     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022102

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133338                                    CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16665                                   30-Sep-2018                                           50,761,883.93

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Feb-2014                                28-Jun-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            53,300,000.00                                     53,300,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             50,761,883.93                                     50,761,883.93

 Actual                                         50,761,883.93                                     50,761,883.93




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonieta Romero-           Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Follette




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Two PDOs were stated in the financing agreement of the original Cameroon Global Partnership for Education
   (CM-GPE): Support to Education Sector (CEQUIL) project, as follows:

   (A) To improve the equity of primary education service delivery in the recipient’s territory with an emphasis on
   disadvantaged areas.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



   (B) To improve the quality of primary education service delivery in the Recipient’s territory with an emphasis
   on disadvantaged areas.

   The disadvantaged areas defined at appraisal in the Strategic document for education and training (DSSEF,
   Document de Stratégie du Secteur de l'Education et de la Formation 2013 to 2020) included: Adamawa,
   North, Far North, North-West and East regions of Cameroon, and other disadvantaged areas (pockets of
   poverty in other peri-urban areas and rural areas).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original structure of the project included two components with activities subdivided under sub-
   components:

   Component 1: Improving equity and quality in primary education service delivery [Original Cost:
   US$48.3 million and 100 percent GPE financing; Revised Cost: US$46.9 million; Actual
   Disbursement: US$45.9 million]. This component supported (i) the improvement of education service
   delivery, especially for early grade students and girls on disadvantaged areas, and (ii) the development of a
   national primary assessment framework. Component 1 included five sub-components; in sub-components
   1.1 and 1.2 disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were the instrument to incentivize sectorial reforms.

         Sub-component 1.1 sought to increase teacher availability in public primary schools in
          disadvantaged areas by supporting recruitment of 9,000 state-paid new contract teachers (instead of
          having teachers paid by parents).
         Sub-component 1.2 focused on the provision of teaching and learning materials that were to be
          reliable, more affordable, and also through (i) a sustainable system of textbook supply sufficiently
          large in volume and low unit and system provision costs, (ii) good-quality books to public schools for
          grades 1, 2, and 3; and (iii) an awareness campaigns on the proper-and-intended use of teaching
          and learning materials.
         Sub-component 1.3: Continued professional development for teachers and inspectors through
          capacity building on how to use new didactic materials to be provided by the project.
         Sub-component 1.4: Support for girls’ education through a design addressing equity in access and
          retention in selected areas. This sub-component supported the following activities: (i) dissemination
          material as teaching and learning materials; (ii) awareness-raising campaign on violence against
          girls and women; (iii) enhanced monitoring and evaluation of gender equity in education at all levels;
          and (iv) strengthening the institutional framework and building the capacity of the Ministry of Basic
          Education (Ministere de l'Education de Base, MINEDUB) officials to track progress on girls’
          education.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



        Sub-component 1.5: Support to the Government in developing a National Assessment Framework,
         including a formative evaluation system, by instituting the Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA)
         and the Early Grade Mathematics Assessment (EGMA) as tools for measuring learning outcomes
         for early grade students (grades 1 to 3). Activities supported included: test development, test
         marking/grading, testing materials, stop watches, and rapid results assessments, under the
         guidance of a National Student Evaluation Committee.



  Component 2. Building institutional capacity for improved education service delivery [Original Cost:
  US$5 million and 100 percent GPE financing; Revised Cost: US$5 million; Actual Disbursement:
  US$4.9 million]. Through this component the CEQUIL project was to provide capacity building to mitigate
  governance risks and enhance monitoring of service delivery, learning outcomes, and equity in basic
  education. It also provided project management financing. This component had two subcomponents.

        Sub-component 2.1: Improving information, governance and accountability, and monitoring and
         evaluation (M&E) capacity. Activities supported under included:(i) data collection through the geo-
         mapping of preschools, primary, and secondary schools, record-card development and setting up an
         architecture for the unification of the Education Management Information System (EMIS); (ii)
         governance and accountability using Rapid Results Strategies (SSR, to identify procedural barriers,
         keep the project on course and get results in 100 days) and budget transparency support; and (iii)
         M&E of progress implementation.
        Sub-component 2.2: Building knowledge for improved service delivery and learning. Through key
         studies and provide TA relevant for moving Cameroon to the next stage of building human capital for
         growth and competitiveness. Activities included: (i) an analysis on introducing compulsory basic
         education (primary and junior secondary); (ii) a study on skills for the labor market; (iii) a study on
         higher education reforms; and (iv) TA for the Government to finalize its policy on adult literacy
         (alphabétisation), out-of-school children (les non-scolarisés), reducing dropout rates, and inclusive
         education, as well as, prospectively, the development of some tools to address the challenges.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. Total project costs were estimated at appraisal at US$55.8 million of which US$53.3 million
  were a GPE grant provided by the Bank. The cancellation of Bank funds approved in 2018 led to financing
  being revised to US$50.76 million resulting from the dropped US$1.4 million funding allocated to the
  provision of textbooks, savings under subcomponents and exchange rate gains. The project’s total actual
  funding was US$52.16 million.

  Financing: Total actual disbursement was US$52.16 million, of which the Bank contributed US$50.76
  million.

  Borrower contribution: An original contribution of US$2.5 million was provided by the Recipient. Actual
  funds in the amount of $1.4 million were disbursed from the Recipient.

  Dates: The project was approved on February 24, 2014 and became effective on June 5, 2014. It
  underwent a mid-term review on October 31, 2016 and had three restructurings, all of which authorized
  additional funds, modifications of the results framework (including dropping activities and subsequent

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



   changes in disbursement periods and indicators). The 2017 and 2018 restructurings also encompassed
   fund reallocations and changes in implementation schedule. The restructurings were as follows:

         December 11, 2015: A level 2 restructuring authorized change in disbursements linked to indicators
          (DLI) of US$6.37 million.
         June 29, 2017: A second level 2 restructuring authorized reallocations between categories of
          US$21.32 million, and revisions of the implementation schedule;
         September 27, 2018: This third level 2 restructuring authorized the restructuring of US$36.1
          million cost revisions, addition of the distribution of benches to schools receiving refugees,
          cancellation of US$1.4 million of funding allocated to the provision of textbooks and reallocation
          between categories. It also authorized a ten-month extension of the project closing date from the
          original date of September 30th, 2018 to June 28, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were relevant at appraisal. In 2012, Cameroon realized that its progress to raise the primary
completion rate (PCR) of 71.2 percent was insufficient to meet the Millennium Development Goals 2
(MDGs) of universal primary schooling by 2015. Shortcomings began with the disparity in regional and
gender access to education (especially affecting the poorest and most disadvantaged children, particularly
girls, in rural and priority geographic areas,), and the relatively low financing from the Government that only
covered 77% of primary education (resulting in high out-of-pocket expenses for households). Likewise, the
country faced a shortage of state-paid qualified teachers and a severe shortage of teaching and learning
materials, especially textbooks. Furthermore, weak governance/management and monitoring capabilities to
properly assess attrition and learning outcomes (due to fragmentation of the ministries in charge of
education, poor quality data on education, and the absence of a national assessment framework) prevailed
(ICR, paras 1 to 8, and PAD p.6).

Overall, the project PDOs – raising equity and quality in primary education service delivery, including
fostering a more robust sector governance and developing an education monitoring system – were relevant
dimensions to support Cameroon’s strategic development objectives encapsulated in the development and
education sector strategies, namely, the Document de Stratégie pour la Croissance et l’Emploi (DSCE
2010–2020), the Document de Stratégie du Secteur de l'Education et de la Formation (DSSEF 2013–2020).
In particular, the DSSEF sought to enlarge areas addressed by the project, namely, increase accessibility to
education (especially of girls) in rural and priority regions, as well as the pool of teachers and provision of
learning materials and textbooks (ICR, p. 7). The project’s focus on boosting the sector’s institutional
governance and M&E capabilities was also aligned with the Government’s commitment to bring
Cameroon’s efforts on the path towards achieving the MDG2 of universal primary education.

The project was also relevant to the Bank priorities. At appraisal, the PDOs were aligned with strategic
themes of the 2010 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS 2010) recognizing Cameroon’s central challenge of
stimulating a healthy and equitable growth rate and boosting competitiveness. The CEQUIL project was
aligned with the CAS education sector goal of improving service delivery to reduce extreme poverty. This,
and boosting shared prosperity were two goals shared by the CAS and the CEQUIL project. Similarly, the


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



               CEQUIL was also aligned with the 2011-2015 Country Partnership Strategy, in particular with Pillar 1, which
               aimed at supporting universality and gender parity in education, as well as efficiency in education service
               delivery (PAD, para 19).

               The PDOs continued to be relevant to the Bank’s Global Partnership for Education (2017-2021, CPE), and
               seeks to achieve equitable quality education for all by 2030 which focuses on investing in strengthening the
               human capital skills base and supporting the implementation of education sector plans. At project closing,
               the objectives remained consistent with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2017–2021).
               Specifically, the project was aligned with objective 3 that aimed to enhance quality of and increase
               equitable access to education (ICR, p. 18). The CEQUIL activities – new contracts for teachers, larger
               distribution of teaching and learning materials, training, and fostering institutional capacity– were aligned to
               the GPE aim to provide a better-quality primary school education contributing to improved learning
               outcomes. Finally, the CEQUIL is aligned with the WBG’s Education Strategy 2020, also well-aligned with
               GPE’s strategy, which aims at: (I) the continuation of systemic reform; (ii) measurement of results that
               enable planning processes to be informed by research and shared best practices; (iii) following Government
               approach; (iv) striving for universality and equity; (v) political alignment and financial commitment; and (vi)
               investment in leadership and implementation capacity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the equity of primary education service delivery in the recipient’s territory with an emphasis on
                             disadvantaged areas.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change presupposed that increasing availability of state-paid teachers in public
                             primary schools in disadvantaged areas would be reasonably expected to contribute to lower education
                             expenses burden on households because these education expenses were the primary reason that prevented
                             poorest children to access or stay at school. A larger provision of grades 1, 2 and 3 textbooks, teaching
                             guides (French, English, Mathematics), reading, and stationery in disadvantaged areas would also increase
                             equity of education delivery (ICR, p. 21). In addition, the theory of change considered that supporting girls’
                             education and provision of benches to refugee children would enhance equity of education in disadvantaged
                             areas. The theory of change also assumed that a management information system was to drive the
                             enhancement of governance and accountability, as well as the ability for officials to follow-up project
                             implementation and equitable delivery of education service delivery. In addition, it was presupposed that the
                             implementation of a Rapid Results Approach (RRA, and for monitoring, RMR) would help address bottlenecks
                             and assure effective and equitable text distribution at large-scale.


                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



The CEQUIL project achieved the following outputs and intermediate results by June 2019.

1.1. Increased number of teachers recruited in public primary schools largely in disadvantaged areas

     8,970 new contract teachers recruited from maître des parents (teachers paid by parents) and
      graduates from the Écoles Normales des Instituteurs de l’Enseignement Général (ENIEG), and mainly
      assigned in disadvantaged areas, close to achieving the original target of 9,000, showing substantial
      progress from the original absence of these contracts. Of the newly contracted teachers, 57 percent
      were females, exceeding the original target of at least 45 percent. The number of new contract
      teachers in 2016 was 3,060; in 2017, it was 2,895; and in 2018, 3,015 teachers.
     93 percent of maîtres des parents converted to contract-teacher status in the ZEP (i.e., priority zones–
      zones d’éducation prioritaires) and other disadvantaged areas, exceeding the target of at least 80
      percent. Of the new contract maîtres des parents, 69 percent were females, exceeding the target of
      45 percent.

1.2. Increased provision of teaching and learning materials largely in disadvantaged areas

     More than 8 million textbooks, teaching guides, readers, and stationery for grades 1, 2 and 3 of
        primary school were provided. In the year 2018/2019 there were 2,249,456 textbooks distributed and
        2,614,106 enrollments registered. For usage during class, 1,090,184 textbooks, readers books, and
        stationery were distributed to schools for grade 1; 1,300,000 textbooks, for grade 2 students; and
        680,000 textbooks, for grade 3 students.


1.3 Support of girls’ education

     A campaign to raise awareness on girls’ education in disadvantaged areas was completed. At least
        2,995 school kits consisting of school supplies and toiletries for girls in grades 5 and 6 were distributed
        in schools in six targeted regions including Far North, East, North, Adamawa, South West, and North
        West.
       Communication strategies on gender and girls’ education and a sensitization action plan were
        developed.
       Several departments of MINEDUB department staff at the central and regional levels were trained on
        gender awareness.
       Several sensitization materials were developed, including life skills pamphlets, note pads, posters,
        publicity materials, and video and audio spots in French, English, and in local languages such as
        Fulfulde, Gaya, Pidgin, and Bemoan.
       Campaigns consisting of mass sensitization and proximity sensitization were carried out.

1.4. Support to the Government in developing a National Assessment Framework

     The cross ministerial learning assessment unit within the MINEDUB and MINESEC was set up based
      on learning activities in 2016 and 2018-2019, which also increased the culture of evaluation in the
      education sector.
     The project assessed the baseline on learning achievements for grades 2, 4 and 6 in 2016-2017.
     A well-organized Rapid Monitoring for Results (RMR) through Collaborative Leadership for
      Development (CL4D) was put in place to support the distribution of textbooks.

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)




      The institutionalization of the cross ministerial Unit for Learning Assessment (Unité des Acquis
       Scolaires—UAS) within the MINEDUB and MINESEC took place (supported by the project),
       underpinned the development of the National Assessment framework. “The existence of such a unit
       for the education system is critical to monitor the performance of the system through assessment of
       the learning outcomes on a regular basis" (ICR, p. 30). With the support of the project, Cameroon
       operationalized the education assessment unit that enhanced the subsector’s governance and
       enabled formative learning evaluations to support better informed decisions and reliable collection of
       statistics on 3rd graders’ performance, measuring the ratio of at least 45 percent of students per
       cohort with high reading and mathematics skills that met reading and mathematics benchmarks.

1.5 Support refugee children with provision of benches in disadvantaged areas. This activity was
added in the third restructuring revisions:

      More than 90 percent of school benches were distributed before the closing date of the project.
       Priority in bench allocation was given to schools hosting refugees. 9,155 school benches were
       distributed in priority schools almost meeting the target of 10,000 school benches for 300 host schools
       in Cameroon. Also 6,131 benches were distributed in refugee/displaced-affected communes,
       exceeding the planned 4,000 benches.

Outcomes

There is evidence that pupil-textbook ratio was reduced from a baseline of 1:12.1 in 2012 to 1:2.32 in 2019,
above the target of 1:3 for project cohort (grades 1, 2, and 3). While it is reasonable to assume that putting
maîtres des parents under state budget directly contributed to decreasing parents’ financing of teacher
salaries, the project did not present data, near the end of the project, on the actual reduction of educational
expenses burden in disadvantaged groups (the indicator was dropped after the second restructuring of June
29, 2017 (ICR, p. 22). Such data was available before the project (out-of-pocket expenses for households
were estimated at 42 percent of total education expenditure, PAD p. 4) and were used to justify the project.

Evidence from the evaluation by the 2019 Independent Verification Agency (IVA) among girls showed a
country-wide gender sensitization campaign induced a change in parents’ and other stakeholders’ awareness
of the importance of girls’ schooling and in the motivation of girls to finish primary education and continue to
higher education (ICR, p.34). The strengthening of access and retention of girls in the education system can
support the reasonable assumption that the project might have prompted a contribution to equity of the
national system. However, girls’ enrollment in the ZEP and disadvantage areas was not verified.

The overall number of direct project beneficiaries was 5,796,674 (exceeding the target of 3,493,988) and of
these, 48% were female.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



To improve the quality of primary education service delivery in the Recipient’s territory with an emphasis on
disadvantaged area.

Rationale
The theory of change of Objective 1 is also applicable to this objective, which presupposed a correlation
between increased recruitment of new contract teachers, materials for teaching and learning, and a National
Assessment Framework as preconditions for enhancing the quality of education delivery. The premise for
change was also grounded in the provision of training to build up teachers’ knowledge on textbook use and
officials’ knowledge in EMIS operation to improve governance and accountability, both of which would
enhance the quality of the education system (ICR, p. 12). In addition, change in quality would result from the
ability of replicating special studies’ best-practice policy actions to address current needs and enhance first-,
second- and third-graders’ learning performance. At the basis of change would also be mainstreaming of
informative learning evaluations.

In addition to the outputs under Objective 1 above, the CEQUIL project reported the following outputs
and intermediate results by June 2019.

2.1. Capacity development for in-service teachers and inspectors on how to use the material

      60,000 teachers, 712 inspectors, and 62 ENIEG directors were trained in the use of teaching and
         learning materials, exceeding the targets of 30,663 teachers, 382 inspectors, and 58 ENIEG directors.
         Of these, 30,400 teachers, 360 inspectors and 9 ENIEG directors were women. Using a cascade
         approach, almost all the teachers were trained by inspectors in the use of the textbooks during
         Professional Development Days (journées pédagogiques). No metrics of teachers’ and official’s post-
         capacity building learning performance were reported by the ICR.

2.2 Improvements in information, governance and accountabilities, and monitoring and evaluation
capacity

      Establishment of the Education Management Information System (EMIS) Architecture and completed
         staff capacity building in (I) EMIS for MINEDUB and MINESEC, (ii) EMIS diagnosis, and (iii) for
         stakeholders.
        Achieved improvements in the governance model of textbook selection resulting from the newly
         reformed textbook policy and the institutional framework developed with project support.
        Achieved mobilization of Rapid Monitoring for Results for the distribution of textbooks by easing the
         communications flow between the PMU, deconcentrated services, and the distributor.
        Achieved development of M&E assessments that would inform on the allocation of all items provided
         to schools, including textbooks.
        The National Student Evaluation Committee administered the learning assessments in 2016, 2018,
         and 2019.
        Not implemented geo-referencing of public and private schools as originally planned; this activity was
         dropped during the second restructuring to avoid duplication with a Government-financed initiative.

2.3. Building knowledge for improved quality of service delivery and learning.

      Three studies were completed: Skills for the Labor Market, Policy Note on adult literacy and out of-
         school children; and Student Flow and Higher Education. The completed studies were critical for the

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



       development of in-service training of teachers, for updating the Education sector Diagnostics in 2019,
       and for the development of the ongoing ESS (2020-2030) (ICR, p.61).
      The project completed a study that validated reports on key reforms in the Country Growth and
       Employment Strategy (DSCE): Partially achieved target of the analysis on introducing basic education
       including early childhood development (completed but not approved by key decision-makers and
       pending approval by the Government, although highly utilized for the ESS, 2020-2030).

2.4 Building knowledge from mainstreamed informative learning evaluations

      The project achieved 33.40 percent of 2019 cohort of francophone third-graders meeting mathematics
       benchmarks in national territory monitored through EGRA, closely reaching the 34 percent target.
       Possible substantial progress from 2014 baseline share of 26.30 percent was captured by another
       methodology (ICR, p. 24). For the anglophone children, the share was 28.1 percent of cohort, not
       achieving the target of 34 percent; remaining same as baseline 28.1 percent (PAD, p. 39).
      Targets of 2019 shares of third-graders in anglophone schools and francophone schools meeting the
       reading benchmarks in national territory, monitored through EGRA were not achieved. Reading–share
       of anglophone cohort was 19.30 percent (target was 38 percent; baseline 33.1 percent); share of
       francophone cohort was 16.60 percent of cohort substantially below the 45 percent target; (baseline
       36.8 percent) (PAD, p.38).
      In 2016-17, the team completed a learning assessment (that did not use the EGRA/EGMA
       methodologies) for grades 2, 4 and 6 performance (grades 4 and 6 are outside the project) (ICR, p.
       36). The Rapport d’états du System Educative National (RESEN) 2019 provided proficiency baseline
       data of percentage of second graders. The targeted average of 50% of cohort skillful in both subjects
       was not met (ICR, p. 37):
            o Second graders: 27% of anglophone cohort and 28.3% of francophone cohort met the
               language benchmark. Similarly, 32.4% of anglophone cohort and 29.8% of francophone cohort
               met the mathematics benchmark.
            o Four-graders: 19.3% of cohort met the reading benchmark in anglophone schools, while in
               francophone schools, 16.6% of cohort met the reading benchmark. Similarly, in Mathematics
               shares in anglophone schools were 28.1% of cohort; while in francophone schools, 33.4% of
               cohort met the benchmark.
            o Six-graders: In anglophone schools, 50% of cohort met the reading benchmark; while in
               francophone schools 37% of cohort met the reading benchmark. In Mathematics 28.1% of
               cohort met the benchmark in anglophone schools, while in francophone schools, 31% of cohort
               met the benchmark.

No disaggregation in data was presented for gender, performance in ZEP and disadvantaged areas, 1 and 2
grades, and other academic years (i.e., 102 of potential 108 statistics were not reported). The PAD did not
indicate the academic cycles to be assessed. Learning indicators of grade 1 (2017, 2018 and 2019), grade 2
(2018 and 2019) and grade 3 (2017 and 2018) were dropped after the second restructuring due to the lack of
baseline data (ICR, p. 17).

Outcome

It is reasonable to assume that capacity training helped teachers and inspectors become acquainted,
respectively, with the use of teaching materials and the operationalization of the newly established Education
Management Information System (EMIS). Similarly, it is also reasonable to assume that the institutionalization


                                                                                                Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



                            of the EMIS might have contributed to enhance the subsector’s governance and accountability. However,
                            without post-training assessments to verify whether teachers and officials acquired and applied the needed
                            capacity, there is a lack of tangible evidence to confirm these outcomes. The project enabled formative
                            learning evaluations that measured the 2019 nationwide ratio per cohort of 3rd graders with high reading and
                            mathematics skills meeting benchmarks, and the literacy and numeracy baselines for 2017 second graders.
                            The targeted shares for third-graders were not met for reading skills, and also for mathematics skills among
                            children in anglophone schools. Although there is some evidence of progress in the performance of
                            francophone children who met the mathematics target and surpassed the baseline benchmark, progress in
                            children’s learning was not measurable, partly due to non-compatible or non-existent baseline data, and
                            because of the project’s overambitious targets within a limited timeframe. The effect of preconditions for
                            raising quality of education service delivery cannot be confirmed.

                            There is further evidence of unintended outcomes not related to education service delivery: the study on the
                            labor market helped stakeholder identify the gap between labor market needs and training in Cameroon; and
                            the study on student flow and higher education reform gave authorities a clear insight on the internal
                            efficiency of higher education.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR presents evidence at national level that overall, the project enhanced the equity of education service
                            delivery, but there was a lack of evidence on outcomes in the ZEP and other disadvantaged areas. The
                            project lacks the parameters to possibly make a valid judgement of whether the quality of service delivery
                            improved. The enhanced quality of education outcomes (not service delivery) that reflected the improvements
                            in quality of the educational service delivery attributed to the intervention cannot be measured, and the
                            efficacy of teacher's capacity building was not verified. This Review also highlights the trying context of
                            insecurity under which the project operated in the anglophone region, where primary education delivery was
                            used as a negotiating medium of the armed groups, preventing the CEQUIL implementation in that
                            geographic area. Soon after the project was approved, Boko Haram’s attacks on Cameroonian far North and
                            East Regions began on March 2014, causing a humanitarian crisis. Due to Anglophone Crisis that began in
                            2016, the majority of schools closed for the 2016-2017 academic year, and as of May 2018 an estimated
                            42,500 children were still out of school, according to UN Office for Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Most
                            schools in the area did not re-open in 2018. In consideration of one almost fully achieved objective to improve
                            equity of primary education service delivery and another partly achieved objective to improve quality of
                            primary education service delivery, overall efficacy is rated borderline substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Cost-effectiveness.

The CEQUIL’s premises and economic analyses at appraisal are relevant and currently in line with the premises
of the Sustainable Development Goals, which establish the link between eradication of poverty and the provision
of equitable and inclusive quality education for all, placing emphasis on fostering gender parity in out-of-school
rates. The project was justified on the premise that primary education is universally regarded as a public good,
that the Government needed support, and that sector state-of-the-art best-practices sustained the expectation
that primary education generates individual, sectoral, and societal benefits.

In the PAD, the ex-ante economic analyses for investing in Education deemed as benefit the fact that higher
quality of primary education contributes to break the cycle of poverty, especially in rural areas (individual returns
to education), and to increased productivity (PAD paras 32). The economic analysis also justified the equity-
improving nature of the Bank support to public service delivery, and efficiency in resource allocation by
improving teacher availability in disadvantaged areas and textbook distribution; and in helping to develop the
needed comprehensive primary education MIS to foster evidence-based decision making and resource
allocation.

The project considered alternative economic arguments from lessons from the World Bank/IDA-supported
project implementation in the education sector,[1] including: (I) using Investment Project Financing (IPF) with
disbursement-linked indicators instead of the recommended Program for Results approach as Cameroon lacked
strong and reliable monitoring systems to enable the adoption of the latter, (ii) factoring in the political economy
sensitivities in the ZEP, which justified that some interventions targeted direct beneficiaries –girl’s education,
teacher recruitment, and textbook distribution in disadvantaged area–; while other interventions –teacher
training, learning assessment, and the EMIS activities– had as sine qua non condition that they would
encompass the whole student population country-wide; (iii) correct the market failure of the teaching and
learning material and use the opportunity to reform the monopolistic commercial book industry; (iv) investing in
teachers’ contracts as a sine qua non condition for achieving positive results, and (iv) the analysis of centralized
versus decentralized financing.

_______

[1] The Project design was based on lessons learned from the Education For All-Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI)
Project (P116437) that closed in December 2011, the World Bank’s Education Development Capacity Building
Project (IDA Cr.4070-CM) that closed in September 2012, the ongoing implementation experience of the CM2D
Project of the AFD, and other development partners’ specifically UNICEF, UNESCO, JICA, and World Bank
Project design and implementation experience.



The cost-benefit analyses (CBA) with estimation of the net present value (NPV), benefit-cost ratio (BCR), and
internal rate of return (IRR) were conducted only at completion by the ICR. Thus, it is not possible to compare
cost-benefit assessments of the project with the appraisal stage (ICR, p. 32). The ex-post cost-benefit
analysis in the ICR assessed direct contributions of the project in supporting higher access to and higher quality

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



of primary education service delivery. The CBA: (I) considered the change in service delivery that can be
attributed to the project; (ii) translated the increase in service utilization into educational benefits; and (iii),
assigned a monetary value to these benefits. According to the ICR, “economic benefits outweighed the costs.
Under the preferred scenario [of the CBA], the estimated NPV of the project was US$639.2 million (the
estimated NPV of the project benefit of US$1,357 million), the benefit-cost ratio was US$3.2, and the economic
IRR was 23.5 percent. The economic rate of return was comparable to other World Bank education projects”
(ICR, p. 32).”



As calculated by the ICR, the project’s internal rate of 23.5 percent, which is nearly equal to the economic return
of 24% in countries in the region, is a reasonable metric of the opportunity cost of capital invested by the project.
Comparatively, optimal levels reported by the Bank Policy Research Work tend to gravitate between 24 to 27
percent as in the case of Ethiopia[2] and other fragile or conflict-afflicted countries in the region. Similarly,
findings from the studies on textbook distribution and impact on raising quality of education form a
reasonable basis to determine the CEQUIL ex-post opportunity cost of capital invested.

___________

[2] Ethiopia Education Sector Development Program (Report No. 1 7739-ET) in Economic Analysis of World
Bank Education Projects and Project Outcomes, POLICY RESEARCH WORKING PAPER 2564, 2001.



At appraisal, cost-effectiveness analyses were also used for the provision of textbooks and teacher
recruitment.

a) Provision of textbooks effectiveness was evaluated in comparison to other countries in SSA and the baseline
cost of textbooks before the project. In 2013, the price range agreed on at appraisal was US$3 (grade 1) to
US$4.2 (grade 3). The ICR reported that the project’s unit cost ranged between US$2.7 (grade 1) and US$3.6
(grade 3), in line with appraisal. “The lower cost of textbooks under the CEQUIL project was, in part, attributable
to the larger number of textbooks and guides procured under the project, which allowed economies of scale to
be realized. Concerning the average cost (AC) of textbooks in Cameroon, at appraisal the AC was US$6-7 per
textbook; in contrast, after the intervention, the project helped to reduce AC by close to half to US$3.2 per
textbook, which is lower when compared to regional average unit cost of textbooks for grade 1 of US$4.5 in
Niger, US$5 in Chad, and US$7.5 in Namibia (at appraisal)” (ICR, p. 33).

b) Cost-effectiveness in teacher recruitment. “The conversion of qualified maîtres des parents from voluntary to
contract-paid teachers was efficient in comparison to classic teacher civil servant recruitment in Cameroon. The
average annual salary of a state-paid primary school teacher was 69 percent higher than that of contract teacher
of the project. “In 2018, the increase in the share of contract teachers, financed by the Government, contributed
to lower the unit cost of primary education. In 2018, this unit cost was estimated at 6.2 percent of GDP per
capita, which is 45 percent lower than the SSA average” (ICR 90).

c) Cost-effectiveness of teachers’ and inspectors’ capacity building in textbook use. Training was provided, but
the ICR did not comment about this activity. It only provided a general observation: “The cost-benefit analysis
suggests that economic benefits outweigh the costs (ICR, p. 32),” including capacity building of teachers.
Overall, the project did not have the ability to establish a comparison between counterfactual and intervention


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



scenarios related to teachers’ learning outcomes, making the determination of cost-effectiveness of investment
in raising the quality of education service delivery impossible, which is the focus of the PDO.

d) Cost-effectiveness of additional procurement. Changes in the exchange rate enabled an increase in Central
African CFA resources, which were used to pay more transactions in local currency. Savings were efficiently
reallocated to finance the grade 3 student learning assessments and the benches for schools in ZEP,
disadvantaged areas and schools hosting refugees.

Project implementation efficiency

The quality of data from CEQUIL regular monitoring enabled tracking meeting milestones, defining revisions of
the project scope, and extensions of scheduled deadlines to comply with delivery of the PDO at closure. The
project was diligent in its management of project funds. However, there were shortcomings in disbursements
stemming from the economic and insecurity crisis, which caused: I) a decrease of fiscal space which led
Government to reprioritize its budget, and ii) slower decision making. In the case of teacher reform and
textbooks, government entities (MINEDUB, MINFOPRA, MINEFI) experienced significant delays ICR, p. 39). By
2016, the MTR found out that this aspect of the PDO was not going to be achieved in the original four years of
the project. Due to the unavailable Government funds, textbooks arrived with one-year delay due to the delayed
and complex procurement process resulting in cancellation of the final tranche of the textbook-related DLI,
namely 60 percent of the funds attributed to non-achievement of the related DLI of grade 3 textbook provision
(ICR, p.17).

Later, the insecurity in the Anglophone Cameroon that began in 2016 and escalated in 2017 and 2018 further
hindered the efficiency of the distribution of textbooks. The crisis situation also delayed the 2018 teacher
recruitment and deployment to be accomplished in 2019, as funds were intended to fund other budgetary
priorities of the administration (ICR, p.39). In 2018, an extension of one extra year was authorized, and by 2019,
the majority of implemented activities were completed as well as targets for all, except the learning achievement
expected outcomes, were met or exceeded. These delays lowered efficiency of implementation (ICR, p. 10).

Negatively, the Anglophone Crisis and insecurity severely disrupted implementation in this zone, practically
impeding delivery of education in the Far North, North West and South West anglophone regions, key
geographic targets of the project. “During the 2018–19 school year, strikes and ghost town campaigns were
imposed by the armed groups. Children and teachers not complying with those lockdowns were kidnapped.
Since 2018, more than 300 teachers and students have been kidnapped. Insecurity in these regions caused
many students to move to other regions to pursue their education. This issue exacerbated the implementation
delays of key project activities” (ICR, p. 122-123).

At closure the total allocated US$50.76 million grant was completely executed.

As explained in section 4, the project’s ability to modify the share of CEQUIL-cohort that meet literacy and
numeracy benchmarks cannot be measured. The lack of this parameter prevents assessing the cost-
effectiveness and implementation efficiency of raising the quality of education service delivery. While the
project potentially offered good value for money, it had significant shortcomings in the efficiency of
implementation.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              23.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High as the project continued to be consistent with the development priorities of
the Bank and the Government of Cameroon and with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (2017–2021)
at closing. Efficacy is rated substantial, as the combined objectives were almost fully achieved. Efficiency is
rated modest, as the project potentially offered good value for money, but had significant shortcomings in the
efficiency of implementation. These ratings are consistent with an overall outcome rating of moderately
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The financial sustainability of the development outcome is likely to be maintained with the available Bank
grant contributions beyond the project’s closing as considered in the education sector plan. In addition, the
adopted education delivery and learning frameworks, as well as the mainstreamed mechanisms to
strengthen governance, accountability and budget transparency will continue to guide education delivery
implementation, using the experience gained in the provision of textbooks sets a baseline. Similarly, the
newly developed national primary assessment framework and M&E tools under the control of the project are
likely to be conducted regularly by Cameroon’s education officials given the need to learn about progress on
future pupil-teacher ratio reduction and inform decisions to deblock supply-side constraints bearing on
number of children directly benefitting from the project interventions, cohorts’ learning outcomes in reading
and mathematics, and the overall performance of the primary education system.

However, the persistence of the insecurity and crisis in Far North and the anglophone regions will continue to
be a threat for future projects working in these areas.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



Going forward, this Review notes that without the Bank GPE grant and interventions in supporting teachers,
textbook distribution and governance and accountability, the sustainability of the PDO in conflict-afflicted
countries like Cameroon may be substantially compromised.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strong economic sector and social analytical work justifying private and public returns from primary
  education studies, as well as financial analyses and World Bank best practices (PAD para140-146) were
  a relevant basis for the design of the project’s theory of change. Targets for the increase in access to
  education of 1, 2, and 3 grade students were set according to Cameroon’s development education
  strategies and the current World Bank’s CPS priorities (2013 country status report on education country
  status report and fully aligned with the DSSEF (2013-2020 DSSEF). Institutional arrangements were
  pragmatic, whereby a Technical Secretariat, made up of staff from MINEDUB line departments and Bank-
  paid fiduciary and support staff implemented the project (rather than a separate unit). The combination of
  a government- and in-country Bank technical expert support ensured high Government ownership,
  effective project coordination and appropriate fiduciary actions. The capacity building on implementation
  provided to staff in charge was suitable for the participating institutions and project units to carry out the
  project and mitigate the high implementation agency risk identified at appraisal. Bank experts supported
  the government units involved in developing and operating the EMIS, the national primary assessment
  framework and in administering the learning assessments.

  The preparation team identified the high risk of the project congruously with economic analysis and
  incorporated additional mitigation features from other Bank-supported primary education projects to
  mitigate the risk. The design was calibrated with the Bank's know-how from other projects. The RRS and
  Budget Transparency Initiative (BTI) were among tools highly utilized during implementation. At
  appraisal, the team considered, to the best of its ability, the risks from the political context of the current
  conflict-afflicted situation in the ZED areas, which according to the ICR, “due to the security issues in the
  Far North and anglophone crisis in South-West and North-West regions, the overall risk continued to be
  high” (ICR, para 143).

  Overall, the team assessed simplicity, implementation feasibility, measurability, replicability and economic
  and financial sustainability challenges. At appraisal the Team estimated that the fiscal impact of the
  project was sustainable by the Government, for schools, communities, and households through a system
  of progressive transfer of reform-financing responsibility to the Government (PAD para 30) and the
  gradual absorption of the salary payments for newly contracted teachers in the payroll of the ministry
  under the state budget and line item allocations for textbook financing (PAD paras 53 and 89). Although
  the project underassessed at appraisal the fragility of the Far North region, presenting insecurity and
  humanitarian crisis since 2013, the aggravation of insecurity risks was not fully overt at that time. The
  project implementation was impacted by external factors such the Boko Haram insurgency, which had
  spread to Cameroon in 2014 shortly after the project began. Later, the Anglophone Crisis exacerbated
  the insecurity, which became a deterrent of implementation. These disruptions were external factors at
  the basis for the project restructurings, and in 2016, after schools closedowns, teachers and children
  kidnappings directly affected implementation and meeting the planned deadlines.


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was adequate to alert the team of diversions from milestones and goals. In bi-
 annual implementation status and results reports (ISRs) during implementation, ratings of progress toward
 achievement of the project development objective were two thirds of the time moderately satisfactory and
 one third of the time satisfactory (first ISR, June and December 2018 ISR ratings). Ratings of
 implementation performance (IP) were moderately satisfactory 7 of 11 times, while the 12/2016 and both
 biannual 2017 IP-ratings were moderately unsatisfactory. World Bank teams of managers, the country-
 based education economist, and the Washington staff in charge of fiduciary and other technical subjects
 were proactive in supervising and working with the government to keep the project on track towards the
 intended results. However, the project was challenged by factors outside the control of the Bank, among
 which were vendor’s delays in providing textbooks, the initial poor quality of the procurement activities at
 MINEDUB and Ministry of Public Procurement and civil conflict disruptions. As the ICR explained, the MTR
 in October/November 2015 highlighted external project implementation shortcomings beyond the team’s
 control, mostly linked to unanticipated general strikes, the Boko Haram insurgency, insecurity, protest
 disturbances in anglophone areas, exacerbated internal anglophone/francophone tensions, and the
 overflow of refugees from Nigeria (ICR, p. 111).

 The Bank showed responsiveness in supporting the first and second restructurings with extension of
 deadlines and AF, and skillful management of the project to achieving the PDO. However, implementation
 progress continued to be challenged by the delays on textbooks procurement, teacher selection, and the
 above conflict-related factors.

 The Bank’s team closely coordinated with directors of ENIEGs and inspectorates, MINEDUB, MINISEC,
 and with staff of the National Student Evaluation Committee in charge of the 2016, 2018, and 2019
 assessments. The Bank team also reported on financial management and procurement progress (7 of 11
 ISR-IP ratings were moderately satisfactory; 12/2016. 6/2017 and 12/2017 IP-ratings were moderately
 unsatisfactory) and worked with the project management unit teams to strengthen their implementation
 capacity to hire teachers, distribute textbooks and other areas. Bank experts also supported the
 government units involved in developing and operating the EMIS, the national primary assessment
 framework and in administering the learning assessments.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)




a. M&E Design
 The project results-framework clearly specified the PDOs linked to indicators, outputs and intermediate
 outcomes. The M&E design made it possible to monitor progress towards achievement of component
 activities within the PDOs (ICR, p. 43). The development of education management information system
 (EMIS) allowed managers and third parties to clearly track and measure teacher recruitment and
 deployment, as well as textbook and learning material procurement and their distribution in classrooms, all
 of which were clearly-specified indicators and outputs upon which the PDO-achievement was prompted.
 The system enabled tracking the delivery of capacity building for teachers on using the new didactic
 materials, as well as the completion of special sector and sub-sector studies that strengthen the education
 system. The newly developed formative evaluation tools and system enabled measuring the abilities of
 children to read and do mathematics.

 The M&E design proved to be too ambitious to assess outcomes of the efficacy of the project in some
 dimensions. For PDO 1, when it became clear that the M&E system lacked ability to determine change in
 the reduction of out-of-pocket expenses for households in all regions, including the disadvantaged areas,
 the indicator was dropped. The ICR also reported that some PDO2 indicators lacked baseline values
 and/or disaggregation, which made it problematic to assess learning outcomes through EGRA and EGMA
 of grade 3 students meeting the reading and mathematics benchmarks. Similarly, data were not
 disaggregated for the number of textbooks (Grades 1, 2 and 3), teaching guides (French, English,
 Mathematics), and learning materials, instead all was grouped together. Such shortcomings made it difficult
 to assess the geographic distribution per grade and change derived from the good-quality textbooks
 provided by the project (ICR, p. 43). Ultimately, due to lack of baseline data, cost-benefit analyses were not
 undertaken at appraisal, preventing a comparison with cost-benefit results and change in quality of
 education delivered at closing.



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, the project implementation had the relevant and measurable Results Framework for the
  MINEDUB to track implementation and assess learning outcomes. M&E activities included (I) systematic-
  routine monitoring, (ii) a mid-term review, (iii) biannual implementation support reviews (ISR) and (iv) the
  ICR (ICR, p. 2). Overall, M&E data were available to determine attainment of milestones and
  implementation delays, such as the one that the 2016 MTR detected and the following ISR reported
  concerning textbook activities that had not been flagged (due to limited capacity of management staff and
  the underestimation of the time needed to complete the textbook distribution for 2 and 3 grades). Despite
  remedial actions, follow-up activities found that textbook distribution never pulled back to track leading to
  ineffective implementation of this activity until the project closure was extended in 2018 and the milestone
  was achieved in 2019.

  As indicated in section 2d, the project supported the design, development and completion of the
  Education Management Information System (EMIS), which also supported tracking procurement.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were effectively used to monitor the status of implementation, decision-making and
  outcome indicators. M&E findings were undertaken by the cross ministerial Unit for Learning

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



  Assessment (Unité des Acquis Scolaires—UAS) within the MINEDUB and MINESEC and shared with
  the project administrator.

  The 2016 mid-term review´s finding of delays in textbook distribution was used by the Government and
  the Bank to modify the results framework, which included dropping some indicators (i.e., those without
  baseline, nonrelevant on EMIS, learning materials other than textbooks); adding new indicators (i.e.,
  number of benches in ZEP for the refugee/IDPs-affected communities as a result of dollar/CFA Franc
  exchange rate savings), extensions to the implementation schedule; and adjustments to the source to
  account for beneficiaries (i.e., the use of actual data from the EMIS became mandatory). The project
  also used the EMIS system to monitor and ensure that funds were used for the intended purposes,
  facilitating transparency of procurement. The findings were also used by the Bank to approve additional
  funds, changes in disbursement periods and reallocations in the three project restructurings. The ICR
  summarized overall accomplishments and performance of the project. It also reported on how the
  institutionalized project-financed formative assessments also served to provide evidence on actual
  cohort shares deviation from the 65 percent targeted share of third-graders meeting the reading and
  mathematics learning benchmarks, both in anglophone and francophone schools (ICR, p. 44).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The CEQUIL was a Category 'C' project. The OP/BP 4.01 "Environmental Assessment" was not triggered
   because no public civic works or use of land having environmental impacts were included. At appraisal it
   was anticipated that the project would have a positive social impact through improvements in education
   service delivery and teachers’ recruitment (ICR, p. 44).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Evidence reported by the ICR (p.45) supported the observation that the project made proper budget
   execution and of grant disbursements as stated in the Financial Agreements.

   Financial management performance was rated moderately satisfactory in ISRs except at the time of the
   MTR (2015) and the ISR December of 2016 and 2017 for MINEDUB –the sole project implementation
   agency– when ISRs were unsatisfactory. Fiduciary staff within the Technical Secretariat were adequately
   in place throughout the project implementation. In addition, external auditors were in place, audits were
   completed on time, and Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were submitted regularly and in accordance with
   Bank procedures” (ICR, p.45p). Ex-ante the PAD para 101-102) stated that the Bank team rated highly
   risky the financial management capacity of the MINEDUB’s Project Secretariat. Consequently, the project
   complied with the World Bank’s requirements under OP/BP10.00 by having additional fiduciary staff,
   namely (I) a technical auditor (third party verification agent) who reviewed payments to contract teachers,
   and the delivery of teaching and learning materials; (ii) a financial management officer and the accountant

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



   who provided support to the Project Secretariat; and (iii) an external auditor. The project also adequately
   (iv) upgraded and used the World Bank/IDA-financed project (Education Development Capacity Building
   Project) information system (Toprol) to manage the project; and (v) adopted a procedures manual as part
   of the Project Implementation Manual.

   Overall, the MINEDUB accomplished the financial covenants of the Financing Agreements. Auditors’
   opinions throughout the project were unqualified (clean), except in December 2017 when significant
   internal control weaknesses were identified. These related to budget allocation, absence of formal
   validation of payment of expenses, and ineligible expenditures of US$26,000 that the Government fully
   reimbursed to the project. In addition, criminal proceedings were brought up by the Government against
   the firm called SOFCOM and civil proceedings against the guarantors (insurance companies) for not
   delivering textbook storage lockers after receiving US$225,000 as advance payment. The US$52.16
   million disbursement was adequately executed. The final audit report took place on June 30, 2019.

   Procurement was consistently rated moderately satisfactory except for three assessments rated
   moderately unsatisfactory (12/2016; 6/ and 12/2017) related to textbook provision –the largest
   procurement activity under the project–, and poor quality of the procurement activities at MINEDUB and
   Ministry of Public Procurement. The contract on provision of textbooks underwent five amendments (1st,
   2nd and 3rd, due to change of editors; 4th due to change of contract amount; 5th, due to change of higher
   quantity of textbooks (higher enrollment) and contract amount (higher unit costs). World Bank staff ensured
   compliance with procurement guidelines of 2011 and no deviations from them were reported. Although the
   implementing agency had experience with implementing Bank-financed projects, the project secretariat at
   first did not have a procurement specialist, and one was appointed (ICR, p. 45).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The establishment of the cross ministerial learning assessment unit within the MINEDUB and MINESEC
   enabled Cameroon to launch the practice of carrying out achievement tests in 2016-17 that provided
   baseline data on learning achievement for grades 2 and also grades 4 and 6; the latter grades were not
   targeted by the project. This outcome reflects not only the increase in the culture of evaluation in the
   education sector, but also the institutionalization of a critical mechanism within the education system to
   monitor learning outcomes on a regular basis (ICR, p. 23).



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               The ICR rated both Quality-at-
                                                                               Entry and Supervision as
                                                                               modeerately satisfactory, while
                                                                               this ICR Review rated them as
                               Moderately                                      satisfactory because the
Bank Performance                                     Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory                                    shortcomings at Entry were
                                                                               considered to be minor, and
                                                                               those encountered during
                                                                               implementation were beyond the
                                                                               control of the Bank team.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 49 to 50) offered several lessons for projects, including the following adapted by IEG:



    1. Flexible disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), which are easily understood by key
       stakeholders and adjustable to incentivize reforms, promote the achievement of
       development objectives. DLIs ensure that funds benefit the implementing entities and ease
       implementation in complex geographical and political contexts. The unfamiliarity of a national
       team with the DLI approach can negatively impact the timely compliance with the planned
       schedule. Similarly, crises like the ones from refugees and anglophone region in Cameroon,
       also lead to disruptions in Government expenditures, causing delays that compromise the
       efficiency of DLI financing (ICR, p. 42).
    2. The use of existing government structures rather than a separate implementation unit,
       complemented by Bank backstopping, facilitates implementation and ownership. Such
       combination facilitated high government ownership, the timely provision of appropriate
       capacity building, and the use of effective coordination mechanisms. In addition, the
       presence of at least one locally based staff helped to strengthen the Bank’s supervision
       ability and ensured completion of planned activities.
    3. When selecting project development indicators, the unavailability of baseline data is a
       challenging factor for measuring progress toward the achievement of objectives. Data
       that is irregularly administered and controlled by an entity not involved in the project, or
       affected by exogenous factors such as insecurity worsening, hindered the project’s ability to
       collect baseline data and to assess key changes sought by the project. The CEQUIL’s
       absence of baselines caused that the increase in quality of learning could not be determined.
    4. In conflict-afflicted contexts such as Cameroon’s, easy-to-implement interventions
       that adjust to local situations reduce the risk of not achieving outcomes. The CEQUIL
       project demonstrated that rapid result strategies and the budget transparency Initiatives



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CM-GPE: Support to Education Sector (P133338)



         helped accelerate implementation and foster governance, although not sufficiently enough to
         ensure smooth activity implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided thorough information on the project scope and experience. It was internally consistent and
followed guidelines.The theory of change was well articulated. The results were clearly presented and showed
how ratings were reached. Analyses were outcome-oriented, but explanations were affected by incomplete
evidence. However, this issue was rooted in the project rather than the ICR. In that sense, the ICR had room to
further emphasize achievements under data unavailability and heightened challenges from the worsened
insecurity in the targeted ZED regions. The lessons section provided a few relevant lessons, some of which
were largely coherent insights for enhancing education service delivery and others, on routine general good
practice process matters such as time frame, baselines, understandable indicators, and implementation by
mainstream ministry vs. a project unit. The ICR copied uncorrected errors in the PAD text, which did not match
with the indicators and targets in the Results Framework of the same PAD, missing to highlight the discrepancy.
The performance storyline was not tightly presented, and the ICR provided a lengthy implementation narrative,
resulting in 50-page report.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
