     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022093

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P123204                                     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51270                                   31-Dec-2018                                          121,598,761.75

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2012                                 31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           135,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            133,822,379.26                                                 0.00

 Actual                                        121,598,761.75                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl              Dileep M. Wagle               Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement of May 22, 2012 (p.5) the objective of the project was “to improve: i)
   integrated water resources planning, management and development; and ii) access to water and sanitation
   services in priority urban areas.” The objective in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii) was similar
   except that it also stated “the objective of the project was “to improve i) integrated water resources planning,
   management and development; and ii) access to water and sanitation services in priority areas. The project



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



   will contribute to higher level goals of sustaining natural resources, improving service delivery, and increasing
   economic productivity.”

   This validation will use the objective as stated in the Financing Agreement.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Investment in Integrated Water Resources Development and Management (appraisal
   estimate US$33.7 million, actual US$18.8 million):

   This component consisted of three sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Identification, preparation and implementation of selected priority investments through
   a participatory planning process in the Kyoga and Upper Nile Water Management Zones (WMZs): This sub-
   component was to finance (a) the preparation of WMZ strategies, and capacity building for the Kyoga and
   Upper Nile WMZs, and the establishment of consultation mechanisms via stakeholder Catchment
   Management Organizations (CMOs) in order to prepare integrated catchment action plans in these WMZ as
   a basis for identifying and implementing investments; and (b) priority investments in related infrastructure,
   catchment management and development measures. Also, financing was to be used for catchment
   investment grants to support priority investments identified by stakeholders. These were to include irrigation
   and flood structures, reforestation and wetlands restoration, soil conservation and small dams.

   Sub-component 1.2: Improvement of the national water resources monitoring and information system: This
   sub-component was to strengthen and expand the existing monitoring network in the two WMZs and
   develop a comprehensive water information system (WIS) to facilitate and improve water resources
   investment, planning and management at the catchment level and increase access to improved data and
   related analytical tools to strengthen the country’s resilience to increased climate variability and change.
   Activities were to include enhancement of networks for water quality and pollution, hydro-meteorological,
   surface, and groundwater monitoring. The development of a comprehensive WIS was to involve all four
   WMZs and the center to ensure compatibility of systems installed across the country while other activities
   were to be limited to Kyoga and Upper Nile WMZs. In addition, appropriate software and analytical tools
   were to be developed, tested and installed as a part of the WIS that will, in particular, support the planning
   and decision support system (DSS) development and use by the WMZ planning teams. This sub-
   component was also to include: upgrading and modernizing the national reference water quality laboratory;



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



and installing or upgrading key elements of the water information system at the national level and in each of
the WMZs

Sub-component 1.3: Kalagala Offset Sustainable Management Plan: This sub-component was to support
priority investments related to the implementation of the environmental offset that complements the Bujagali
Hydropower project. Activities were to include: afforestation and reforestation, restoration of native
vegetation, conservation of sensitive habitats, restoration and protection of river banks, promotion of
environmentally sustainable livelihood strategies, and enhancement of the capacities of the national and
sub-national entities responsible for implementation of the management plan.

Component 2: Infrastructure investment in urban water supply and sanitation/sewerage and
catchment/source protection (four National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) towns and
eight Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWD) towns) (appraisal estimate US$98.5
million, actual US$99.9 million): This component consisted of two sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1: Town water supply and sanitation under NWSC: This sub-component was to construct,
improve and expand priority water supply infrastructure and sanitation/sewerage services in the
municipalities of Arua, Gulu, Ishaka-Bushenyi, and Mbale. It was also ensure the long-term availability and
improved quality of water supply through enhanced source protection (e.g., supporting water resources
management activities and other measures to protect and rehabilitate catchment areas). Coordination
between DWRM and NWSC was to be strengthened to enable appropriate measures to be put in place for
each of the systems financed under the project. Activities were to include: undertaking new or updating
existing feasibility studies in each of the respective towns, including environmental and social due diligence
(EIA/EMP and RAP, if needed); detailed engineering designs and the preparation of tender documents for
the rehabilitation and construction of new water supply and sanitation infrastructure systems; source
protection measures; appropriate pro-poor measures; and the rehabilitation or construction of priority
investments.

Sub-component 2.2: Town water supply and sanitation implemented by DWD: This sub-component was to
construct, improve and expand existing water supply infrastructure and sanitation/sewerage services in
eight towns: Butaleja-Busolwe, Budaka, Kadama-Tirinyi, Kumi-Nyero-Ngora, Rukungiri, Busia, Pallisa,
Katwe-Kabatoro and Koboko. In a similar manner to sub-component 2.1 above, this support was also to
ensure the long-term availability and improved quality of water supply through enhanced source protection
(e.g., supporting water resources management activities and other measures to protect catchment areas),
including coordination mechanisms between DWRM and DWD. As under the previous sub-component,
activities were to involve updating or preparing feasibility studies; environmental and social due diligence
(EIA/EMP and RAP, if needed); detailed engineering designs and tender documents; and rehabilitation or
construction of priority investments.

Component 3: Strengthening Institutions for Effective Project Implementation (appraisal estimate
US$2.8 million, actual US$2.8 million): This component was to finance five sub-components which were
to enable the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) to provide oversight of the project through its Water
Sector Liaison Division (US$ 1.44 million). They were also support MWE directorates – Directorate of Water
Resources Management (DWRM) (US$ 0.56 million), Directorate of Water Development (DWD) (US$ 0.56
million), and Directorate of Environmental Affairs (DEA) (US$ 0.27 million) – and National Water and
Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) (self-financed) to manage the day-to-day implementation of the project,
including procurement of computers and vehicles, operations and maintenance, monitoring and evaluation,
facilitation of project supervision and review missions, etc. These sub-components were also to support


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



   capacity building activities for all key stakeholders, including Water and Sanitation Development Facilities
   (WSDFs), catchment management organizations and District officials in key areas such as training in
   procurement and implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Support for implementation of relevant aspects of the Water Sector
   Governance Action Plan (GAP) developed in 2009 and revised/updated in 2011 was also to be provided.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$135 million. Actual cost was US$121.59 million due to
   exchange rate fluctuations, with the original credit only being worth US$123 million by December 2018.

   According to ICR (p. 43) actual disbursement under component 1 was only 56 percent of the appraisal
   estimate due to procurement delays, resulting in a reduction of scope of the implementation of the WIS and
   the number of stations supported by the project. Also, water management funds from this component were
   reallocated to component 2 given water supply needs and readiness to start interventions.

   Financing: The project was financed by a US$135 million IDA credit of which US$121.59 million was
   disbursed and approximately US$1.16 million was cancelled. Due to exchange rate depreciation between
   the SDR and US Dollar the original credit was only worth US$123 million by December 31, 2018 (8.9
   percent less). The German Development Bank, Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau (KfW), financed US$6.5
   million for the Gulu Phase 1 works when it became clear that the Bank’s financing was not sufficient to
   finance all works.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was not to make any contributions.

   Dates: The project was not restructured and closed on its original closing date of December 31, 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of appraisal Uganda’s economy was dependent on exploitation of
natural resources such as water. Also, primary commodities accounted for more than 50 percent of exports.
However, between 1995 and 2010 the agricultural sector’s growth was limited due to, among other reasons,
declining soil fertility and the sector’s almost complete reliance on rainfall. Also, wetlands were shrinking
quickly and deforestation became a national issue when 25 percent of the country’s forests were deforested
between 1990 and 2005. In addition, demand for water supply by municipalities continued to increase and
water resources were not adequately protected. Inadequate management of water resources worsened the
impacts of droughts. At the time of appraisal, the government developed the five-year National
Development Plan (NDP) for 2011 to 20156, which focused on three key areas: growth, employment, and
socio-economic transformation for prosperity. The NDP stated that improved water resource management
was critical to these key areas.

The project supported the Government of Uganda’s five-year National Development Plan for 2015/16-
2019/20, which emphasized (p. 133) the importance of: i) improving water supply and sanitation services in

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



               urban small towns as well as expanding and prioritizing services in rural and vulnerable areas; and ii)
               consolidating Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) as a key strategy to ensure water security
               given climate variability and climate change.

               The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
               (2016-2020), especially Objective 3: “increased commercialization of agriculture”, Objective 4 “enhanced
               resilience of the poor and vulnerable”, and Objective 6 “improved access to urban services”. The project
               was also aligned with the Bank’s earlier Country Assistance Strategy for Uganda (2011-2015) and its two
               recommended areas of Bank support: i) enabling sound water resources management and development
               and ii) investing in improved access to and delivery of priority water and environmental services.

               As regards sector experience, in 2010, the Bank prepared a Uganda Water Country Assistance Strategy
               (UWCAS) to support Uganda's water sector (PAD, p. 3). The UWCAS identified limited development of
               water infrastructure and inadequate water resources management - coupled with natural challenges of
               hydrological variability and trans-boundary water resources - as key reasons for the inefficient utilization of
               water, rising unmet demand declining water quality, and high vulnerability to water shocks. The Bank has
               played a catalytic role in introducing critical reforms in Uganda’s water sector. For example, the Small Town
               Water Supply and Sanitation project piloted reforms that were rolled out to 79 towns and the Poverty
               Reduction Strategy Credit (PRSC) series supported a system of fiscal transfers to local governments that
               have been mainstreamed. Also, the project was to scale up support for Integrated Water Resource
               Management (IWRM), which had been introduced at a smaller scale in pilot catchments through the Nile
               Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program (NELSAP) and the Lake Victoria Environmental Management
               Project (LVEMP).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve integrated water resources planning, management and development:

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change (TOC) envisioned that inputs, including investments to improve integrated
                             water resources planning, investment and development, would result in outputs such as a water information
                             system being installed and operational, catchment management plans being prepared, new/upgraded
                             monitoring stations (hydrologic, hydromet and water quality) being installed, forest boundaries being
                             demarcated and trees being planted. These outputs would in turn result in the outcome of improving
                             integrated water resources planning, management, and development. However, the Results Framework
                             included a PDO indicator (“area under integrated water resource management and development in selected
                             catchments supported by the project”) to measure the achievement of this objective. It is unclear how this

                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



PDO indicator could have captured the sum of these outputs and how this PDO indicator was a relevant
measure for the achievement of the objective. Also, the ICR did not state if these outputs were at sufficient
scale to create a critical mass leading to the achievement of the planned outcome.

Outputs:

      A Water Information System (WIS) was installed and is operational at the Ministry of Water and
         Environment (MWE) but not at the Water Management Zone (WMZ) office. Therefore, the target of
         WIS being installed and operational at the Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWRM) and
         one WMZ office was only partially achieved. The WIS is providing real time data and information on all
         investments in the water and sanitation sectors and has improved the process of issuing water
         permits. According to the ICR (p. 14) 25 water permits have been issued since the WIS was installed
         and 32 permits were assessed using data from the new hydrometerological stations. However, since
         the ICR did not provide a comparative number of permits issued and assessed before the installation
         of the WIS, it is not clear to what extent this result is an improvement.
        Four participating Water Management Zones (WMZs) were developed and agreed on catchment
         management plans, achieving the target of four WMZs.
        41 monitoring stations (hydrologic, hydromet and water quality) were upgraded or newly built, well
         short of the target of 71 monitoring stations. Data from these monitoring stations was expected to
         allow managers to predict changes in water and quality, allowing steps to be taken to mitigate
         negative impacts. However, due to a shortage of funds, this target was not achieved.
        Seven implementing agencies with Memorandum of Understanding effectively coordinated to manage
         the project and submitted quarterly reports, falling short of the target of 12 implementing agencies.
         According to the ICR (p. 38) the original target was set on the basis of incomplete information about
         what the project would support. However, soon after the project closed, three additional Memorandum
         of Understandings were signed.
        660,000 tree seedlings were planted in degraded areas to prevent erosion and better manage flood
         waters.
        Four Catchment Management Plans (CMPs) and one Water Recourses Strategy for Water
         Management Zones (WMZs) were developed and are now being implemented, achieving the target of
         four CMPs being prepared. The CMPs developed included Mpologoma, Victoria Nile, Albert Nile and
         Aswa in Kyoga WMZ and Upper Nile WMZ. Also, the Upper Nile WMZ developed a Water Resources
         Strategy with an action plan.

Outcomes:

      5,590 hectares of area under integrated water resources management and development in selected
         catchments were supported by the project, achieving the target of 2,740 hectares.

          The PDO indicator used to assess the project’s objective was not well linked to the objective making
         the assessment of the extent of the achievement of the objective challenging. However, the project
         did produce some critical outputs, such as the installation of WIS, the development of WMZ and CMPs
         as well as a Water Resources Strategy that will have a long-term impact on the improvement of
         integrated water resources planning, management and development. Overall, the achievement of the
         objective was Substantial.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to water and sanitation services in priority urban areas:

Rationale
The project’s TOC envisioned that inputs such as investments to improve access to water and sanitation
services in priority urban areas would result in outputs such as new sewer connections being constructed,
water treatment plants being operational, and distribution networks being installed or rehabilitated. These
investments would also result in outputs such as new piped household water connections being made and
waste water treatment plants as well as operational and fecal sludge treatment facilities becoming
operational. These outputs would in turn lead to the outcome of increasing access to, and quality of, water
and sanitation services. These inputs and outputs were relevant for achieving the objective. Also, the PDO-
level indicators in the Results Framework (“people provided with access to improved water sources under the
project” and “people in urban areas provided with access to improved sanitation under the project”) were
adequate to measure the achievement of the objective.

Outputs:

      200 new sewer connections were constructed under the project, achieving only 15 percent of the
         target of 1,350 sewer connections.
      Five water supply sources in targeted catchments under source protection measures were supported
         by the project, well short of the target of 12 water supply sources. According to the ICR (p. 16) the
         target was not achieved due to: i) the agglomeration of towns in the Mbale water system that are
         sharing one water source and; ii) insufficient budget to finance all planned activities.
        12 water utilities were supported by the project, achieving the target of 12 utilities.
        The number of piped household water connections benefiting from rehabilitation works increased from
         14,332 connections in 2012 to 25,000 connections in 2019, surpassing the target of 22,249
         connections.
        6,345 new piped household water connections resulted from project interventions, well short of the
         target of 14,739 connections. According to the ICR (p. 16) the target was not met because distribution
         systems in some towns were completed towards the end of project implementation and connections to
         distribution systems take time since households have to first apply and then wait for the service
         provider to make the connection. However, since these systems were presumably supposed to have
         been completed at an earlier phase of project implementation, the delay in their completion would
         suggest a shortcoming in project implementation, and hence a failure to meet the PDO in this regard.
        32 public toilets were built at schools, markets, and bus parks in nine towns.

         Outcomes:

      1,01,0000 people were provided with access to improved water sources under the project, surpassing
         the target of 245,792 beneficiaries. According to the ICR (p. 15) a cost-effective pro-poor water
         strategy was implemented which aimed to increase water coverage to the poor through the installation

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



                                   of standpipes, which resulted in a lower connection fee cost for customers within 50 meters of the
                                   water main and reduced the water price without impacting the financial sustainability of the water
                                   companies.
                                  Only 14,410 people in urban areas were provided with access to improved sanitation under the
                                   project, well short off the target of 26,000 people.
                                  Overall, the project benefited 1,034,0000 beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 877,815 beneficiaries.
                                   According to the Bank team (May 7, 2020), the project’s M&E system reported the direct beneficiaries
                                   as the addition of the main activities under component 1 and component 2 and subtracted some
                                   beneficiaries to avoid double counting. However, the different beneficiary numbers are not directly
                                   consistent since in Arua and in Katwe beneficiaries included residents with improved both water and
                                   sanitation simultaneously, who were counted as one (despite benefitting from improved water and
                                   sanitation) for the purposes of the assessment.
                                  The cost recovery ratio for water supplies in DWD and NWSC towns supported by the project
                                   improved from 1 to 1.10, achieving the target of 1.10.

                            The project did not achieve critical targets for outputs such as constructing new sewer connections.
                            Therefore, the objective of improving access to sanitation services was not achieved. Also, the project was
                            not able to deliver outputs such as water supply sources in targeted catchments and new piped household
                            water connections.

                            Even though the project surpassed the envisioned target of providing people with access to improved water
                            sources by over four times, it is unclear to what extent this achievement can be solely attributed to the project
                            and if the target was set at a sufficiently ambitious level since the original target was set for piped water
                            connections, whereas the achievement was recorded for water delivery via stand-pipes, which was not part of
                            the original design, and which do not necessarily meet the same service delivery standards.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the achievement of the project’s first objective “improved integrated water resources planning,
                            management and development” was Substantial, the achievement of the second objective “improved access
                            to water and sanitation services in priority urban areas” was only Modest. As such, the project’s overall
                            efficacy is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Low achievement



                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 16) conducted an economic analysis, which examined the benefits and costs of infrastructure
investments to improve WSS services in order to assess whether it was likely that the economic benefits justify
the costs. The analysis calculated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of WSS investments included in
the project. The EIRR was approximately 15 percent and the net present value (NPV) was about US$ 24.6
million. Further, the sensitivity analysis showed that if the main outcomes were underachieved, the project would
still be viable. For example, under a hypothetical 10 percent reduction in the number of beneficiaries, the project
would still achieve a 13% EIRR.

The ICR (p. 18) conducted an economic analysis for interventions under the Upper Sipi water supply
investments of component 1 and component 2. The analysis calculated an overall economic rate of return (ERR)
of 41 percent and an NPV of US$210.6 million. The ICR (p. 48) stated that this analysis did not estimate a value
to the improvement in the quality of potable water, which replaced unprotected surface water from current
sources and wells and the averted damage of the aquifer by water protection actions implemented. Also,
according to the ICR (p. 18) higher than expected benefits resulted from 24/7 water supply and a one-time
increase in value of houses newly connected to water supply networks.

The ICR stated that investments under sub-component 1.1 (US$1.61 million) had an ERR of 55 percent and a
NPV of US$17.52 million. Investments under sub-component 2.1 (US$38.77 million) had an ERR of 6 percent
and a NPV of 0.89 million and investments under sub-component 2.2 (US$22.43 million) had an ERR of 53
percent and a NPV of US$175.44 million. According to the ICR (p. 48) the return from sub-component 1.1 was
higher since newly established water supply replaced poor water from unprotected sources and reduced the
water cost due to reliance on private vendors. The return from sub-component 2.1 was lower due to the
analysis not including significant benefits from the improved water quality, reduced intermittent water supply,
and associated coping cots.

Operational efficiency:

The project did not experience any significant implementation delays and closed on its original closing date.
However, according to the ICR (p. 10) when the detailed designs for priority investments were developed it
showed that costs were higher than expected and the project’s financial resources were not sufficient to cover
all investments as originally planned. According to the Bank team (April 11, 2020), in addition to the exchange
rate fluctuation, the increased sub-project cost estimates were also linked to the level of preparation at the time
of appraisal and framework nature of the project design. Although some studies and information were available
to inform the project design at appraisal, it was not until the detailed design phase that the client had all the key
elements of the proposed sub-projects to develop a more accurate cost estimate. Furthermore, the original cost
estimate did not include enough contingency to accommodate the uncertainty at appraisal. However, overall this
did not have any negative impact on the project’s efficiency.

Taking everything together, the project’s overall efficiency rating was Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    73.00
Appraisal                                                 15.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              41.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was High given its alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (2016-2020). The achievement of the project’s first objective was Substantial while the achievement
of the project’s second objective was Modest resulting in an overall Efficacy rating of Modest. Efficiency was
rated Substantial. Therefore, the project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical: Continuous Bank support and financing will ensure the sustainability of the achieved project
outcomes. A new Bank project, the Uganda Integrated Water Management and Development Project
(US$280 million), was approved by the Board in June 2018, and is building on this project’s outcomes. The
project aims to improve access to water supply and sanitation services, integrated water resources
management, and operational performance of water and sanitation service providers. The project will also
finance the originally planned activities, which the Water Management and Development project was not able
to finance.

Political/Governance: Integrated Water Resource Management has become a key activity of the Ministry
of Water and Environment (MWE) (ICR, p.28), which will also have a positive impact on the sustainability of
project outcomes. Also, the MWE is using WIS data on the status and evolution of water resources and uses
to inform decision making on operational management, regulation, planning, monitoring, and risk
management. However, the risk of government having weak fiduciary capacity as identified in the PAD (p. 9)
did materialize and resulted in procurement related delays. This might continue to be a risk for future project
implementation.

Financial: Tariffs for supplying water and sanitation services do cover operational costs, depreciation and
some minor investments, indicating that the established system is financially sustainable. However, financing
will be required for larger investments that might be necessary in the future.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team conducted wide consultation with the government and development partners working in
  the water sector. Furthermore, according to the PAD (p. 9), the Bank conducted a detailed analysis to
  assess the sector and based the project design on the Bank’s Uganda Water Country Assistance
  Strategy (UWCAS) which identified two broad areas for engagement: i) capacity development for
  effective integrated water management and development; and ii) investments in improved access to and
  delivery of water, sanitation, and environmental services.

  The Bank team identified stakeholder and government risks as High in the PAD. The high stakeholder
  risk was related to inadequate or ineffective stakeholder participation and capacity. The high government
  risk was related to fiduciary aspects of the project (procurement, financial management and safeguards)
  for which the Ministry had limited experience and capacity. According to the Bank team (April 11, 2020)
  the Bank tried to mitigate these risks by implementing a strong capacity-building program all levels (local,
  national and watershed), which was to include a platform for stakeholder engagement and developing a
  stakeholder communication strategy. In addition, tools and guidelines were developed with the support of
  the Bank and other donors to bring international standards and good practices to Uganda. Also,
  mitigation measures for financial management and procurement included: (i) capacity building activities
  for procurement and financial management of both MWE and NWSC designed as per specific
  assessments conducted by the Bank teams; and (ii) close supervision from Bank teams that included
  targeted assistance based on client demand and hands on training when needed.

  According to the ICR (p. 21) most of the project’s infrastructure activities were to be identified through a
  consultative process on which findings the Catchment Management Plans (CMPs) were to be developed.
  Once these CMPs were to be developed, preparation of feasibility studies and detailed designing of
  activities were to start. However, the consultative process only started after project effectiveness.
  Therefore, the first detailed designs and cost estimates of potential investments were only ready in
  2015. Also, the cost estimates showed that the project’s financing was not sufficient to include all the
  towns that were included in the design.

  The project’s Results Framework had shortcomings such as not encompassing all aspects of the PDO
  (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team experienced limited turnover among team members. Also, the ICR (p. 26) stated that the
 Bank team conducted 12 supervision missions throughout the six years of project implementation. The
 supervision mission team included Bank experts from relevant areas such as water resource management,

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



 water and sanitation services, procurement, financial management, civil engineering, safeguards and social
 development. The Bank team put adequate emphasis on visiting individual towns that were geographically
 separated to strengthen implementation support.

 Furthermore, according to the ICR (p. 27) Aide memoires were sufficiently candid and of high quality.

 The Bank team also stated (May 7, 2020) that non-compliance issues in regards to safeguards were
 resolved through close supervision, monitoring of agreed action plans, specific training, and management
 meetings to reinforce policy requirements.

 Mitigation measures taken for weak procurement capacity were not sufficient. The ICR (p. 22) stated that
 the procurement of the Water Information System (WIS) and of the hydromet equipment took much longer
 than planned. This delay resulted in reduction of geographical scope of WIS implementation and fewer
 stations that the project could support.

 The Bank missed the chance to restructure the project to allow for the Results Framework to better reflect
 the project’s achievement after the project scope was reduced. This had already been discussed during the
 Mid- Term Review, because the Bank was planning to restructure the project when considering the
 government’s request for additional financing. When the additional financing did not happen, the
 restructuring was abandoned, since there was very little time left until project closing.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objectives were clearly specified. The indicators in the Results Framework were specific and
 measurable and included a baseline when possible. The project’s theory of change and how key activities
 and outputs were to lead to outcomes was logical. However, it is not entirely clear how PDO indicator 1
 “area under integrated water resources management and development in selected catchments supported
 by the project” was linked to the first objective “improve integrated water resources planning, management
 and development” and was a relevant measure for the achievement of this objective.

 The ICR (p. 23) stated that targets for indicators measuring “area under integrated water resources
 management and development in selected catchments supported by the project” and “number of direct
 beneficiaries” were not set during project preparation since the areas to benefit were not known and the
 number of beneficiaries was to be based on the population in the selected areas.

 According to the PAD (p. 12) all agencies involved in implementation of the project were to participate in
 the process of data collection, compilation, analysis and use. The Project Liaison Officer was to have the


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



 overall responsibility for collating and presenting this information in results M&E progress reports which
 were to be prepared by each of the directorates involved in implementation and the NWSC on a regular
 basis.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 23) the MWE established an active monitoring system to collect data on project
  activities at the district level. Quarterly progress reports were of moderately satisfactory quality and
  improved during the last two years of project implementation. The M&E team visited project sites on a
  regular basis and documented progress of activities and assessed the impact of these activities on
  beneficiaries. However, the Bank team did not restructure the project and adjust the targets once it
  became clear that the scope of the project had to be reduced. Also, it was planned that indicators, with
  targets “to be determined”, were to be defined during the restructuring. However since the project was not
  restructured, these undetermined targets were not set until the fourth year of project implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 24) the project’s M&E data was used for discussions during supervision
  missions and to identify implementation bottlenecks. For example, the Bank and the government used
  M&E data to understand delays in procurement processes. The Bank team confirmed (April 11, 2020)
  that the M&E data were used to inform decision-making with respect to assessing progress towards
  meeting project results indicators and project completion schedule. The Results Framework was used to
  inform Bank management, high level officials, and key stakeholders on overall project progress and was
  also used to inform the decision of a new operation (IWMDP) as well as its design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’ safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.11 (Cultural
   Resources), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), OP/BP 7.50 (International Waterways), OP/BP 4.09
   (Pest Management) and OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams).

   The Bank team (April 21, 2020) clarified that during implementation, the environmental operational policies
   (OP/BP 4.04, OP/BP 4.36, OP/BP 4.37, OP/BP 4.09, OP/BP 4.11) were implemented under the overarching
   OP/BP 4.01, since they all contributed to the mitigation measures that were designed and implemented as
   Environmental and Social Management Plans. In summary, the implemented activities that required the
   application of these policies were monitored as part of the overall environmental performance and
   contributed to overall rating of OP 4.01 in the Bank’s operational portal.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



  The Bank team stated that OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.12 were monitored and reported on throughout project
  implementation and OP/BP 7.50 was fully and appropriately addressed during appraisal.

  Also, when necessary, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were mostly prepared and implemented before
  civil work activities started. However, in two sub-projects (Rukungiri and Bukedea – Upper Sippi) RAP
  payments experienced significant delays when contractors used compensation funds to start work due to
  budget constraints. According to the ICR (p. 25), this issue was addressed by the Bank through the
  conduct of close supervision and training and resulted in all RAPs being paid.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 25) the project performed its financial management procedures satisfactorily and
  complied with the Bank’s fiduciary requirements throughout project implementation. According to the Bank
  team (May 4, 2020) the project complied with the Bank’s financial covenants.

  The external auditor’s opinions were unqualified and submitted on a timely basis. Also, the Management
  Recommendation Letters did not identify any internal control deficiencies or accounting issues.
  Furthermore, the ICR stated that the project had adequate internal controls for withdrawal applications at
  the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation
  (NWSC). The Bank team stated (April 11, 2020) that the external auditor’s opinion was unqualified on June
  30, 2019.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 26) the project performed its procurement procedures moderately
  satisfactorily. The project complied with the Bank’s procurement guidelines and the Bank provided training
  and supported the counterpart in developing adequate procurement plans and documents. Also, the Bank
  conducted procurement meetings on a monthly basis and provided support to the MWE and NWSC to
  build capacity. However, the project experienced some procurement related delays, contributing to the
  decision to reduce of scope of the implementation of the WIS and the number of stations supported by the
  project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other
   ---



                                                                                               Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   Efficacy was rated Modest
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 28-29) included several lessons learned:

        Creating a sense of ownership is important for the design and sustainability of
         investments. This project benefited from community participation in the development of the
         CMPs and in the selection process for investments to be made under the project. Even if
         these consultations slowed implementation down, it created a sense of community ownership
         which will be important for the sustainability of these investments.
        Starting to build capacity within the counterparts during project preparation is critical
         for ensuring a successful project implementation. This project was the first Bank project
         to be implemented by the MWE and NWSC. Staff needed a significant amount of training in
         critical areas such as preparing infrastructure designs, procurement, financial management
         and safeguards resulting in implementation delays.
        Timely coordination with development partners is beneficial for achieving
         development outcomes. Also, ensuring better timing of the financing and that all parallel
         contracts and financing close simultaneously benefits project implementation. In this project,
         the Bank team coordinated with the KfW when it became clear that Bank financing was not
         sufficient for the Gulu Phase 1 works.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was concise and
included an adequate Economic analysis. Also, the ICR was sufficiently outcome driven and included useful
lessons which could have benefited from being more specific. However, the ICR did not include any information
on the risks identified during preparation and how the Bank mitigated these risks. Also, the ICR did not indicate



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Water Mgmt & Dev. Project (P123204)



the assessment instrument and mitigation plan for each safeguard policy triggered and did not provide evidence
that all planned mitigation activities were carried out.

Overall, the quality of ICR rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 16 of 16
