     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022243

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127807                                    Tax Administration

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tajikistan                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8100                                  31-Dec-2017                                          16,378,618.59

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Oct-2012                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            18,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             18,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         16,378,618.59                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 6), the program development objective of the Tajikistan Tax
   Administration Reform Project was “to reform the tax administration in order to: (i) enhance the level of
   voluntary compliance; (ii) strengthen the effectiveness of the Tax Committee to fight tax evasion; (iii)
   strengthen the institutional and human capacity in order to improve the professionalism of tax officials and
   reduce the avenues for corruption; and (iv) modernize the processes that would help reduce administrative
   cost for the government and compliance burden for taxpayers.”


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)



   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (pages ii and 7) and the Restructuring Paper (page 13) stated the
   project development objective differently: “The project development objective is to reform the tax
   administration to become more efficient and effective in collecting revenue, enhance the level of voluntary
   compliance, and improve the quality of taxpayer services. Specifically, the project aims to: (i) reduce the
   administrative cost of collecting revenue to make the Tax Committee a more efficient institution; (ii) strengthen
   the effectiveness of the Tax Committee to fight tax evasion and reduce the size of the shadow economy; (iii)
   reduce contact between tax officials and taxpayers to reduce avenues for corruption and create conditions for
   increased level of voluntary compliance; and (iv) provide good quality taxpayer services that would help
   reduce the compliance burden for taxpayers, thus improving the business environment and competitiveness.”

   The ICR (page 8) states that “the substance and desired outcomes [of the two statements] are generally the
   same” but assesses the project based on the statement of the objective in the Financing Agreement. This
   ICR Review uses the project development objective in the Financing Agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components.

   Institutional Development (US$2.2 million estimated at appraisal, US$1.94 million disbursed) supported
   the: (a) development of strategic planning and restructuring of offices of the Tax Committee, the agency
   responsible for tax administration in Tajikistan, to enhance capacity in modern tax organizational structure
   and to increase efficiency through the provision of consultants' services and training; (b) improvement of
   human resources policies, workforce planning, and staff transition plan as part of the modernization
   process, through the provision of consultants' services; (c) installation of a Human Resources Management
   Information System through purchase of equipment, and training to enhance capacity in human resources
   management; (d) development of training policies and strategy, curriculum, and e-learning and distance
   learning, through provision of consultants' services; and (e) establishment of regional training facilities
   through purchase of equipment, and training to enhance capacity of the training institute to deliver e-
   learning applications.

   Operational Development (US$1.8 million estimated at appraisal, US$1.42 million disbursed) involved: (a)
   strengthening the analytical capacity of the Ministry of Finance and the Tax Committee for tax policy; (b)
   augmenting skills of Tax Committee inspectors in auditing for detection of fraud; (c) enhancing the capacity
   of Tax Committee staff to enforce collection; (d) improving internal controls and internal audit; (e) revamping
   taxpayer services, including establishment of a modern call center; and (f) supporting the development of
   an independent tax appeals systems with a database for tracking of appeals cases, through the provision of
   consultants' services, purchase of equipment, and training.

   Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Infrastructure and System Modernization
   (US$12.4 million estimated at appraisal, US$10.94 million disbursed) supported: upgrading the ICT in the
   Tax Committee to automate the processing of returns, calculation of taxes, desk audits, and other tax

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)



   administration functions, through the provision of equipment, including the development of an Integrated
   Tax Management Information System (ITMIS) and the establishment of data centers.

   Project Management (US$1.6 million estimated at appraisal, US$2.08 million disbursed) involved
   strengthening the Tax Committee's capacity to provide project implementation, through the provision of
   consultants' services and incremental operating costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$18 million at appraisal. The final project cost was
   US$16.38 million, the lower amount largely due to the depreciation of the SDR against the U.S. dollar
   during project implementation.

   Financing: The project was financed by an SDR 11.9 million (US$18 million equivalent) grant from the
   International Development Association. The amount disbursed was SDR 11.7 million (US$16.38 million
   equivalent) by project closing, or 98.6 percent of the grant.

   Borrower Contribution: There was no financial contribution by the Republic of Tajikistan to the project.

   Dates: The project was approved on October 31, 2012, became effective on February 8, 2013, was
   restructured on February 8, 2017, and closed two years behind schedule on December 31, 2019.

   Restructuring: The restructuring in February 2017, with US$7.76 million disbursed (47 percent of the final
   disbursement amount): (a) revised some results indicators, including targets; (b) revised the project
   implementation schedule, extending the original closing date of December 31, 2017 by two years.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were substantially relevant to the development priorities of the government at project
appraisal. The "National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for the Period to 2015" cited
the "more effective management of government finances and the improvement of tax administration" as
priorities to "improving the public administration system and macroeconomic development." The "Poverty
Reduction Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for 2010-2012" advanced four "functional blocks" for
promoting sustainable economic growth. Of these, the second, "Macroeconomic Development", prioritized,
among others, tax reform, including by improving and simplifying tax administration. The "Public Finance
Management Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for 2009-2018" recognized that tax revenue remained
low in part due to tax exemptions, weaknesses in tax administration, and high tax arrears. The document
advocated improving tax administration to increase tax revenues and improve "budget predictability."

While this project focused on tax administration reform, tax policy reform in Tajikistan was concurrently
addressed by the government with the separate assistance of the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). A three-year arrangement under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) for SDR 104.4 million (US$116


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Tax Administration (P127807)



               million), approved by the IMF in April 2009 and augmented in June 2010, imposed a floor on tax collection
               through 2012 as an indicative target and a floor on the overall cumulative fiscal balance of the general
               government (excluding foreign-financed public investment program and related grants) as a quantitative
               performance criteria. Importantly, the IMF program required the submission to the Cabinet of a "strategy for
               reform of the tax regime" as a structural benchmark for September 2011, and the submission to the Cabinet
               of a "revised tax code consistent with IMF recommendations" as a structural benchmark for March
               2012. Focused on a simplification of the tax regime, the new "Tax Code for the Republic of Tajikistan" was
               approved by Parliament in December 2013 and adopted by the government in January 2014.

               The project objectives remained substantially relevant to the development priorities of the government at
               project closing. The "National Development Strategy of the Republic of Tajikistan for the Period Up to
               2030" emphasized the continued improvement of tax administration with the aim of improving tax
               collection, reducing the administrative burden of paying taxes, and increasing the transparency and
               predictability of the tax system.

               The government continued to pursue the tax policy reform agenda at project closing. According to the IMF
               Article IV Consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan, which concluded in January 2020, the next priorities
               for tax policy reform include: "broadening the tax base"; "gradually phasing out tax incentives"; and "fiscal
               consolidation measures to put debt on a downward trend." Accordingly, the government has drafted a new
               Tax Reform Program for 2020-25. Adoption of these new reforms may require additional revisions to the
               Tax Code.

               The project objectives were aligned with the country strategy of the Bank Group in Tajikistan at project
               appraisal. The “Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Tajikistan FY10-FY13” (CPS) articulated
               three objectives: (a) reducing the negative impact of the crisis on poverty and vulnerability; (b) paving the
               way for post-crisis recovery and sustained development; and (c) mainstreaming core governance
               reforms. The project objectives were aligned with the first CPS objective, particularly with the expected
               result to “maintain fiscal stability”, and the third CPS objective, specifically with the results to “strengthen
               incentives for better performance of civil servants” and to “improve transparency and accountability in public
               financial management.”

               The project objectives remained aligned with the country strategy of the Bank Group in Tajikistan at project
               closing. The “Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Tajikistan for the Period FY19-FY23”
               (CPF) supports the country’s development priorities in three “focus areas”: (a) human capital and resilience;
               (b) public institutions and sustainability; and (c) enabling private sector growth and creating markets. The
               project objectives were aligned with the second CPF focus area, specifically with the objective “to improve
               the effectiveness of the tax and the statistics offices.”


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration (P127807)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To enhance the level of voluntary compliance.

Rationale
The degree of achievement of this objective is assessed as high.

Theory of change: The review of business processes at the Tax Committee, purchase and customization of
an off-the-shelf ICT solution, purchase of software and equipment for the Data Center and Data Recovery
Center, and training of Tax Committee staff on data analytics would enable the Tax Committee to install and
deploy an ITMIS for the electronic filing of tax returns (e-filing) and the online payment of taxes by
taxpayers and the computerization and digitalization of many Tax Committee functions and services. A fully
functional ITMIS, supported by data centers and operated by trained staff, would allow taxpayers easy access
to their tax information, enable them to file returns and make payments online, and lessen their contact with
tax offices, thus helping raise their voluntary compliance with their tax obligations. A higher level of voluntary
compliance would be reflected in an increase in the number of taxpayers and in the percentage of taxpayers
using the new electronic filing and online payment system.

Outputs: The project achieved two output targets.

      The ITMIS was implemented, meeting the target. Acquired off-the-shelf but customized for the Tax
       Committee, the ITMIS was launched and deployed in July 2019. The ITMIS provides a single-window
       taxpayer-service platform for taxpayer registration, the filing of tax returns, the payment of taxes, and
       access to personal taxpayer information, including tax obligations and notifications. The system was
       rolled out in stages with the last four of 40 modules, made available in January 2020, relating to Tax
       Committee functions and covering risk-based audit, internal audit, tax arrears management, and
       appeals management.
      The Data Center in Dushanbe and the Data Recovery Center in Khujand were made operational in
       2015, meeting the target. Between 2015 and 2019, the data centers offered a suite of interim
       electronic services until the ITMIS was launched and made operational in 2019. The interim system
       allowed for the beginning of e-filing, using e-tokens, some 2,000 of which were distributed free to
       taxpayers. E-filing, which was not available in 2013, progressed from some 4 percent of all tax filings
       in 2015 to 90 percent by 2017.

Outcomes: The project exceeded two outcome targets.

      The total number of taxpayers more than doubled from 160,000 in January 2013 (baseline) to 326,492
       in December 2019 (closing date), exceeding the target of 201,500 taxpayers. The ICR (pages 12 and
       61) provides details of the headline number. The number of individual entrepreneur taxpayers
       increased from 137,265 to 295,563 and legal entity (or incorporated) taxpayers from 23,543 to
       30,929. The number of active value-added tax (VAT) taxpayers slightly declined slightly from 5,202
       to 5,148, after the VAT registration threshold (the value of “taxable supplies” --- the value of sales or
       supply --- at and above which persons are required to register and account for VAT) was raised from
       Tajikistani somoni (TJS) 200,000 in the baseline to TJS 500,000 in January 2013 and TJS 1,000,000
       in January 2017. But the number of corporate income tax (CIT) taxpayers rose significantly by 114
       percent from 2,367 to 5,080.

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration (P127807)




        The percentage of taxpayers (incorporated legal entities) filing tax returns electronically rose from zero
         percent in the baseline to 98.9 percent by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 70
         percent. According to the Taxpayer Survey of 2019, some 81 percent of survey respondents were
         aware of the new e-filing system, 68 percent reported using the system, and 98 percent expressed
         satisfaction with the system. Nonetheless, the survey also indicated that the e-filing system was less-
         used by individual entrepreneurs, including farmers, who had limited access to the Internet.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the effectiveness of the Tax Committee to fight tax evasion.

Rationale
The degree of achievement of this objective is assessed as substantial.

Theory of Change: The purchase of point-of-sale terminals and their integration into the ITMIS, the
development of risk-based audit techniques and their linkage with the ITMIS, and the development of
methodologies for tax revenue modeling, tax policy analysis, and impact analysis would result in a functional
e-invoicing system, a risk-based audit system, and stronger policy analytic capacity at the Tax Committee,
enabling the agency to strengthen its effectiveness in combating tax evasion. The outcome would be
evidenced by reductions in the tax gap measures, reductions in tax arrears, increases in tax adjustments as a
result of audits, and increases in the share of revenue collected by the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate.

Outputs: There was no output indicator defined for this objective, although the ICR (page 16-17) notes that
the four project activities related to this objective were all completed.

        E-invoicing was installed at the Tax Committee during project implementation. E-invoicing had been
         developed outside of this project but its deployment was supported by this project through: the
         purchase of point-of-sale terminals; the distribution of the terminals to small and medium-size
         enterprises; and the integration of the VAT e-filing system into the ITMIS.
        Following support provided by the International Finance Corporation for a risk-based auditing system,
         this project assisted with the development of a risk-based plan for tax inspections of business
         entities. For this purpose, the ITMIS had, beginning in June 2019, allowed the automated exchange
         of data with commercial banks, the National Bank of Tajikistan (the central bank), the Customs
         Service, the Social Protection Fund, the Property Register, and the Public Procurement Agency
         following agreement with third parties on an information exchange protocol. The Data Analytics
         Center at the Tax Committee, supported by this project, studies data that are warehoused at the
         Center.
        The software to manage tax arrears, initially supported by the International Monetary Fund, was
         expanded under this project and integrated into the ITMIS. The system helps with the Tax
         Committee's debt collection efforts.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration (P127807)




      This project helped produce recommendations for the Ministry of Finance to improve revenue
         forecasting, tax policy formulation, and impact assessment analysis. The recommendations are yet to
         be implemented, but are expected to be considered in future reform efforts.

Outcomes: The project achieved three of five outcome targets.

      VAT revenue productivity (defined as net tax revenue to final consumption divided by the statutory tax
         rate) increased from 0.37 in 2013 to 0.41 in 2019, nearly achieving the target for an increase to 0.42.
        CIT revenue productivity (net tax revenue to GDP divided by the statutory tax rate) increased from
         0.03 to 0.06, meeting the target for an increase to 0.06.
        The amount of tax arrears as a percentage of total annual tax collection decreased from 13.8 percent
         to 5.2 percent, exceeding the target for a reduction to 10 percent.
        Adjustments as a result of audit, measured on a per-auditor basis, increased from TJS 184 million to
         TJS 516 million, exceeding the target for an increase to TJS 280 million.
        The share of revenue collected by the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate rose from 43.6 percent to 58.8
         percent in 2018 (its highest rate during the implementation period), before dropping to 50.6 percent in
         2019, missing the target for an increase to 60 percent by the project closing date. Collections by the
         Large Taxpayer Inspectorate are sensitive to changes in tax policy, especially tax exemptions, which
         are the focus of the next set of tax policy reforms (see Section 3). In November 2019, the government
         decided to exclude medium-sized taxpayers from the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the institutional and human capacity in order to improve the professionalism of tax officials and
reduce the avenues for corruption.

Rationale
The degree of achievement of this objective is assessed as modest.

Theory of Change: A review of human resource (HR) policies at the Tax Committee, improved workforce
planning, the automation of HR management and performance evaluation, and the development of internal
controls and risk-based audits would create an effective HR management system. In addition, the planning
and development of a training policy and training curriculum, including the equipping of training centers and
provisions for e-learning would strengthen the capacities of the Tax Committee staff. A stronger institutional
and human capacity would improve the professionalism of tax officials and help reduce the avenues of
corruption, which would be reflected in increased taxpayer satisfaction with the professionalism of tax officers
and the quality of tax services.


Outputs: The project delivered two output targets.


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration (P127807)




      The Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) for the Tax Committee, which the
       agency did not have in the baseline, was operational in all offices of the Tax Committee by January
       2019, a year ahead of the closing date, after being launched in September 2017. The HRMIS
       covered all 1,800 employees of the Tax Committee.
      The training strategy for 2015-20 was developed and implemented, meeting the target. The training
       centers in Khujand, Kulob, Khorog, and Bokhtar were equipped under the project and distance
       learning was introduced. Advanced training for tax officers and continuing education were
       also launched, covering, in addition to tax administration, courses in ICT literacy, ICT security, and
       computer systems design and maintenance.

Outcome: The project achieved the outcome target for this objective.

      A comparison of the Taxpayers Surveys of 2016 (baseline) and 2019 (project closing) show an
       improvement in the perception of taxpayers regarding the level of professionalism and honesty of tax
       administration staff, meeting the outcome target. The 2019 survey indicated that: (a) 70 percent of
       audited taxpayers rated the professionalism of tax auditors highly (the professionalism of tax auditors
       had not been covered in earlier surveys, providing no comparison between end-line and baseline
       values); and (b) 90 percent of visitors to tax officers expressed satisfaction with the quality of tax
       services and the professionalism of tax officers in 2019, compared to 34 percent in 2016.
      Although the Taxpayer Survey of 2019 reflected improvements in taxpayer responses, the ICR (page
       17) also cautions that the indicators may not have been measured consistently over time. Other
       measures also yield mixed results. The Bank's Enterprise Survey of 2019 reported that the
       percentage of those firms surveyed that requested to make informal payments dropped from 30
       percent in 2013 to 8 percent in 2019, an indicator that "corruption levels in tax administration have
       decreased." However, Tajikistan continues to rank poorly in Transparency International's Perception
       of Corruption Index, scoring 25 out of 100 points (0 = highly corrupt, 100 = very clean) and ranking
       153rd out of 180 countries in 2019, compared to 22 out of 100 points and ranking 153rd of 176
       countries in 2013. And, the country's performance on control of corruption (which "reflects
       perceptions of the extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and
       grand forms of corruption, as well as "capture" of the state by elites and private interests") in the
       Bank's Worldwide Governance Indicators slid from a score of -1.25 (-2.5 = weak, 2.5 = strong
       governance performance) and 15th percentile rank (upper bound of 90% confidence interval for
       governance; 0 = lowest, 100 = highest) of 212 countries and territories in 2012 to a score of -1.42 and
       11th percentile rank of 209 countries and territories in 2018.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To modernize the processes that would help reduce administrative cost for the government and compliance
burden for taxpayers.

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Tax Administration (P127807)



The degree of achievement of this objective is assessed as high.

Theory of Change: A review and restructuring of the Tax Committee's organizational structure would help
improve the organizational structure and modernize business processes at the Tax Committee, enabling the
agency to lower the costs of tax administration. The creation of a Contact Center for taxpayers, including the
proper equipping of the center, the creation of an electronic database of taxpayer questions and Tax
Committee answers, the training of staff to improve taxpayer services, and the development of computer
software to help manage the appeals process would help to further modernize business processes at the Tax
Committee, enabling the agency to reduce the burden of compliance on taxpayers. A reduced burden of
compliance and lower tax administrative costs would be reflected in reductions in the time taken by taxpayers
to comply with tax obligations and in higher tax collections by the Tax Committee, measured on a per-tax-
official basis.


Outputs: The project achieved two output targets.

        The organizational and workforce reviews of the Tax Committee, the restructuring of the agency
         following the organizational review, and the redeployment of staff following the workforce review were
         implemented, meeting the target. Several functional departments were created under the new
         organizational structure, including the Modernization and Strategic Development Division, the
         Taxpayer Services Division, and the Complaints Division. Key activities of all functional divisions were
         documented using business process mapping procedures; operational instructions were developed for
         the new organizational structure; job descriptions were written up, and (at the time of ICR document
         preparation) selection was underway for audit officers.
        The Contact (Call) Center for taxpayers was established, meeting the target. Up to ten call center
         seats were created and staffed at the Contact Center in Dushanbe, and two satellite offices were
         also established in the regions. The center and satellite offices have been operational since January
         2018. According to the ICR (page 15), the Contact Center received 12,000 calls in 2016 and 35,000
         in 2019. Moreover, the Taxpayer Survey of 2019 found taxpayer satisfaction with the services
         provided by the Contact Center to be high at 94.8 percent, compared to 26.2 percent in the Taxpayer
         Survey of 2016.

Outcomes: The project exceeded two outcome targets.

        The ratio of revenue collected per tax official tripled from TJS 2.1 million in the baseline to TSJ 6
         million by the project closing date, exceeding the target for a 35 percent increase to TJS 2.9 million.
        The average time to comply with paying taxes was reduced from 296 hours in 2013 to 224 hours in
         2019, meeting the target for a reduction to 237 hours. The indicator was measured by the Doing
         Business Survey for the year 2018, and published in the Bank's Doing Business Report for 2019
         (page 208).



Rating
High




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Tax Administration (P127807)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the first objective to enhance voluntary compliance is assessed as high; the
                            second objective to strengthen the effectiveness of the Tax Committee to fight tax evasion, substantial; the
                            third objective to strengthen the institutional and human capacity in order to improve the professionalism of
                            tax officials and reduce the avenues for corruption, modest; and the fourth objective to modernize the
                            processes that would help reduce administrative cost for the government and compliance burden for
                            taxpayers, high. The overall efficacy of the project is rated as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: Defining the economic benefit from the project as consisting principally of reductions in
   compliance costs to taxpayers (owing to simplified procedures, lesser incidence of tax inspections, reduced time
   spent in tax offices), the PAD (page 15) computes the ERR for the project at 21.6 percent. The ICR (pages 44-
   45) offers a higher ERR, 68 percent, but explains that this number is not comparable with that in the PAD since
   the ICR uses a different baseline number for compliance hours.

   Moreover, defining the financial benefits from the project as consisting of increases in tax revenues (resulting
   from more effective tax administration), the PAD (page 15) computes the FRR for the project at 54 percent. The
   ICR (pages 45-46) arrives at a higher FRR, 194 percent. The ICR also states that it uses a different baseline
   number for compliance hours, and therefore its computation is not comparable with that of the PAD.

   Operational Efficiency: The project was implemented in seven rather than five years (the restructuring of
   February 2017 extended the closing date from December 2017 to December 2019). More time was needed to
   complete the development, testing, and implementation of the ITMIS, a central project activity, the procurement
   process for which was derailed in 2015. Two of three bidders failed to provide originals of their financial
   proposals at bid opening, necessitating a rebid in 2016.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                         Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tax Administration (P127807)



                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 21.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              68.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was substantially relevant to development priorities in Tajikistan and substantially aligned
to the Bank Group strategy and partnership framework in Tajikistan at appraisal and closing. The efficacy of the
project is rated as substantial. The efficiency of the project is rated as substantial.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes of the project are assessed to be moderate.

Political Risk: Political commitment to tax administration reform has been strong, beginning with the
adoption by the government of Resolution No. 686 in December 2010 approving the Comprehensive Tax
Reform Program for 2012-15. Achievements made under this project have firmed the political commitment
to the tax administration reform objectives. At the time of project closing in December 2019, the government
issued Decree No. 643 approving a new Program for Tax Administration Development for 2020-25, aimed at,
among others, building a tax compliance culture among taxpayers The commitment to the project objectives
will likely remain strong as the government and the Bank prepare the proposed Tajikistan Tax Policy and Tax
Administration Reform Project, which aims to inform and enhance capacities for implementing
comprehensive tax policy and administration reforms emphasizing efficiency, simplicity and equity, and the
proposed Tajikistan Tax Reform Project, which aims to improve voluntary compliance and the investment
climate.

Institutional Risk: According to the ICR (page 26), more extensive capacity building activity is required to
convert the Tax Committee, which is responsible for tax administration, into a full-service tax authority. The
next focus should be on developing a comprehensive compliance strategy that utilizes risk-based audit
practices. It will also be important to forge stronger linkages between policy setting, revenue forecasting,
and tax collection by strengthening institutional relations among the Tax Committee, the Ministry of Finance,
which is responsible for tax policy, and the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade, which is
responsible for economic policy.

Macroeconomic Risk: An expected deterioration in the macro-fiscal framework in Tajikistan, following
economic disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, may lead to some erosion of the country's
tax base. The International Monetary Fund approved an SDR 139.2 million (US$189.5 million equivalent, or
80 percent of quota) disbursement to Tajikistan under the Rapid Credit Facility in May 2020 to "help meet

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)



urgent balance of payments and fiscal needs stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic." Tajikistan also
obtained a US$11.3 million grant from the International Development Association in April 2020 and a US$5
million assistance from the U.S. Agency for International Development in June 2020 to help the country
respond to health and humanitarian problems stemming from the pandemic. Economic activities supported
by these developmental assistance would help mitigate economic and social risks arising from the pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was informed by analytical work produced by the Bank and the IMF, including
  "Tajikistan: Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment" (2007) and "Accelerating Tax
  Administration Reform" (2010). The ICR (page 21) cites complementary support on tax administration
  reform that were all considered by the Bank during project design --- conveyed through technical
  assistance by the Asian Development Bank (on business process mapping and re-engineering), the U.S.
  Agency for International Development (pilot tax office), the European Commission (one-stop-shop for
  business registration), the International Finance Corporation (tax payer education and risk criteria for
  audit selection), and the IMF (new tax Code and tax reform measures). Moreover, the PAD (pages 10-
  11) explains that the Bank incorporated into the project design some 12 lessons learned from successful
  tax administration reform programs elsewhere, including that investment in an Integrated Tax
  Management System would provide a best-practice business process for the Tax Committee and that
  reducing contact between tax officials and taxpayers would help reduce the avenues for corruption.

  The PAD (page 14) identified and rated four key risks to implementing the project and advanced
  mitigation measures. Weakening commitment to the tax administration reform agenda was considered a
  substantial risk, for which the mitigation measures included reinforcing the priority given to the reform
  program in the policy dialogue between the Bank and other development and the authorities. Weak
  institutional capacity --- inadequate skills, staff turnover, and problems with the retention of skilled
  specialists --- was also considered a substantial risk. The PAD recommended more effective training,
  staff secondment, adoption of a staff retention plan, and internships to build technical capacity at the Tax
  Committee.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank fielded qualified staff to supervise the project. There were three Bank task team leaders (TTLs)
 over the duration of the project. A co-TTL was based in Dushanbe; the last TTL was also based in
 Dushanbe, allowing for more direct and regular contact between the bank and the authorities.

 The Bank fielded regular supervision missions, which filed 15 Implementation Status and Results Reports
 (ISRs) over the seven-year project implementation period, or two per year, the average for Bank

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)



 investment financing projects. The Bank also prepared nine Aide Memoires, following many of
 the supervision missions.

 The Bank conducted the Mid-Term Review in November 2015. The Mid-Term Review reported on the
 overall and individual-component progress of the project, updated the assessment of project risks,
 assessed the adherence to project covenants, and laid out the next steps for the completion of the project,
 as evidenced by the Aide Memoire prepared for the review.

 The Bank restructured the project in 2017, extending the project duration to allow the ICT contractors and
 the Tax Committee to complete the development, testing, and implementation of the ITMIS, the
 procurement for which had been delayed in 2015. The Restructuring Paper revised the results indicators
 for the project, although a full articulation of the theory of change underlying the project would not be made
 until the preparation of the ICR.

 According to the ICR (page 25), technical assistance provided by the Bank to the implementing agency
 was crucial in a low-capacity environment and in response to the procurement problems in
 2015. Importantly, the Bank provided expert guidance to the Tax Committee on the complex ICT
 procurement process, covering: (a) the preparation of terms of references and technical specifications; (b)
 the evaluation of bids; (c) the design of contract negotiation strategies; (d) and the conduct of contract
 management.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD (pages 19-21) defined six outcome indicators and 12 output indicators to evidence the
 achievement of the project objectives. According to the ICR (page 24), the PAD lacked a robust discussion
 of both the project outcomes (the six outcome indicators referred to voluntary compliance, efficiency,
 quality of taxpayer services, and effectiveness) and the project outputs (the 12 project output
 indicators were listed by project component rather than project objectives). The lack of clarity with the
 indicators carried over into the Financing Agreement and resulted in incomplete indicator reporting in the
 ISRs filed over 2015-17 (before the project restructuring), according to the ICR

 The Restructuring Paper (pages 7-13) revised the set of results indicators: (a) changing the targets for two
 outcome indicators; (b) adding four new outcome indicators; and (c) changing the target for one output
 indicator. However, according to the ICR (page 23), the Restructuring Paper missed listing the outcome
 indicator for the third objective "to strengthen the institutional and human capacity in order to improve the
 professionalism of tax officials and reduce the avenues for corruption" --- the taxpayer satisfaction surveys
 showing an improvement in the taxpayer perception of the professionalism and honesty in tax

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)



 administration.

 Notwithstanding the lack of a robust discussion in the PAD of how the project outcomes related to the
 project objectives, they were in fact related as seen in the theory of change expounded in the ICR and
 used in this ICR Review (see Sections 4 and 14). Thus, the indicators give an accurate picture of the
 achievement of the project objectives.

 The M&E plan also required the Project Implementing Unit, within the Tax Committee, to undertake the
 M&E for the project. The Tax Committee would prepare quarterly performance reports and annual reports,
 the latter within four months after the end of each fiscal year.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Implementing Unit at the Tax Committee implemented the M&E according to plan, except for
  some early deficiencies. According to the ICR (page 23), there were some deficiencies with the ISRs
  prepared in 2015-17, with reporting on some outcome and output indicators missing. The project also
  lacked baseline data on taxpayer satisfaction with the professionalism of tax auditors; the Taxpayer
  Survey of 2016 did not cover the topic.

  Overall, the ISRs prepared after 2017, the Aide Memoires produced for the supervision missions, and the
  Aide Memoire produced for the Mid-Term Review in November 2015 adequately reported on the results
  indicators and progress with the project.




c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 23), the Bank found the M&E data to be useful in its discussion with the
  Project Implementing Units and with the Tax Committee on the progress with the project and on
  “corrective actions” to address project implementation issues and problems. This is reflected in the Aide
  Memoires prepared for the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: According to the PAD (page 18), the project was classified as an
   Environmental Assessment Category "C" project at appraisal, for which no environmental review was
   required. Accordingly, the project was not rated for environmental safeguards or for overall safeguards
   during implementation, and the ICR (page 24) did not cover the topic either.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Tax Administration (P127807)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: According to the ICR (page 24), procurement complied with the requirements of the
   Financing Agreement: (a) procurement plans were updated regularly, reviewed by the Bank, and publicly
   disclosed; (b) findings and recommendations of ex-ante and ex-post reviews by the Bank were promptly
   addressed; (c) the development of the procurement plan for the ITMIS package took longer than expected;
   (d) the cancellation of two large consultancy contracts followed Bank guidelines; and, (e) there was
   adequate collaboration among procurement staff of the Bank in the field and at headquarters and of the
   implementing agency. Procurement was rated satisfactory beginning in November 2018, after being rated
   moderately satisfactory earlier.

   Financial Management: According to the ICR (page 24), the bank considered all aspects of financial
   management --- planning, budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, funds flow, internal controls, and
   external audits --- adequate and acceptable. Interim financial reports were mostly submitted on time,
   although small discrepancies were found between expenditures reported in the interim financial reports
   and the last two audit reports in relation to foreign exchange gains and losses. Financial management was
   rated moderately satisfactory throughout project implementation.

   Audit: The auditor issued clean opinions on the fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2019 project financial
   statements. The audit of the fiscal year 2019 financial statement was not available at the time of ICR
   preparation. The project had requested an extension of the audit report submission deadline to September
   20, 2020 due to COVID-19 related interruptions in operations.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons



                                                                                                Page 15 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Tax Administration (P127807)



Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 26-27), with some adaptation.

Having a functional integrated tax management information system is a key element in tax
administration reform. In this project, an off-shelf ITMIS was procured and customized to meet the
Tax Committee's business process requirements. It was also installed over a phased
implementation period, allowing for learning. According to the ICR (page 26), the off-shelf package
was the appropriate information technology solution (despite the Tax Committee's preference for an
in-house solution) as the implementing agency had limited technical capacity and was not fully
equipped for an re-engineering task. Moreover, the non-proprietary solution offered a source code
for future software modification, an important feature for the sustainability of the IT system moving
forward. However it is acquired, an ITMIS is critical to the modernization of tax
administration. According to the PAD (pages 10-11), the ITMIS was included in this project, having
been an important part of successful tax administration reform efforts elsewhere.

Projects with complex ICT activities should be provided longer lead times for preparation and
implementation, as well as more robust technical assistance. In this project, the Bank provided
expert technical advice and assistance to the Tax Committee for the ITMIS procurement, including
with writing technical specifications and preparing terms of references for services (see Section
8.B). Still, the procurement process was delayed. Beyond procurement, a comparatively longer
implementation period is also necessary for the design and implementation of an ICT system,
including for testing, calibration, and reconfiguration, if necessary. It also takes time to build up
capacity among government staff to work with digital and computer systems. According to the ICR
(page 27), it was ambitious to complete this project in five years, the original implementation
period.

With tax administration modernization being an ongoing concern, it would be optimal for
governments to plan for broadening and deepening tax administration reforms in the
medium- to long-term. In this project, with the Tax Committee having acquired basic digital literacy
with an ICT-backed system, the government may well consider the next steps to strengthening its
tax administration system. The ICR (page 27) lists various next-generation measures that the
government can consider: (a) a compliance risk management tool; (b) reductions in advance tax
payments; (c) a more independent and transparent Appeals Body; (d) the increased use of
automated procedures to select tax audits; and (e) annual taxpayer surveys.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR (page 7) presented a theory of change for the project, that the ICR stated (pages 18, 23) had only
been "implicit" in the PAD and Restructuring Paper. Moreover, the ICR uses the statement of the project
development objective found in the Financing Agreement to assess the efficacy of the project objective. The
project development objective had been stated differently in the PAD (see Section 2.A). The use of the legal
document avoids any confusion with linking different project results to different project objectives.

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Tax Administration (P127807)




The ICR (pages 12-18) offers a thorough and detailed reporting on the results of the project, citing not only the
output and outcome indicators but also the activities and inputs that led to the results. The assessment of the
efficacy of the project objectives is candid. For example, the ICR states that: (a) there is less progress to report
on revenue forecasting, tax policy formulation, and impact assessment analysis than originally expected; (b)
major improvements are still wanting with tax audits; (c) tax exemptions, as well as the exclusion of medium-
sized taxpayers from the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate, were major factors accounting for the Large Taxpayer
Inspectorate's failure to meet the target on the revenue collection ratio; and (d) the Enterprise Survey of 2019
continued to list "tax rates" and "tax administration" as the top two business environment constraints,
notwithstanding the results of the project and the findings of the Taxpayer Survey of 2019.

Three annexes provide more comprehensive reporting and analysis of the project results: (a) Annex 4 -
Efficiency Analysis (pages 44-46) offers details on the ICR's calculation of the project ERR and FRR, although it
falls short of fully explaining the differences between the PAD and ICR assumptions; (b) Annex 8 - Executive
Summary of the 2019 Taxpayer Survey (pages 63-68) goes beyond listing the detailed findings of the survey
by submitting recommendations that can be drawn from the results; and (c) Annex 7 - Executive Summary of
the Borrower's Report (pages 49-62) provides an even more detailed narrative of the project activities and year-
by-year reporting of selected results.

The ICR could have discussed more fully the findings of the tax policy-related analysis supported by the project
(see Section 4, Objective 2). A follow-up with the project team after the completion of the ICR revealed that: (a)
three manuals on methodologies for tax policy formulation, tax policy impact analysis, and revenue forecasting
were developed; (b) staff at Ministry of Finance and Tax Committee were trained in the use of the
methodologies detailed in the manuals; (c) the manual on tax policy formulation discussed topics including the
objectives of tax policy, the properties of good tax policy, national taxes, and sub-national government
revenues; (d) the consultant also submitted recommendations pertaining to various taxes and tax rates,
including taxes and tax rates that could be increased or decreased; but (e) the focus of this particular project
activity remained that of building the capacity of government staff for tax policy formulation and analysis.

The project team also supplied data, after the completion of the ICR, on taxpayer satisfaction with the Contact
Center in the baseline and at end-line (the information had not been included in the ICR).




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Tax Administration (P127807)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
