     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022121

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P103499                                    NG:Growth & Employment

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                    Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48820                                  30-Dec-2016                                          66,853,193.22

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Mar-2011                                29-Mar-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          160,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             83,568,552.48                                               0.00

 Actual                                         66,853,193.22                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          Paul Holden                  Christopher David Nelson        IEGFP (Unit 3)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original objective of the project approved in 2011 was "to increase growth and employment in
   participating states". However, the original project never became effective, because of the advent of a new
   Government with different priorities. The project title and the PDO were revised through a level-1 restructuring
   in June 2013. Pursuant to the Financing Agreement on p. 5, the revised project objective was" to increase firm
   growth and employment in participating firms in Nigeria". Although there was a parallel financing, the project



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



   was conceived as a joint project between the World Bank and DFID (ICR p. 7). This review will assess the
   project's outcome of the co-financed project against only the revised objective.

   The assessment will undertake a parsing of the PDO in two sub-objectives as follows:

         (i) to increase firm growth in Nigeria, and
         (ii) to increase employment in participating firms in Nigeria.

   Under each sub-objective, we will assess (i) the outcome achieved during the period 2013-2019 using the TA
   instrument, with predominant funding from the DFID and some IDA disbursements, and (ii) the outcome
   achieved during the period of June 2013-19, using the TA and grant instruments, with funding from both the
   DFID and IDA resources.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  04-Jun-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Since the project only became effective in July 2013 following the June 2013 Level 1 restructuring, there
   was no expenditure of resources before that date. There were two Level-2 restructurings in August 2017
   and June 2019, which affected the project components and resources allocation.

   Component A: Improved Investment Climate (Original funding by DFID in the amount of US$75
   million and US$5 million IDA; Actual US$5.0 million by IDA, and US$72.73 million by DFID).

   This component became effective in June 2017 as part of the level 2 restructuring. The US$5 million IDA
   amount was allocated to this component in June 2017 to support the improvement of the investment
   climate, as a complement to the DFID parallel financing which covered the period 2010-2015. The key
   activities under this component aimed to support land and tax administration reforms, Investment promotion
   and facilitation, and other investment climate reforms and peer learning activities.

   Component B: Increased Competitiveness of Strategic Clusters (Total Funding: US$172 million, of
   which US$142 million by IDA and US$30 million by DFID; Actual of US$51.85 million by IDA, and
   US$48.18 million by DFID)

   The component provided support at the firm-level, in order to identify high-potential entrepreneurs
   and modernize their business practices. Key features of the June 2013 Restructuring Paper (para 23-
   30) and summarized in the ICR on Table 2 were as follows: (i) for the ICT, Entertainment, Wholesale and

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



  Retail, Light Manufacturing clusters, support was provided through TA and grants, to eligible firms or
  institutions and enterprises; (ii) TA and financial assistance aiming to support the development of the local
  catering industry, promote local culture, and strengthen the hospitality industry; (iii) TA and financial
  assistance intended to improve skill development and access to finance, incentivize innovation and support
  policy advocacy and reform in the construction industry; and (iv) the project aimed to improve the meat and
  leather industry and food safety, as well as the investment climate and public sector capacity within the
  sector.

  Revised component in the June 2013 level-1 restructuring (Total Funding: US$172 million, of which
  US$142 million by IDA and US$30 million by DFID): The revised component shifted focus to provide
  support at the firm-level, by identifying high-potential entrepreneurs and modernizing their business
  practices. Key changes adopted in the June 2013 Restructuring Paper (para 23-30) and summarized in the
  ICR on Table 2 were as follows: (i) for the ICT, Entertainment, Wholesale and Retail, Light Manufacturing
  clusters, there was a shift in focus from TA to TA and grants, and from institutional strengthening to
  providing grants to eligible firms or institutions and enterprises, and (ii) there were no changes to activities
  listed under the hospitality, construction, and meat and leather clusters.

  In the June 2017 level-2 restructuring, funding was revised to US$167.00 million, of which US$137
  million by IDA, and US$30 million by DFID). In this restructuring, the number of project activities were
  reduced to 18. Several activities were dropped in the ICT, Entertainment, Light Manufacturing clusters, as
  well as in the Hospitality, Construction and Real Estate Clusters. A new SME Investment Fund was
  proposed to provide longer-term mezzanine funding to SMEs, and to expand third-party funding
  instruments. However, in the June 2019 level-2 restructuring, the SME investment fund proposal was
  withdrawn and US$76 million of undisbursed IDA funds were cancelled.

  Component C: Project Implementation, M&E, and Communications (Total Funding: US$20.37
  million, of which US$18 million by IDA, and US$2.37 million by DFID: Actual US$10 million by IDA
  and US$5.67 by DFID)

  Key activities aimed to support project management, monitoring and evaluation, project coordination,
  environmental and social management, and strengthening government institutions. The Federal Project
  Implementation Unit (FPIU) and the Project Management Unit (PMU) were merged, and the Minister of
  Trade and Investment was to chair the Steering Committee, and the project management unit merged with
  the FPIU. Actual disbursements for the DFID project increased, because while the DFID project closed in
  2015, a DFID expert continued to support the IDA project implementation until 2019. Actual disbursements
  for the IDA project were scaled down following the reduction of the project's scope and associated
  implementation costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual disbursement amount totaled US$157.56 million, composed of US$41.78 million
  equivalent from IDA, and US$115.74 million equivalent from DFID.

  Project Financing: The total project cost was estimated at U$269.37 million equivalent at appraisal,
  composed of USS$160.0 million from IDA and US$109.37 million equivalent from DFID. Because of
  implementation challenges (ICR, para 90), there was a 2019 partial cancellation of undisbursed IDA funds


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



   amounting to US$76 million. Actual disbursements stood at 58.7 percent of the total project commitments.
   The project was designed as a parallel-financed project with DFID.

   Borrower Contribution: There was no financing from the borrower.

   Dates. The project was approved by the World Bank’s Board on March 17, 2011, and became effective on
   July 29, 2013. Its initial closing date was December 31, 2016. The project had four restructurings, one of
   which never came into effect. In June 2013, there was a level-one restructuring, which occurred before
   project effectiveness. It included changes to the project title and the PDO and a closing date extension to
   September 7, 2018. A level-two restructuring occurred on August 01, 2017, but the Ministry of Finance did
   not sign the Amended Financing Agreement, so the restructuring was never official. A further restructuring
   occurred in October 2018, which included an extension of the closing date to March 29, 2019. A final
   restructuring occurred on December 07, 2018 and included changes in components and costs, the
   cancellation of US$76 million in financing, and reallocation between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Consistency with the Borrower's priorities: Growth and employment were at the core of the Nigeria’s 7-
point policy agenda of the country’s poverty reduction strategy, which explicitly recognized the importance
of employment, diversification, and wealth creation. The project appraisal coincided with a changing
environment in the Nigerian political landscape. Even as the project drew on extensive studies establishing
the rationale for the project, the ICR reports (para 89) that the World Bank was unsuccessful in securing
sufficient buy-in from the states and did not reach firm agreements with the key beneficiaries on project
design. The Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF) requested that the project support the ‘Agricultural
Transformation Agenda’, and the ‘YouWin’ business plan competition. The absence of these new
developments in the original project design led to delays in project effectiveness, and triggered the June
2013 level-1 restructuring, which revised both the title and the PDO of the project, and integrated the
borrower's new priorities. The revised PDO was "to increase firm growth and employment in participating
firms in Nigeria". The new PDO was consistent with the Nigeria’s 2020 strategy, which aimed to qualify
Nigeria as one of the world’s top 20 economies by 2020. This project intended to support the second CPS
pillar focusing at boosting the role of private sector and non-oil growth.

Consistency with the Bank's strategies: The revised PDO was consistent with the country's priorities
and the World Bank's strategies until the project closing date. As detailed hereafter, the revised PDO was in
line with the recent World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD). The revised PDO was in line with the 2014–2017 CPF, in its goal of promoting diversified
growth and job creation, and supported the first strategic cluster aimed to increase financing for SMEs
and create more jobs. Finally, the 2019 SCD identified four pathways for Nigeria's development goals,
including the third pathway whose goal was to “promoting a private sector-led growth,” which was
underpinned the project’s objectives and design.

The revised PDO was implemented over a period of six years (2013-2019). The scope of the project was
revised twice in 2017 and in 2019 to adjust to on the ground developments. On balance, the relevance of
the revised PDO is rated as Substantial, because at closure, while the PDO was congruent with the

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



               Government's priorities and the Bank's strategy, the program of activities was overambitious and could not
               be fully implemented, as illustrated by the cancelation of about 48 percent of the IDA originally allocated
               resources.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase firm growth in Nigeria.

                             Rationale
                             (A) Efficacy achieved using the TA instrument

                             IDA and DFID disbursements supported the above PDO in respective amounts of U$6.06 million US$115.74
                             million using the TA instrument. The goal was to provide TA that would create a conducive business
                             environment for the private firms' growth and employment.

                             Causal chain and outcome attribution

                             There was no causal chain developed either in the PAD or in the subsequent restructuring papers. The ICR
                             constructed a result chain (ICR-Figure 1) whose key features are developed hereafter. The project results
                             chain was underpinned by financial resources provided by the DFID and IDA, and which were the main inputs
                             for the project. Financial resources were to fund a host of TA activities, reforms and studies aimed at
                             improving the country's investment climate and the competitiveness of strategic clusters. Key expected
                             outputs could include the number of reforms adopted (tax, land, ease of business) and skilled workers, and
                             the creation of new firms; expected outcomes could include the number of jobs created, the efficiency
                             in the management of new firms and business clusters. Expected long term outcomes and impacts could be
                             the ease of doing business, increased foreign and domestic investment, which would spur higher economic
                             growth. Finally, the gist of achieved outcome under this PDO is mostly attributable to the DFID, based on the
                             amount of disbursed funds in support to this objective.

                             Project resources were to fund TA aimed to improve the investment climate. Completed reforms and
                             studies would allow the adoption of new laws and regulations, which in their turn would result in reduced time
                             and cost of registering property, and reduced time taken to obtain approvals and licenses to operate. The
                             above would reduce the cost and risk of doing business and provide a greater incentive to invest,
                             triggering increased foreign and domestic investment, job creation in the key sectors, and eventually
                             strengthening country's participating firms.



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



Key assumptions underpinning the above result chain was to include (i) the ownership and technical capacity
of participating states and national government to implement reforms, (ii) the sustainable partnership of
donors and continuous alignment of country priorities, and (iii) the conduciveness of the global and national
economic and political situation for private sector growth. Missed outcomes resulted from some of the key
assumptions being incorrect, in particular technical capacity was weak, a lack of buy-in from the states and
changing country priorities.

As reported in the ICR (paras 31-37), key outputs and outcomes generated toward the PDO at the project's
closure are presented below:

Outputs

      A tax harmonization bill was passed and a proven toolkit to guide internal revenue generation was
         developed, and both improved the investment climate in participating states;
      A Systematic Land Title Registration (SLTR) process at the local government level was completed in
         the states of Kano and Kaduna to facilitate business development in those states;
        Investment Promotion Agencies in the states of Kaduna, Kano, Lagos, and Jigawa were established;
        Four hundred (400) artisans were trained in video and sound editing, and six hundred (600) youths
         were trained to promote quality of service and affordable housing development in the Kaduna State;
        A Collateral Registry was established at the Central Bank therefore improving access to finance for
         entrepreneurs and firms; and
        Market systems were strengthened for the sectors of meat & leather, construction & real
         estate, and wholesale & retail through the “Making Markets Work for the Poor (M4P) Approach".

Outcomes

      The SLTR provided residents with title to their property and increased property security. Land title
         holding increased the property value by approximately 40 percent, and improved land titling expanded
         investment in the productivity of land, and this was a positive step for private firms in general;
        The project brought in systemic change in the meat and leather industries, as income-related targets
         were exceeded ;
        There was a large registration pickup in the Collateral Registry, with registered assets
         reaching US$102 billion as of 2017;
        Tax compliance has increased and generated revenue reached the equivalent of US$1.37 billion in
         Kaduna, Kano, and Jigawa;
        In Kaduna, mobilized investments reached a total value of US$350 million by 2017, and firms that
         worked with the local investment promotion agencies reported positive feedback on their collaboration;
        Strong performance of the DFID-funded Whole and Retail Market Systems with 15 of the 16
         indicators targeted fully achieved. Key areas of intervention include mobile money, skin salting, and
         micro retailing, and rice and tomato agro-service provision;
        Results for the beneficiaries of improved access to services supported by the project reached over 3.9
         million individuals in May 2017 against a target of 4.2 million;
        The sustainability—measured through the percentage of new or improved services sustained in the
         market a year after project end—was fully achieved and reached the target of 90 percent.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



(B) Efficacy achieved using the TA and grant instruments

DFID disbursements were used to fund TA benefitting private firms in key clusters, while IDA resources
funded TA and grants to step up potential firms' growth and employment. The project's efficacy toward the
revised PDO reflects the changes brought in by both the June 2013 level-1 and the 2107 and 2019 level-
2 restructuring operations.

Causal chain and outcome attribution

The elements of the causal chain and the critical assumptions presented while using the TA instrument alone
apply here. The project focus was on TA and grants in supporting firms, by identifying high-potential
entrepreneurs and modernizing their business practices.

The main inputs were TA from DFID and IDA as well as IDA grants. Financial resources were to fund TA
activities and provide grants to firms with high potential. Reforms and studies aimed at improving the
country's investment climate and the competitiveness of strategic clusters would take place, and high-
potential firms were to receive grants to step up their performance. Key expected outputs would include the
number of reforms adopted to improve the business environment, the number of firms receiving grants, and
the number of new firms created; expected outcomes would include the number of jobs created, the efficiency
in the management of new or existing firms and business clusters. Expected long term outcomes and
impacts would include the performance of supported firms, higher jobs creation, increased foreign and
domestic investment, which would spur the growth of private firms.

Achieved outcome under this PDO is attributable to both the World Bank and DFID. Their resources were
used to fund activities supporting the new objective, until project's closure for both DFID and IDA. Generated
outputs and achieved outcomes reported in the ICR (paras 38-55) are summarized below:

Outputs

      The target for the number of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) registered in the
         Business Innovation and Growth (BIG) Platform was exceeded, reaching the number of 107,910
         against a target of 100,000;
        The target for the number of MSMEs benefiting from capacity enhancement was partially achieved,
         reaching the number of 2,111 against a target of 8,974;
        Results include a total of 109,000 SMEs which were registered on the platform; 5,474 out of them
         received access to services, including online training, business development services (BDS), and
         insourcing/outsourcing;
        Staff from twenty-seven consulting firms were trained in the provision of BDS to SMEs, which led to
         their growth and job creation;
        Sixty-two BDS providers were trained, with achieved performance assessed based on a paper-based
         test and an observation of a consulting service provided to a MSME; and
        The capacity of SMEs was strengthened through outsourcing by building firm-level competencies and
         was piloted in Lagos and Abuja.

Outcomes




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)




      The target for percentage growth in sales of participating firms was exceeded, reaching 258 percent
         against a target of 20 percent;
        The target for percentage growth in sales of female-headed participating firms exceeded reaching 99
         percent against a target of 20 percent;
        An online platform contributed to improved transparency of beneficiaries’ selection, provided a high
         level of control at different steps of the process and enhanced cost effectiveness of the
         implementation;
        A large impact evaluation was embedded in the project to measure impact from various capacity
         building approaches on firm’s business practices. Impact evaluation results illustrated that the
         insourcing, outsourcing and consulting interventions all improved business practices in participating
         firms, although training had a negligible impact;
        The ICR conducted beneficiary surveys at completion to mitigate for weak results measurement, and
         these surveys provided a positive feedback on growth and job creation, although they did not measure
         growth and employment effects specifically;
        During the ICR phase, there was a collection of firm-level data in the context of a survey and virtual
         focus groups. The surveyed firms reported higher levels of growth of sales. This underscores that the
         project contributed toward the revised PDO to increase firm growth in Nigeria, but the significance
         of those improvements could not be established. The feedback was mixed on the quality and efficacy
         of different capacity building services provided to the firms. The results presented in the ICR (Table 3)
         reflect the perceptions of survey respondents on the impact of the project on the strength of
         beneficiary firms. Overall, in-person training was ranked first, closely followed by the services provided
         from inhouse consultants.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase employment in participating firms in Nigeria.

Rationale
(A) Efficacy achieved using the TA instrument

Causal chain and outcome attribution

The causal chain and outcome attribution outlined under the first sub-objective apply here when pursuing the
second sub-objective using the TA instrument. Expected long term outcomes and impacts could be the ease
of doing business, increased foreign and domestic investment, which would spur higher rates of employment
in participating firms in Nigeria. Finally, the gist of achieved outcome under this sub-objective is mostly
attributable to the DFID, based on the amount of disbursed funds in support to this instrument.

Outputs



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



Outputs generated by the project and presented under the first sub-objective using the TA instrument are all
relevant toward the achievement of the second sub-objective. They were all instrumental, directly or indirectly,
in achieving the outcomes toward increased employment in participating firms in Nigeria.

Outcomes

Achieved outcomes reported in the ICR (paras 31-37) are delineated below:

      The employment target was achieved at 92 percent, with 4,076 achieved by the end of June
       2015 against a target of 4,400 full-time employees equivalent;
      Achievements in the increase in the average number of male and female full-time employment
       generated by participating MSMEs were exceeded by 14% and 30%, respectively; and
      Impact results were exceeded by 27.3 percent for the number of jobs, with actual of 12,737 against a
       target of 10,003, and by 5.6 percent for the absolute number of people recording a positive change in
       income (actual of 528,210 against of a target of 500,023).

B. Efficacy achieved using the TA and grant instruments

Causal chain and outcome attribution:

      The causal chain and outcome attribution outlined under the first sub-objective apply here when
       pursuing the second sub-objective using the TA and grant instruments. The main inputs were TA from
       DFID and IDA, as well as IDA grants. Key expected outputs were to include the number of reforms
       adopted to improve the business environment, the number of firms receiving grants; and the key
       expected outcome was the expansion of employment in the participating firms in Nigeria. Finally, the
       achieved outcome under this sub-objective relying on the two instruments is attributable to both DFID
       and IDA.

Outputs

      The outputs generated by the project and presented under the first sub-objective using both the DFID
       and IDA TA as well as the IDA grants are all relevant toward the achievement of the second sub-
       objective. They were all instrumental in achieving the outcome achieved toward increasing
       employment in participating firms in Nigeria as presented hereunder.

Outcomes

     Achieved outcomes reported in the ICR (para 31-37) are delineated below:

      The target for percentage increase in average number of workers in participating firms was exceeded,
       reaching 30 percent against a target of 20 percent;
      The target for percentage increase in average number of workers in female-headed participating firms
       was missed, reaching nil percent against a target of 20 percent;
      During the ICR phase, a survey reported higher levels of workers hired. This underscores that the
       project contributed toward the revised PDO to increase firm employment in participating firms in
       Nigeria, but the significance of those improvements could not be established.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy toward increased firm growth in Nigeria

                            The project's reform program supported firms in a wide range of sectors. Some areas of intervention included
                            mobile money, skin salting, and micro-retailing, and rice and tomato agro-service provision, and results were
                            achieved in 28 states. The project's performance for growth in sales of participating firms (services and
                            industry) was exceeded, including female-headed participating firms. Evidence from the impact evaluation
                            results shows that the insourcing, outsourcing and consulting interventions all improved business practices in
                            participating firms, while training had a negligible impact. During the ICR phase, a survey reported that some
                            increase in firm growth in Nigeria occurred, but improvement significance could not be established. Most
                            importantly, a large portion of resources earmarked to fund the achievement of outcome were not used
                            and were canceled.

                            Efficacy toward increased employment in participating firms in Nigeria

                            As regards to employment progress, the expected levels of male and female full-time employment created by
                            participating MSMEs and the increase in average number of workers in participating firms were
                            exceeded. However, the percentage increase in average number of workers in female-headed participating
                            firms was missed. Finally, an ICR survey reported that while there was an increase in employment in
                            participating firms in Nigeria, improvement significance could not be established.

                            On balance, the overall project's efficacy under the revised objective is rated as modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analysis

   At appraisal, an efficiency analysis provided estimates of the project’s contribution to GDP growth in the
   originally selected states that would arise from addressing prevailing market failures, and improving the
   business environment, competitiveness and returns to investment. A full-fledged economic analysis was
   conducted at the occasion of the 2013 level-1 restructuring, which concluded that the revised project would lead
   to an estimated Net Present Value (NPV) of US$31.4 million, and an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of
   31%. In the context of the 2017 level-2 restructuring, which dropped several activities and created a SME fund,

                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



no NPV or ERR were calculated, although the financial model derived an equity investor net IRR of 18.9
percent.

The ICR did not quantify the benefits of the limited part of the project that was implemented or conduct a proper
NPV or ERR calculation at closure, as relevant data was unavailable. Instead, the ICR undertook specific
cost efficiency and effectiveness analyses (ICR, paras 56, 58 and 59) limited to the project support to (i) the
MSMEs, (ii) the capacity development activities, and (iii) the DFID components, drawing on the
surveys completed during project implementation. While the cost efficiency analysis for the DFID
component demonstrated improvements in efficiency and economies of scale, the one related to MSMEs
concluded by a modest efficiency, while the one for capacity building was inconclusive. The cost efficiency
analyses were limited in time for some of them (2016-2018), and were partial in coverage and in depth and don't
reflect the comprehensive economic and financial impact of the achieved outputs and outcome developed under
Section 4. This review concludes that the overall project's economic efficiency of the project was modest,
while suggesting an updated comprehensive efficiency analysis in the future.

Operational and administrative analysis

Because of the disconnect between the PDO and the evolving priorities of the Borrower, the
project's effectiveness was delayed until the completion of the 2013 level-1 restructuring. The intention to build
synergies with DFID-funded sectoral activities was thwarted by the limited opportunities for synergy between the
World Bank's focus on a grant funding model and the market systems based DFID projects.

The ICR noted (paras 65-66) that institutional arrangements were weak for effective implementation, and
that lack of institutional capacity persisted, requiring the recruitment of external expertise to make up for limited
skills within the PIU. The delays in effectiveness led to compressed implementation timeline and to PIU
accumulated lags in the recruitment of specialists, including FM and procurement staff.

The ICR noted further (paras 70-71) that there was a lack of basic communication from the implementing
team. Moreover, when the project started to generate outputs, procurement issues generated negative press,
and coordinating shortcomings were experienced among key stakeholders, including DFID and the World Bank.
Because of the complex nature of the project, many implementation partners were ineffective, slowing down the
entire implementation system. Overall, the complexity of the project, the multiple restructuring operations, and
the weak implementation readiness and arrangements led to delays and dropping of activities, and the
cancelation of project resources. The above affected significantly the operational and administrative efficiency of
the project, which is rated as modest.

Based on the developments above, the overall project efficiency is rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was substantial. While the PDO was congruent with the Government's priorities and
the Bank's strategy, the reform program was overambitious. Efficacy was modest, because the grants program
could not be fully utilized, and significance with respect to improved firm growth and employment in participating
firms in Nigeria could not be established. Efficiency was also modest, resulting in an overall outcome rating of
Moderately Unsatisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (para 96) reported that the contribution of BDS services and grant support to firms, which could
help to raise revenues and retain jobs created through project financing could well be sustained. Project
beneficiary SMEs were willing to pay for BDS even in the absence of project's financial support. While some
BDS providers continued to use training materials developed with support from the project, most business
training schools continued to provide enterprise training after the project’s closure.

On the negative side, the ICR identified (para 97) trends pointing to a weaker sustainability of achieved
outcome: (i) the government did not show strong willingness in funding the SME support activities initiated by
the project, notably by replacing the external expertise used to implement the project, and (ii) while the
project was implemented through the PIU located in a ministerial unit, Government's services did
not substitute to the donors after the project's closure. Moreover, the PIU was dissolved upon project
completion and all the financing and capacity building facilities related to the project were closed.

On balance, given the disengagement of the World Bank and the DFID from the sector and limited signals of
Government's commitment to sustain achieved outcome, the risk to development outcome is rated as high.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design team did not gather sufficient buy in by key stakeholders at appraisal. Even as the project
  drew on extensive studies establishing the rationale for the project, the ICR reported (para 89) that
  the World Bank was unsuccessful in securing sufficient buy-in from the states and did not reach firm
  agreements with the key beneficiaries on project design. The goal to establish a synergy between DFID
  and other donors' efforts was an innovative design feature, but resulted in a lukewarm cooperation. The
  co-financing arrangements and the resulting technical design remained disproportionate with the
  counterpart’s implementation technical capacities, and this led to the dropping of several activities and
  the cancellation of resources.

  Limiting the project coverage to selected states was a design flaw which prompted the resistance to
  approval by the National Assembly and caused a delay in project's effectiveness. There was no
  clarity regarding the criteria and process for selecting the target states, as well as uncertainty regarding
  the money allocation to states and sectors, the budget distribution and the implementation setup.

  The revised PDO abandoned the focus on four states and targeted specific sectors at the national level.
  There was no matchup between the original multi-industry cluster program and the country’s level of
  institutional development, because the required industry expertise lacked in the PIU, which was
  predominantly staffed by civil servants. The project preparation did not create institutional arrangements
  for effective implementation, and the lack of institutional capacity persisted throughout the span of the
  project.

  The ICR accurately noted (ICR, para 64) that the project risk assessment and mitigation were inadequate
  at appraisal. Both the complex political environment surrounding the project and the low implementation
  capacity were underestimated. While several potential risks linked to the complex political system,
  governance challenges, precarious economic situation dominated the country's context, their assessment
  and mitigation were inadequate, because the probability of political risks was assessed as low, despite
  the political transition underway.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team displayed (ICR para 90) implementation proactivity and flexibility
 despite huge implementing challenges on the ground. The project team implemented a large and
 ambitious project, in a context of a weak PIU and daunting political roadblocks. Implementation support
 missions and an ongoing impact evaluation were the key tools of project oversight. DFID technical advisors
 provided expertise and contributed to awareness creation. The World Bank team exerted flexibility by
 undertaking project restructurings that factored in the needs of counterpart and beneficiaries. Mission aide-
 mémoires were generally comprehensive, but had gaps in risks assessment. The building of synergies with
 DFID-funded sectoral activities did not occur due to delays in IDA loan effectiveness and the World Bank's
 focus on a grant funding model, which limited opportunities for synergy with the market systems based
 DFID projects.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



 The high TTL turnover affected project implementation; there were six TTLs between appraisal in 2010 and
 closure. TTLs turnover thwarted efforts to bring the project back on track and affected the continuity of
 activities, the quality of supervision, and reduced their ownership of the project complexities. The World
 Bank team relied on external expertise and consultants to address procurement and FM challenges that
 cropped up during project implementation, in its efforts to ensure the proper provision of disbursements
 forecasts and project planning. However, FM and procurement weaknesses continued to affect the project
 operations until its closure.

 Technical skills within the PIU were weak, which the project tried to remedy by recruiting consultants. Lack
 of readiness for implementation created confusion in the roles and responsibilities of government officials
 vis-à-vis technical consultants. Project team's efforts to strengthen the PIU, and reverse ownership and
 partnership issues were not successful. The project had lagged far behind for it to be fully disburse.

 Coordination and communication among stakeholders was weak throughout project implementation. The
 ICR noted (ICR, para 70-71) that there were challenges in coordinating between DFID and the World Bank,
 the PIU, and the multiple consulting firms and individual consultants. Many implementation partners had
 performance issues, and this slowed down the entire system of project implementation.

 Finally, risk management fell below what was required to boost project implementation. Given that the
 political and governance challenges started shortly after appraisal, the project team could not figure out
 immediate mitigation measures. While the PIU staff were trained in World Bank's fiduciary procedures to
 boost technical capacity, the stakeholder risks persisted during the project. Unfortunately, a mitigation plan
 was developed by the PIU with the DFID's technical support to head off perceived risks was not adopted.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As detailed in the ICR (para 76-78), indicators to gauge the performance of IDA-funded activities were
 weak, and were not fully aligned with project activities. M&E expertise in the PIU to oversee progress
 toward outcome was lacking. While there was a results framework in the PAD, the project lacked
 measurable and relevant indicators to support the results chain, and a means to regularly conduct effective
 M&E. To enhance outcomes measurement, the project incorporated a third-party monitoring agent and an
 impact evaluation to remedy the poor quality of M&E.

 For many of the IDA activities indicators, baselines and targets were lacking due to the M&E team’s limited
 expertise, and results were difficult to measure or to attribute to the project. Some PDO-level indicator (the
 growth rate of selected enterprises for instance) had no clear definition. Overall, M&E arrangements for IDA
 activities were unclear, with too many actors involved in the process, with no clear focal point assigned to


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



 oversee M&E more broadly at the project level. On the contrary, indicators for DFID-funded activities were
 well selected and had adequate baselines and targets.



b. M&E Implementation
  As reported in the ICR (para 79-80), the M&E framework was revised twice, but the revisions did not
  fully integrate the changes in the project design. The first M&E review occurred during the June 2013
  restructuring to factor in structural changes related to the project's core objective and resource
  reallocations, and to improve relevance of the indicators. PDO-level indicators were to focus on the firm
  level, and no longer to the state level. The second set of revisions were incorporated during the 2017
  second restructuring to reflect recommendations from the 2016 MTR. The 2017 restructuring overhauled
  the project M&E framework, as some indicators were dropped, and as targets for those retained
  were redefined to better reflect the expected project achievements. Despite changes in the M&E
  system, the dropped SME Investment Fund component was not removed from the results framework,
  even if it was no longer part of the revised design.

  A PIU M&E specialist and an implementation partner were hired with delay (2016). M&E implementation
  was affected by the initial delays to launch the project and the complexity of third-party monitoring. Key
  M&E shortcomings remained and included: (i) limited grasp of the project by some stakeholders, (ii) lack
  of proactivity by the M&E contractor, and (iii) weak expertise of the hired staff. The June 2016
  MTR suggested to realign project activities to the objectives, and this led to the August 2017 changes in
  the M&E system overseen by a new-recruited PIU M&E specialist. However, the political economy
  challenges on the ground did not allow the accurate collection and reporting of the relevant information
  that was necessary to provide a strong basis for assessment of the PDO achievement.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, the project reporting, through the aide-memoires and the ISRs, was comprehensive. However
  there were key aspects of project implementation that were not sufficiently documented, including the
  causes for the negative media coverage, the corruption accusations and and the handling of complaint
  letters sent by NGOs.

  Because of delays in setting up the M&E system and establishing the baseline and target indicators, the
  M&E data were late and were not useful during implementation. On the contrary, the DFID M&E systems
  captured results of DFID-funded activities, but the absence of a unified results framework for the project
  led to limitations in having a comprehensive results measurement.

  The impact evaluation through surveys came too late and did not improve M&E utilization to better
  improve the project results. The impact evaluation results presented in the ICR (Annex 8) contributed in
  the identification of effective ways of improving MSME business practices and capacity. The evaluation
  results provided insights on the impacts of capacity development on private films performance, including
  through skills outsourcing and insourcing, BDS, and training.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B operation, indicating that the potential adverse environmental
   and social impacts of the project's activities were expected to be small-scale. The project triggered the
   following World Bank safeguard policies: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and (iii) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), and three safeguards instruments of
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and
   integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) were approved and publicly disclosed.

   The safeguard policies triggered at project design did not change, and no physical and economic
   displacements occurred. A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) received numerous complaints that
   emerged due to operational delays in grant disbursement. About 50 individual complaints out of 109
   individual registered were filed under the World Bank’s grievance redress services (GRS). The complaints
   arose from delays in processing the disbursement of approved grants, and the above-mentioned redress
   mechanism handled conclusively the grievances raised.

   Overall, project support to individual MSMEs satisfied all safeguards requirements. The Safeguard Unit of
   the project provided occupation health and safety support to the beneficiaries during sub-project
   implementation. Overall compliance to environmental and social safeguards was rated by the ICR as
   satisfactory throughout the project reporting period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management

   The World Bank team worked with the PIU staff regularly to share insights on how to locate the right
   information needed to feed into the system. The World Bank team noted that the PIU had knowledge
   gaps and this could impact financial management. Because of weak local expertise, financial management
   worsened overtime, leading to FM rating downgrading from satisfactory to moderately satisfactory. A
   financial audit unearthed FM irregularities, discrepancies between planned and actual activities, including a
   cumbersome payment process. Earlier ISRs ratings of FM were satisfactory, but the rating was
   downgraded to moderately satisfactory after the 2016 MTR. Due to the lack of capacity, the project team
   was unable to generate financial reports on time, and needed to be rated lower than Moderately
   Satisfactory, especially that the project team did not provide a copy of the latest external financial audit.

   Procurement

   The PIU needed additional technical expertise in procurement since the outset. The initial procurement
   team was strengthened in May 2016, leading to significant improvement in the documents sent to the
   World Bank. The April 2019 ISR noted that procurement performance had improved including in contract

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



   management. Multiple and repeated mistakes in critical procurement documents contributed to rating being
   downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Although the female-headed participating firms were not targeted for project grants, there was substantial
   participation from female business owners. In the context of a survey, 65.7 percent of project beneficiaries
   identified the principal applicant as male and 34.3 percent identified the principal applicant as female.
   The ratio of female-headed participating firms improved in comparison to previous data assessing female
   business participation.



d. Other
   The ICR did not identify other unintended impacts.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  There were major shortcomings
                                                                                  in the appraisal of the IDA
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Unsatisfactory              project, and in proactive
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  identification of opportunities
                                                                                  and resolution of threats.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons and recommendations (ICR, paras 98-116) arising from the
experience of the project design and implementation. The most striking lessons are summarized
and rephrased below:

    1. To achieve expected outcomes, the project design needs to match the implementation
       capacity of the borrower, especially from the technical and governance perspective. In
       Nigeria, the activities of this project frequently exceeded the implementation capacity of the
       PIU, which lacked technical expertise.
    2. Multi-donor and large projects can be effective in a complex environment, but
       borrower ownership and commitment need to be in place to ensure coordination. For

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)



        this project, IDA and DFID funding was brought together in support of the increased
        performance of firms and competitiveness of strategic clusters. However, there was a lack
        of adequate mechanisms for efficient coordination.
     3. For a large project to succeed, improved stakeholder assessment and transparent
        communication are central to ensuring the buy in by key
        stakeholders, building partnerships and maintaining government commitment. The
        project team could not bring the new Government on board quickly, so as to carry out the
        blended DFID/IDA project in a coordinated manner. Under-performance in communicating
        about the project goals and processes created a confusion in the public that was used
        to discredit the project's goal and hinder its full implementation.
     4. The Bank team needs to proactively prepare to counter political interference during
        project implementation. For this project, incomplete and delayed design and slow
        implementation provided the opportunity for lobbying that compromised the project.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and the review analysis is evidence-based with substantive annexes. The ICR constructed
an adequate theory of change for the project, which was missing in the Project Appraisal Document and the
subsequent Restructuring Papers. The ICR has several thoughtful lessons and recommendations from the
project, and all of them reflect the experience of project implementation.

There were several moderate deficiencies in the ICR as follows: (i) the split assessment was unnecessary,
because the original PDO was never effective, (ii) the theory of change could have been improved by avoiding
the mix-up of outputs and outcomes, (iii) additional information on fiduciary performance (FM and procurement)
of the project was requested and not provided, (iv) the content of written lessons and recommendations from a
key co-financier (DFID) needed to be fully reflected in the ICR, and finally (v) the project performance
assessment needed to parse the PDO.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NG:Growth & Employment (P103499)




                                                                  Page 19 of 19
