     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022165

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P128939                                     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Tonga                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57700,IDA-D1060,IDA-H7430,TF-           31-Dec-2016                                        33,562,154.70
 12702,TF-A1644

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Dec-2011                                 31-Dec-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             27,210,000.00                                   1,630,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              36,040,655.16                                   1,580,655.16

 Actual                                          33,562,154.70                                   1,580,655.16




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kavita Mathur               John R. Eriksson              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was "to improve the operational safety and oversight of
   international air transport infrastructure" (Financing Agreement page 6 and Project Appraisal Document
   page xii).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised four components:

   Component A: Aviation Infrastructure Investments (cost at appraisal US$24.4 million
   (including contingencies); actual cost US$28.5 millions). This component was expected to finance the
   aviation infrastructure at Fua’amotu and Vava’u airports. This included: (i) rehabilitating airport runways,
   taxiways and aprons; (ii) installing new navigation aids, automatic weather monitoring system, safety and
   security equipment at the two airports; (iii) provision of renewable power through the implementation of a
   photovoltaic panel for on-site power generation at Vava’u airport; (iv) improvements to terminals to reduce
   electrical consumption through both passive and technological means; (v) provision of airport facilities to
   collect and store rain water from roof areas to reduce the amount of water needed from the grid and to
   preserve natural water resources; (vi) security improvements such as improved fencing, access control,
   installation of a building management system, a flight information display system, closed-circuit television
   and X-ray equipment for hand baggage; (vii) upgrading of runway lighting, (viii) purchase of fire safety
   equipment, (ix) provision of the Pacific Aviation Safety Network at Vava’u airport, (x) providing portable
   refueling equipment for Vava’u airport; and (xi) design and supervision consulting services required for
   carrying out such investments.

   Component B: Aviation Sector Reform and Training (cost at appraisal US$1.7 million (including
   contingencies); actual cost US$1.6 millions). This component would provide technical assistance to Tonga
   Airports Limited (TAL), the Ministry of Transport (MOT), other line Ministries, and the Pacific Aviation Safety
   Office (PASO). The technical assistance included: (i) strengthening capabilities for aviation sector
   management, policy, safety and security oversight; (ii) drafting the legislation needed to improve the long-
   term status of TAL’s operations; (iii) training on aviation policy, management and operations; (iv) carrying
   out a baseline audit of the safety and security at Fua’amotu and Vava’u airports and review progress in the
   implementation of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Corrective Action Plan by TAL and
   the Government of Tonga; (v) carrying out safety and security oversight audits; (vi) preparation of a
   business plan for PASO’s operations; and (vii) implementation of restructuring measures arising from the
   PASOs business plan.

   Component C: Strengthening Airport Operations and Management Capacity (cost at
   appraisal US$0.55 million (including contingencies); actual cost US$0.59 million). This component would
   finance three studies: (i) to review options for improving the regional aviation market in the Pacific Island
   Countries including future travel demand patterns in the region, for passengers and freight, and the types of
   aviation services that would be most appropriate to meet these demands; (ii) to review options for Pacific
   Island Countries for sustainable long-term financing and operations of key aviation infrastructure and ways
   in which this financing can realistically be met; and, (iii) increasing revenues from the Flight Information
   Regions of Program Countries through which aircraft travel.

   Component D: Program Support (estimated cost at appraisal US$1.85 million (including contingencies);
   actual cost US$2.93 millions). This component would provide funding for technical, advisory an


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



   administrative support to TAL, line Ministries, and the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU), as well
   as the associated operation and staff costs.

   Revised Components. The Additional Financing in 2016 scaled-up the activities under component A. This
   included a new Air Traffic Control Tower at Fua’amotu International Airport and purchase of Air Traffic
   Control equipment.

   With project savings, additional activities were included under Components A and C as part of
   the November 2018 restructuring. These include:

         Terminal renovations at the Vava’u International Airport and the construction of a cargo shed
          at Fua’amotu; and

         The design of a regional airfield pavement management system (APMS).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The actual total project cost was US$37.8 million, slightly higher than the appraisal estimate
   of US$32.8 million. This was due to the scaling up of activities as discussed above in section 2d.

   Financing. At appraisal, IDA commitment was US$27.2 million. In 2016, an Additional Financing of
   US$7.25 million was approved, making the total credit US$34.45 million. The actual disbursements were
   US$31.9 million. The difference is due to exchange rate fluctuations between SDR and US dollar.

   Co-financing. At approval, the Government of Australia through the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility
   (PRIF) committed US$1.32 million. In 2016, PRIF provided additional grant of US$0.31 million (ICR para
   24). The actual amount was US$1.6 million.

   Borrower contribution: The Government of Tonga committed US$4.3 million at appraisal in the form of
   taxes. The actual contribution was US$4.16 million. The variation is largely due to currency fluctuations
   (ICR page 41).

   Dates. The project was approved on December 13, 2011 and became effective on March 14, 2012. It
   closed on December 31, 2019, after a delay of 3 years. The mid-term review was carried out on December
   14, 2014.

   Restructurings. The project experienced two restructurings, the first (a level 2) on March 9, 2016, included
   additional financing, a change in results framework, change in component costs, and a change in loan
   closing date to December 31, 2018. The second restructuring (November 27, 2018) extended the closing
   date from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



Country Context. The Kingdom of Tonga is a small Pacific Island Country (PIC) comprising of 169 islands.
It is one of the most geographically remote nations, with a small population (approximately 106,000 people
at appraisal). Most of the population is based in the main island of Tongatapu. In 2011, GDP per capita was
US$4,084, and tourism accounted for 17% of GDP (PAD para 4) and 15% of employment (ICR para 27).

Sector Context. The aviation sector for Tonga is very important as it provides the much-needed national,
regional, and international connectivity. It is essential for the import and export of goods as well as tourism
development. In addition, the country’s susceptibility to the effects of climate change and in particular storm
surges make airports a vital entry point for relief goods. The airports were indispensable for
the humanitarian relief effort after the 2001/2002 Cyclone Waka (which caused US$51 million in damages)
and the 2004 Cyclone Heta (which caused an estimated US$150 million in damage) (ICR para 3).

At appraisal, several safety and security deficiencies were identified at the two main international airports:
Fua’amotu and in Vava’u, The runways were in increasingly poor condition and navigational aids were
basic or missing. The investments in runways, navigational aids, and safety and security equipment
were required to meet International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) safety and security standards. The
failure to comply with ICAO’s safety and security standards could potentially lead to the interruption or even
cessation of services from international airlines, causing major economic and social disruptions.

Alignment with strategy.

The Pacific island countries (PICs) face similar development challenges arising from their dispersion,
remoteness and small populations. As a group, these countries development priorities focus on two
strategic areas: (i) mitigating economic isolation by encouraging regional and global integration; and (ii)
building resilience against external shocks. Therefore, the aviation sector is critical as it provides vital
national and international connectivity. However, the specialized nature of aviation places a high burden on
small countries with limited human and financial resources.

The project “Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga" is part of a regional, horizontal Adaptable Program Loan
"Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PIAP)" that consists of a series of projects designed to ensure that
critical aviation infrastructure meets operational safety requirements, as well as to strengthen regulatory
compliance of international air transport of the participating Pacific Island Countries. The PAIP supports the
Bank’s Regional Engagement Framework for Pacific Islands (FY2006‐2009) on mitigating the effects of
economic isolation through, among others, reduced barriers to trade and investment, promotion of tourism,
human resource development and mobility and improved environmental management (PAD para 14 and
the Regional Engagement Framework para 106). The Project objectives are aligned with the current World
Bank Regional Partnership Framework (FY17‐ 21) – as reflected in objective 4.2 “increased access to basic
services and improved connective infrastructure.”

The project was highly relevant to and consistent with two of the three themes laid out in the Country
Assistance Strategy (CAS FY2011‐2014) for Tonga: (i) generating opportunities from Greater Global and
Regional Integration, and (ii) building resilience against shocks. Improving the national, regional and
international connectivity of the country, would facilitate the movement of goods and people and support
business development and tourism. Improving the ability to quickly respond to natural disasters through
international airport links is important for building resilience against natural disasters.

The project objectives are aligned with the Government of Tonga's priorities articulated in the Strategic
Development Framework (2015-2025) (TSDF) which noted the investments in the airports as being of


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



               strategic importance. The objectives were directly linked with the TSDF’s National Outcome A: a more
               inclusive, sustainable and dynamic knowledge-based economy, by contributing to its indicator on air visitor
               arrival numbers, as well as its National Outcome E: successful provision and maintenance of infrastructure
               and technology (ICR para 29).

               The Government of Australia provided co-financing and considered the objective of improving regional
               aviation safety and security as highly relevant for the preparation of a business plan for the Pacific Aviation
               Safety Office (PASO).

               In summary, there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country and
               Bank strategies. The relevance of the objectives is pitched at a level that adequately reflects a potential
               solution to a development problem – to improve operational safety and oversight of international air
               transport infrastructure so international flights can continue to operate in Tonga to support domestic and
               regional connectivity, business development (exports and imports) and tourism. The relevance of objectives
               is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the operational safety of international air transport infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change is solid, with the planned activities logically and plausibly connected to their
                             expected outputs and outcomes. In order to improve the operational safety of the international airport to ICAO
                             standards, inputs such as improvements in navigational aids, upgrading of terminal buildings and runways,
                             and security improvements through improved security screening, were needed. This was a reasonable cause
                             and effect results chain as without the project, the country was at risk of seeing air services to the two airports
                             suspended due to safety concerns. The key assumptions for the achievement of the PDOs was that the
                             equipment was delivered and installed in a timely manner.

                             Outputs

                                        As targeted, the runways at Fua’amotu and Vava’u airports were resurfaced.

                                        At Fua’amotu airport, apron expansion (of approximately 2,150 square meters) and the construction of
                                          a new base and asphaltic surface was carried out (ICR para 34).



                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)




      An Air Traffic Control (ATC) tower at Fua’amotu airport was constructed.

      Navigational aids were upgraded in both airports and were fully operational by the end of the project.

      Both international terminals were upgraded as targeted. The project supported terminal improvements
       that separates arriving and departing passengers, as well as security controls for terminal access and
       management. (According to the project team, the design of the terminals allow the airport operators to
       be compliant with ICAO / IATA standards in terms of capacity, management of passenger flows, level
       of service. These standards were used to size the terminals based for example on the minimum space
       to be made available per passenger, factoring in the maximum number of passengers at any point in
       time taking into account the flights schedule and capacity of aircrafts landing in Tonga).

      Purchase of fire safety equipment.

      Installation of safety screening equipment.

      The security fence at Vava’u was upgraded.

      Training was provided to air traffic controllers.

      Air Traffic Management was modernized through the adoption of the regional Very Small Aperture
       Terminal (VSAT) network. VSAT is a two-way secure satellite communications system that enables
       regional Civil Aviation Authorities and air transport organizations to communicate essential safety and
       security communications in a reliable, secure and timely manner (ICR para 37).

      The project financed the installation of Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-B)
       transmitters for aircraft monitoring in all aircrafts in Tonga.

Outcomes

      With the improvement in operational safety at Fua’amotu airport, the international flights per year
       increased from 700 at appraisal to 1,101 in 2019. The apron expansion at Fua’amotu airport has
       enabled larger aircraft such as Air New Zealand's B777 and B787 to park on the apron while still
       allowing other aircrafts to enter, park and exit (ICR para 34).

      The upgrading of navigational aids resulted in location accuracy from satellites and reduced the
       amount of ground equipment previously required to aid flight navigation (ICR para 35).

      The installation of ADS-B transmitters facilitated more efficient flight routing and safety, by making
       aircraft visible, in real time, to air traffic control and other appropriately equipped ADS-B aircraft.

The project investments improved the operational safety of the two international airports in Tonga through
the improvements in navigational aids, upgrading of terminal buildings and runways. The terminal
improvements now provide separation of arriving and departing passengers, as well as security controls for
terminal access and management. The achievement of this objective is rated high.



                                                                                                       Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the oversight of international air transport infrastructure.

Rationale
The theory of change for the second objective was based on the premise that to improve oversight, timely
completion of technical studies covering pertinent sector reforms and implementation of recommendations as
well as completion of training activities of operators and regulators was needed. This would strengthen the
capacity of sector institutions to carry out regulatory oversight for meeting the necessary safety standards.
The ICAO requires regulators to have a level of independence from operators, to ensure that economic or
other interests do not compromise safety decisions.

Outputs

        The project supported the development of a business plan for Pacific Aviation Safety Office
         (PASO) (ICR para 41). The project team clarified that the business plan included short‐term cash flow
         forecasts and identified forthcoming liabilities projecting an impending insolvency of PASO. The team
         also mentioned that the business plan implementation is being supported by the PASO reform project
         (P145057), with the objective of implementing the agreed reform agenda developed through this
         project.

        The project assisted in the preparation of Fua’amotu Master Plan, which provides the Tonga Airports
         Limited (TAL) with a 20-year master plan as well as a 10-year priority investment plan. The team
         confirmed that everything TAL has been doing since the Master Plan was completed is consistent with
         it.

        The project assisted in the preparation of necessary legislation for the establishment of Tonga Airport
         Authority. The revised bill was sent to the cabinet on June 4, 2019. According to the project team, the
         bill has not been passed yet.

        The project supported the amendment of the Airport Authority Act, which once endorsed by the
         parliament would give TAL the responsibility to manage airports across Tonga. Currently, if is
         managing the airports under delegated authority from the Government.

Outcomes

        The ICR (para 44) indicates that the project made substantial progress with regards to the aviation
         sector reform and training and improved policies that incorporated safety and security oversight, as
         well as supporting TAL to implement the ICAO Corrective Action Plan - all these activities contributed
         to better safety oversight and preparedness for the audit. However, the PDO level indicator "State
         requirements for safety and security reaches global ICAO average" was not achieved. Of the eight
         audit areas, "accident Investigation was dropped" (ICR reports that this was standard practice in the

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



                                    Pacific Region) and three were postponed until 2021. Of the four areas audited – Legislation,
                                    Organization, Air Navigation Services, and Aerodromes – a score of 38 was given, which would
                                    equate to 62 percent for the achievement of this indicator (ICR para 47).

                                   Both airports received "Regulatory certification of safety and security" in accordance with ICAO
                                    standards.

                                   The project successfully achieved the implementation of a regional safety and security levy (SSL) for
                                    departing international passengers (the levy is included in the cost of all passenger tickets). Since
                                    2012 (the year it was implemented), the Government has received US$1 million), which is
                                    being used for maintenance and upgrading of safety and security equipment, and other related
                                    activities.

                                   The Civil Aviation Division has used the SSL for the preparation of manuals and reports necessary for
                                    ICAO audits; implementation of ICAO’s standard and recommended practices; Tonga payments to
                                    PASO; and, obstacle clearance at Vava’u airport (ICR para 42).

                            The project made substantial progress with regards to the aviation sector reform and training and improved
                            policies that incorporated safety and security oversight. However, the legislation for the establishment of
                            Tonga Airport Authority has not been passed. Currently, TAL is managing the airports under delegated
                            authority from the Government. Once passed, the legislation would give TAL the responsibility to manage
                            airports across Tonga. Both airports received "Regulatory certification of safety and security" in accordance
                            with ICAO standards. The project successfully achieved the implementation of a regional safety and security
                            levy (SSL) for departing international passengers. As discussed above, the PDO level indicator "State
                            requirements for safety and security reaches global ICAO average" was not achieved because ICAO's audit
                            for Tonga was not carried. The indicator was to be measured through the ICAO Universal Safety Oversight
                            Audit Program (USOAP) but was delayed and is outside project's control. The achievement of this objective is
                            substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project improved the operational safety of the two international airports in Tonga to ICAO standards
                            through the improvements in navigational aids, upgrading of terminal buildings and runways, and improved
                            security screening. The terminal improvements now provide separation of arriving and departing passengers,
                            as well as security controls for terminal access and management.

                            The project played a significant role in the development of plans and regulations to improve the oversight of
                            the aviation sector. Both airports received "Regulatory certification of safety and security" in accordance with
                            ICAO standards. Despite this progress, the two airports have not yet received ICAO certification as the

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



  ICAO's audit for Tonga was not carried out (it has been delayed and is outside of the project’s ability to
  control).

  Overall, efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The economic analysis at appraisal focused only on the impact of the withdrawal of air services on travel
industry as air freight was minor (PAD page 49). Two scenarios were analyzed: (a) with-project case, the
airports and runways were upgraded as soon as possible, i.e. within two years of the commencement of the
project; and (b) without-project, no action is taken until forced to do so, i.e. when airlines withdraw direct jet
services (PAD page 50). Assuming the interruption happens in 2014, the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was
estimated at 48.7%, with a Net Present Value (NPV) was US$14.1 million. If the services were interrupted in
2016, the ERR was estimated at 20.9%, with a NPV of US$7.8 million (PAD para 48).

An ex-post economic analysis was conducted using the appraisal methodology and covers the time horizon of
15 years (2012-2026). The ex-post ERR was estimated at 17% with NPV of US$3.94 million (ICR para 53).
While the ERR indicates sufficient economic return on infrastructure investment, the actual return is slightly
lower than the ex-ante ERR of 20.9%. The ICR notes (page 43) that this may be because of: complex project
management structure, higher actual costs, procurement delays, and longer implementation period. The ICR
also mentions that these results did not take into account the impacts of the strengthening of the regulatory
framework through the project. Qualitatively, those impacts are considered to be positive and supportive of the
efficiency of the project, providing the aviation sector with strategies and enhanced capacity for planning and
operation.

Although, the ERR at closure was lower than the estimated ERR at appraisal, overall, project efficiency is rated
substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      74.00
 Appraisal                                                  20.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



                                                                                      75.00
ICR Estimate                                                17.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high because the project is fully aligned with the Bank’s and Government’s
strategy and addresses the key aviation sector issue – to improve operational safety and oversight of
international air transport infrastructure so international flights can continue to operate in Tonga. The efficacy is
rated substantial because through the efforts of the project, the safety and security and oversight of the airports
was enhanced. Although, the economic rate of return at closure was lower than the estimated ERR at appraisal,
it is substantially above the required minimum of 12%. Therefore, the project efficiency is rated substantial.The
outcome rating for the project is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. The institutional risk is negligible as the Tonga Airports Limited (TAL) has adequate
capacity to manage Tonga's airports.

Financial Risk. The financial risk is substantial as the receipt of Upper Airspace Revenues (which are paid
by airlines for services provided by TAL) were going into the general revenue rather than directly to TAL.
This revenue is an important source of funds to implement TAL’s budget, and its allocation to TAL was a
legal covenant of the project.

Exposure to pandemic. The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has emerged as a global pandemic, halting air
transport around the world, including Tonga. The ICR notes (para 100) that the full impact and length of
global shutdowns is still unknown, and so is the effect it will have on air transport to and within Tonga. This
will have an impact on the economy as well as the Safety and Security Levy (SSL) revenues. This poses a
significant risk for the maintenance of the project investments and TAL’s budget.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  A comprehensive analysis of the multi-modal transport sector and options for rationalizing the aviation
  sector was carried by the Government of Tonga with support from the Bank's Economic and
  Sector Working group during 2004-2006 (ICR para 4). In 2008, the Bank approved the Transport
  Sector Consolidation Project (P096931). This project identified several safety and security requirements

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



  at the two main international airports: Fua’amotu Airport and Lupepau’u Airport in Tongatapu and Vava’u,
  respectively. The assessment of the aviation sector in the Pacific Island Countries also found that many
  of the countries lacked proper policy, regulatory and infrastructure to comply with the ICAO requirements,
  which justified the need for safety and security improvements. To coordinate across countries and benefit
  from the economies of scale, a regional, horizontal Adaptable Program Loan approach was adopted.

  Risks were identified and satisfactorily addressed. To mitigate insufficient capacity risk, a regional
  Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) was created to provide a combination of the procurement
  and contract management skills. The Tonga Airports Limited (TAL) was identified as the agency to host
  TFSU. However, a risk which was not identified was the "non payment of dues to the TFSU" by the
  participating countries, which would create a financial burden for TAL as the hosting institution.

  As part of the regional approach, harmonized result indicators were used across all participating Pacific
  Island Countries. As discussed in the M&E section 9, this approach had limitation as it did not take into
  account country specific achievement.

  The quality at entry was satisfactory. A comprehensive analysis of aviation sector in Tonga was carried
  out. To mitigate insufficient capacity risk, the program/project included the creation of a regional
  Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) (to provide a combination of the procurement and contract
  management skills). As discussed in the quality of supervision, to mitigate the risk of non payment of
  dues by the participating countries, "insurance premium" was added at the time of project restructuring.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project had three Task Team Leaders during the eight years implementation period.
 The TTLs overlapped to prevent the loss of institutional knowledge (ICR para 97). At least two
 supervision missions per year were carried, with additional technical missions taking place as necessary.
 This was complemented with weekly meetings with the implementation team (ICR para 95). The task team
 and the Pacific Country Management Unit provided capacity building through workshops. Additional
 support was also provided by the procurement, safeguards and financial management specialists. As
 discussed in section 10, the TAL complied with the Bank's procurement policies.

 Two restructurings (one including an additional financing), were carried out in response to the project
 needs and requests from the Government.

 Two countries failed to pay their dues to the TFSU. This left TAL financially vulnerable. The Government of
 Kiribati didn’t pay its dues for several months between 2014-15. The project team, as part of the 2016
 additional financing included an "insurance premium" for TAL, which allowed up to US$100,000 to be
 disbursed from the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) multi donor trust fund to cover any
 payment default by one or more beneficiaries of TFSU services (ICR para 96). This was used in 2020,
 when the Government of Vanuatu failed to pay it"s due for two months. While the Government of Vanuatu



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



 did pay a portion (US$28,859) of its dues, the remainder (US$50,655) and was reimbursed through PRIF
 for TFSU's expenses.

 The project supervision was satisfactory. The Bank team supported capacity building of the PIU and
 provided procurement, safeguards and financial support during implementation. It was proactive and
 provided additional financing and included "insurance premium" when countries failed to pay their dues to
 the TFSU.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project was part of the regional Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP) and the M&E design was
 harmonized across the program. This approach was expected to provide comparable measurement across
 all projects but failed to account for country specific achievement. For example, in Tonga's case the
 establishment of the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) was not included as an intermediate
 indicator as the establishment of TFSU was key to the program’s outcome.

 The second PDO indicator “State requirements for safety and security reaches global ICAO average” was
 dependent on an external agency outside of the project’s influence. The achievement of this indicator was
 dependent on ICAO completing the audit and updating the scores as the countries respond to ICAO audit
 findings. However, the ICR notes that this rarely happens in a timely fashion and the lag time for
 score update is months if not years.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes (para 82) that not all achievements were captured in the results framework during the
  initial years of project implementation. According to the project team, during the early years of
  implementation there was less emphasis on M&E and the Project Support Team (PST) did not have the
  right staff. Overtime, staff responsible for M&E was assigned to the PST and M&E improved.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR indicates (para 84) that the project’s M&E was used to measure project progress, particularly
  towards the end of the project life.




                                                                                                Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



  Overall, quality of M&E is modest because during the initial years, not all achievements were captured
  because of lack of prioritization. Even when M&E improved, there is no evidence that it was utilized by
  the aviation sector agencies.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Assessment Category B under the World Bank's environmental
   and social safeguards policies due to minor environmental impacts. The environmental impacts associated
   with the project were: (i) excavation of runways in selected locations to remove and replace unsuitable
   material with suitable replacement material; (ii) transportation of excess waste material and backfill
   materials; (iii) dust pollution during excavation and construction; (iv) incidental loss of bitumen/asphalt
   during runway works; (v) disposal of excess excavated materials; and (vi) drainage during construction.
   These impacts were expected to be minor, temporary, readily mitigated and in most cases easily reversible.
   The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was disclosed in Tonga on February 28, 2011. The Design
   and Supervision Consultant would monitor the implementation of the EMP on behalf of the Tonga Airports
   Limited (TAL) and the Ministry of the Environment would oversee environmental compliance.

   The PAD (page 88) stated that the project would not have an impact on people‘s lands, assets, or
   livelihoods as the investments were taking place on existing airports. Therefore, no land acquisition or
   resettlement was envisioned. People in the project area in Tonga were not considered indigenous as per
   the Bank‘s Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10).

   Therefore, only one safeguards policy was applicable i.e. Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).

   The ICR (para 86) states that the Environmental and Social management Plan (ESMP) was implemented in
   compliance with Bank policies and is available on the TAIP website (http://taip.to/safeguards). No summary
   details were provided.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Financial Management (FM) was rated "satisfactory" by the project team in
   the Implementation Status and Results Reports. A FM manual was prepared early in project
   implementation and the project's FM arrangements were adequately managed by the Technical and
   Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) (ICR para 88). The Bank conducted on-site FM supervision reviews once
   or twice per year, in line with the project’s moderate FM risk rating. An off-the-shelf accounting system
   (QuickBooks) was used (this met the Bank's and the Ministry of Finance FM requirements) and the
   accounts were well maintained during the project life. The quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFR) and
   annual project audits reports were submitted on time and were unqualified. The ICR reports (para 88)


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



   that since the project included the strengthening of Tonga Airports Limited (TAL), the audited financial
   statements of TAL were also required, however these were consistently submitted late.

   Procurement. The Program adopted a “regional procurement approach” for all participating countries to
   mitigate the high risk of procurement in capacity‐constrained Pacific Island Countries. The regional
   approach was used for goods, works and services being delivered to multiple countries, therefore,
   benefitting from economy of scale. There were some procurement delays due to logistical challenges such
   as: (a) shipping schedules and getting equipment and goods to Tonga and other countries; and (b) having
   to wait for all countries to be ready to bid for a single procurement contract. The procurement rating in the
   Implementation Status and Results Reports was Moderately Satisfactory in 2017 and Moderately
   Unsatisfactory in June 2019 due to the slow pace of implementation and weak monitoring of ongoing
   contracts (ICR para 90). The ICR indicates (para 89) that the TAL generally complied with the relevant
   procurement policies




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were adapted from the ICR:

      More detailed cost estimates are needed in remote and capacity constrained
         environments. Civil works under the project were often found to be more expensive than
         originally estimated, which caused some delays. The terminal building works were put for
         tender twice because the estimated cost was much lower than the budget proposed by
         bidders, and the final cost was 70 percent higher than the estimate. At appraisal, preparation
         of detailed cost estimates and bill of quantities would help with more accurate estimates.
         Also, given remoteness, perceived risks and limited competition, higher cost contingencies
         should also be factored into project design. Lower capacity environments may require longer


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



       implementation periods, the standard five-year implementation period is unlikely to be
       sufficient in small island states. The project had to be extended twice.
      It’s important to have indicators within the project’s control. For instance, the design of
       one of the PDO indicators relied on a third party audit from ICAO, which need not follow the
       project's M&E timeline. Tracking the impact of the project can be better served by using
       indicators for which data generation is more directly controlled by the project.
      A proper needs (and capacity) assessment is needed to tailor the project activities to
       the local context. For example, for the construction of the Air Traffic Control Tower, the
       implementation team used designs of other control towers in small island states as the base
       and adapted them to suit local needs. This provided a a lower cost solution than designing
       the building from scratch.

      Regional procurement harmonization for relatively small scale and dispersed
        situations can save on processing times and costs. Given the technically complex and
        sizable civil works investments for runways, navigation aids and other specialized equipment,
        the regional approach to central procurement proved to be effective. Procurement of the
        same goods for several countries in one tender helped to reduce cost (compared to
        procuring specialized equipment for each country separately).

      Appropriate mechanisms should be put in place to ensure that cost-sharing for
        centralized services across countries takes place in the intended manner. The cost of
        the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) was to be shared by all Pacific Aviation
        Investment Program countries. However, some countries such as Kiribati and Vanuatu failed
        to pay their dues. As discussed in the quality of supervision section (8b), this was mitigated
        through the inclusion of "insurance mechanism" for TAL, which allowed up to US$100,000 to
        be disbursed from the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) multi donor trust fund to
        cover any payment default by one or more beneficiaries of TFSU services.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Phase I of the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP) included projects in the Republic of Kiribati, the
  Kingdom of Tonga, and Tuvalu in 2011. Samoa entered the program in March 2014 as Phase 2, the Republic
  of Vanuatu in May 2015 as Phase 3, and Solomon Islands in March 2018 as Phase 4. Once all these projects
  are completed, it would be useful to conduct a regional field assessment to learn from implementation
  experience and consolidate lessons for these projects or even a wider analysis of air transport infrastructure
  projects in small island countries.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)



The ICR is results-oriented, clearly written, and is largely consistent with the guidelines except for the length.
With 30 pages, the ICR is too long (the ICR Guidelines recommend a maximum main text length of 15
pages). The analysis is evidence-based and the ICR provides a good description of the project’s activities and
implementation challenges. The lessons were derived from the project’s experience.

The ICR had a few minor shortcomings. The discussion on M&E could have included details on implementation
experience. For example, the reason why all achievements were not captured in the results framework during
the initial years of project implementation; and how this was rectified. Similarly, the safeguards section could
have included a discussion of the implementation experience.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 16
