     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022196

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P124045                                    TZ-Productive Social Safety Net

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50930,IDA-58600                        31-Dec-2017                                         402,764,570.86

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Mar-2012                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             220,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              420,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          402,764,570.86                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Anthony Martin Tyrrell      Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                     IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement (p.5) the project objective was “to create a comprehensive, efficient, well-
   targeted productive social safety net system for the poor and vulnerable section of the Recipient's population.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)




  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Jun-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   As per the PAD (pp. 7-10) there were two components the first of which was comprised of two sub-
   components and the second of which was comprised of three sub-components. Some revisions to the
   design of the components were introduced at the time of the AF.



   Component 1 Consolidation of Integrated Social Safety Net Interventions for Extremely Poor and
   Food Insecure Households: (Planned: US$140.0 million; Actual US$290.8 million). This component
   sought to maximize the impact of a social safety net (SSN) in Tanzania for the extreme poor and food
   insecure groups through coordination of the implementation and scale up of two complementary
   interventions: labor intensive public works and cash transfers. The approach adopted by the Productive
   Social Safety Net (PSSN) in which multiple interventions are targeted to the same households required a
   common targeting mechanism to select eligible households and a unified registry of beneficiaries. The
   targeting system comprised a two-step process of geographical and community targeting to minimize
   exclusion errors complemented by a Proxy Means Test tool as a verification mechanism to minimize
   inclusion errors and possible elite capture.



   Sub-component 1A: Conditional Cash Transfers. As originally designed, the cash transfer program
   comprised two benefits to include a Basic Transfer (equivalent to US$5 per month per household to be
   transferred to all eligible registered households), and a Variable Conditional Transfer (VCT) for households
   with children younger than 18 and/or a pregnant woman, equivalent to up to US$5 per households per
   month. The VCT would be transferred subject to compliance with co-responsibilities by each of the eligible
   members of the household as follows: a) Education: Annual enrolment of school-age children aged 5-18 in
   pre-primary, primary and secondary schools (where available) and regular attendance of at least 80 percent
   of the school days per month; b) Maternal and Infant Health: all pregnant women within beneficiary
   households to attend a minimum of four prenatal medical examinations; deliver at a health facility or
   assisted by skilled personnel and attend a post-natal check-up according to the Tanzania’s health protocol.
   For children younger than two years, regular check-ups at health services at least once every month
   including regular growth monitoring and counselling and distribution of micro-nutrients; all children of the
   household aged between 24 and 60 months to attend routine health services at least once every six
   months. For all children younger than five years the health facility would provide full immunization; and c)
   Workshops to reinforce nutrition practices and investment in human capital: At least one parent or guardian
   to attend monthly workshops organized by the program in coordination with the education, health and/or
   social welfare sectors to promote good nutritional practices, child care, home hygiene, water usage, as well
   as other topics including the importance of starting education at the right age. Subject to meeting the

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



conditions, bimonthly payments under the PSSN would be authorized. Transfers were to be received by
mothers except in cases where this was not feasible, in which case a guardian would receive the benefit.
Beneficiary households would register all eligible members in the program (i.e., children younger than 18
and pregnant women).

Based on the assessment of the intervention before the AF, a slightly revised benefit and co-responsibilities
structure was developed to (a) increase the incentive to comply with co-responsibilities by linking cash
benefits to households’ behaviors more closely, (b) provide additional benefits for children attending
secondary education to better reflect the higher opportunity costs of attending secondary versus primary
school, (c) better align the penalties for noncompliance with co-responsibilities to individual eligible
members of each household, and (d) facilitate delivery of payments by rounding cash benefit amounts to
Tanzanian shillings rather than U.S. dollars.



Sub-component 1B: Labor Intensive Public Works Plus. As originally designed, a Public Works
Program (PWP) would offer a guaranteed 15 days of paid work per month for four months (totaling 60 days
per year) to each eligible household (one member per household) targeted under the PSSN targeting.
Households would be able to access the program over a number of years, as long as they remained listed
by the common targeting mechanism with a view to incentivizing planning, saving and possible investing.
Households were eligible for the PWP if they were listed by the common targeting system and had at least
one adult able-bodied member (between the ages of 18 and 65, not pregnant beyond 4 months or
disabled). Participants would work at a daily wage rate of US$1.35 in the initial phase of the program, which
was lower than the average market rate for unskilled labor so that only those participants with no other,
more attractive, livelihood alternatives or employment opportunities would be willing to participate in the
PWP. The wage component of public works (PW) funding would represent a minimum of 75 percent of the
PW budget allocated for each PAA per year in order to maximize the number of households that would be
able to benefit from the transfers. The other 25 percent of PW budget allocation would be used towards
financing administrative costs including technical supervision and monitoring and capital inputs. The PW
technical manual would include technical design, work productivity norms, social and environmental
mitigation measures. A Community Savings Promotion (COMSP) would complement the PW program, by
mobilizing beneficiaries to save through a group savings methodology. Activities to be financed would
include community mobilization for savings, community groups institutional building, record-keeping and
technology based innovations (for example, using Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
where possible and provision of well-designed savings messages to communities on a regular basis using
mobile technology). It was also envisaged that groups could be linked to legally-constituted financial
institutions (FIs) to ensure that the poor operate in a viable and sustainable savings framework. A rigorous
impact evaluation was envisaged as an integral part of the sub-component to assess the evidence of
impact.

In addition to scaling up the PWP, the AF introduced two new features: (a) PW was to be undertaken when
labor demand for agricultural activities was low (and participation in PW would therefore not compete with
the need to work on own land) and (b) PW should be timed so that payments would be made during or
before the lean season. The AF also strengthened the Community Savings Promotion (COMSP)—originally
introduced to complement Subcomponent 1B by supporting beneficiaries in saving—by expanding its scope
to support households’ income-generating capacity in the medium and long term. Specifically, the
subcomponent was adjusted to support (a) the design of a basic awareness and skills training package to
promote savings and budget management and facilitate access of TASAF beneficiaries to skills training,

                                                                                                Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



microcredit, and business development support based on location-specific opportunities; (b) the design and
implementation of a communication strategy for program officers to support the implementation of the
component; (c) the training for TASAF program officers; (d) the financing of a productive grant for a selected
number of beneficiaries; and (e) the design of an M&E strategy to capture results and improve the design of
the component.



Component 2: Institutional Strengthening (Planned: US$93.9 million; Actual: US$111.2 million). This
component sought to: (i) support the government in the process of institutionalizing the PSSN as part of a
national social protection framework; (ii) support the Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) to start the
implementation of the PSSN under the current structure and gradually move towards permanent institutional
arrangements; and (iii) support program management and monitoring and evaluation of the PSSN. The
scope of Component 2 was enhanced with AF to support a substantially larger coverage in the following
areas: implementation of a URB of social programs (e.g., improvements to the ICT elements in view of the
program’s scale-up as well as the operational tools used to collect data to populate the URB; periodic
updates of the targeting tools, such as the proxy means test (PMT) and community-based (CB) targeting
tools, as new data became available and/or based on operational lessons learned; and operationalization of
the latest poverty maps and other poverty data for targeting and retargeting); design and development of a
new flagship computerized MIS to cater to the scaled-up PSSNP and that would cater to targeting,
enrollment, case management, and compliance monitoring; grievance redress and citizen feedback; project
tracking; electronic payments processing; and interfacing the URB with the PSSN MIS; funding of
information, education, and communication campaigns; project activities for sensitization, training, and
retraining; and communication of messages and results; implementation of a cost-effective payment
platform to help the PSSNP in paying beneficiaries; supply-side assessments to identify health and
education services gaps for the PSSN communities and establish the appropriate co-responsibilities based
on the level of services available; and support for a grievance response mechanism (GRM) that was seen
as an important part of scaling up and as a crucial element to provide beneficiaries, communities, and
supporting institutions a formal mechanism to report, receive, evaluate, and redress program-related
grievances as well as key information to improve program performance.



Sub-component 2A: Strengthening TASAF and Supporting Implementation of the PSSN. This sub-
component sought to support TASAF and other implementing entities such as the Department of Social
Welfare in carrying out the required operational reform to effectively implement the PSSN through the
provision of financial and technical assistance to implement activities including the following: (i) operational
reforms and institutional strengthening that TASAF may require to improve efficiency in the implementation
and monitoring of the PSSN; (ii) program management including procurement, financial management,
supervision of operations including safeguards and human resource management; (iii) capacity building
through training and technical assistance, advisory services, study tours and operational trips; (v) research
and development and knowledge generation activities; (vi) use of ICT in support of Component 1A and 1B;
(vii) and research and development.



Sub-component 2B: Development of Systems for Implementation of Social Safety Net Intervention.
This sub-component involved provision of assistance to develop and finance a set of instruments and


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



  systems in support of the following activities: (a) a unified registry of beneficiaries of social programs (URB);
  (b) management information systems; (c) information education and communication campaigns (IEC); (d)
  Supply side assessments; and (e) Strengthening operational capacity of TASAF and CMCs.



  Sub-component 2C: Development and Strengthening of the M&E Systems. The PSSN M&E system
  would transform data collection, processing and information management into an integrated data system to
  facilitate the operation of PSSN components through the entire cycle, across all levels of government. To
  implement the M&E system, the project would finance consultant and non-consultant services, IT
  equipment, goods and operational costs to carry out a comprehensive impact evaluation and regular
  process evaluations, beneficiary surveys and qualitative evaluation, design and test grievance mechanism
  and enhanced program accountability mechanisms, field-based sampling verifications (spot checks), and
  audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  Inclusive of non-World Bank financing (see below), the project cost at appraisal was US$240.90 million. AF
  – in response to government request to expand the SSN - and adjustments to non-World Bank financing
  revised the appraised cost to US$570.00 million. The ICR shows that, ultimately US$402.76 million were
  disbursed. However, in conversation IEG, the TTL for the project explained that it was not possible to
  enter partner contributions into the system. These contributions were set out, in various currency
  denominations, in Annex 3 of the ICR as detailed below.



  Financing

  The PAD (pp. 11-12) stated the project would be supported with a US$220 million IDA credit – in the form of
  an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) noting plans at appraisal for a follow-on project supported by a second
  APL. In addition, it was envisaged that financing for the project would be provided as follows: US$16 million
  equivalent from a DFID grant; US$0.9 million equivalent from a Spanish Cooperation grant; and US$4
  million from the Government counterpart. The DFID and Spanish grants were to be administered by the
  Bank under a multi-donor trust fund arrangement (PAD p.12). At restructuring (see below) an additional
  US$200 million IDA credit was introduced and the planned DFID contribution was increased to US$150
  million. World Bank financing of US$402.76 million were disbursed. Annex 3 of the ICR also indicates that
  the following were disbursed noting an increased number of donors from those identified in the PAD: Bill
  and Melinda Gates Foundation US$3.726 million; DFID GBP153.262 million; OPEC's Fund for International
  Development US$28.350 million; UNICEF's Private Fundraising and Partnerships (PFP) EURO52,595;
  SIDA KR89.595; UN Agencies US$2.452 million; USAID US$5.6 million; and Tanzania's Commission for
  Aids (TACAIDS) TZS2.954 million

  Borrower Contribution




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



   A planned borrower contribution of US$4 million materialized (as per Annex 3) as US$5.167 million (noting
   the ICR seems to imply (p.31) that the government did not make a cash contribution due to budgetary
   constraints). However, the ICR (p. 31) also noted that the implementing agency’s final report estimated the
   government’s in-kind contribution (salaries for non-TASAF staff, office space etc.) for the PSSNP at the
   equivalent of US$90.9 million.



   Dates

   The project was approved March 29, 2012 and became effective August 13, 2012 with a planned closing
   date of December 31, 2017. The Mid-term Review was carried out on October 1, 2014. Given an approved
   extension, the actual closing was December 31, 2019.



   Restructuring and Additional Finance

   A level 2 restructuring was approved February 23, 2016 that involved reallocation of funds between
   expenditure categories to cover the short-term costs of the expansion of the cash transfer program as well
   as some changes to the language and targets of both key performance indicators and intermediate
   indicators.

   The Board approved a restructuring on June 16, 2016 that involved the introduction of AF, extension of the
   original closing date, change in the Results Framework, change in components and cost, change in loan
   closing date(s), and change in safeguard policies triggered. The strategic rationale for AF was to respond to
   a Government request to support a credible and solid strategy to reduce extreme poverty by reaching the
   poorest; to provide the necessary institutional, technical, and financial support to ensure long-term
   sustainability of the PSSN and efforts to eliminate extreme poverty; and to mobilize development partners’
   technical and financial support to the Government strategy. The Results Framework was changed to reflect
   the new scope and scale-up of the project and track progress toward achieving the objective of the overall
   original APL series. Some end targets were revised upwards and others were reformulated to better track
   project progress. Reflecting the significant scale up with AF the PDO target on “Benefits reaching the
   poorest 20 percent of the population” was revised downward from 100% (PAD, p. 26) to 85%. Some
   indicators were deleted as they were considered to be too difficult or costly to measure or were irrelevant to
   track project progress.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, pp. 2-4) the project responded to the launch of
Tanzania’s Second National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty (NSGRP II). The strategy
included commitments to improving and increasing social protection provision for both the economically
active and vulnerable groups. At the time, the government was also finalizing a draft of a National Social
Protection Framework (NSPF) that aimed to improve coordination and speed up the implementation of

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



               social protection policies designed to improve the lives of the poor and most vulnerable groups. There were
               a large number of transfer programs in implementation, many of which were very small. Overall provision
               was characterized as inefficient with limited beneficiary coverage, delivering intermittent and inconsistent
               benefits (at times duplicative). As such there was recognition of the need to introduce greater coordination
               with the aim of increasing consumption and improving the health and nutrition condition of poor households
               through sustained, year-long transfers; smoothing household consumption during lean seasons and
               creating community assets; and improving human capital accumulation of poor and vulnerable children. The
               government’s Third Social Action Fund (TASAF III) Program Document (2011) adopted a new approach to
               providing support to the poor and food insecure in a systematic way that included the development and
               consolidation of a comprehensive safety net that more effectively addressed the needs of the poor. The
               overall government program would establish a national safety net incorporating transfers linked to
               participation in public works and adherence to co-responsibilities; provide support to community driven
               interventions to enhance livelihoods and increase incomes (through community savings and investments as
               well as specific livelihood enhancing seed grants to facilitate asset building); provide targeted infrastructure
               development (education, health, water) to enable service poor communities to realize the objectives of the
               safety net; and provide capacity building to ensure adequate program implementation by community, local
               government authorities, regional and national levels. The World Bank, DFID and USAID committed to
               supporting the safety nets and capacity building components of the program. The ICR (p.17) stated that, as
               part of the County Partnership Framework (2018-2022) the Bank plans to support the government’s efforts
               to reinforce TASAF by ensuring PSSN expansion and sustainability, ensuring accountability for public
               services, and improving the effectiveness of service delivery. Better targeting is also seen as a goal,
               identifying both inclusion and exclusion errors. The CPF also presents social protection interventions as
               offering a range of coping mechanisms for households and communities confronting disasters and climate
               change. More broadly, the ICR noted that social inclusion is at the core of many of the CPF objectives e.g.,
               the PSSN provides support for the poorest 15 percent of households (close to 6 million people) through
               both conditional cash transfers and public works and livelihoods programs.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To create a comprehensive productive social safety net system for the poor and vulnerable section of the
                             Recipient's population (with 'comprehensive' defined, as under Relevance above, as a programmatic
                             combination of supports)

                             Rationale
                             For the purposes of this validation exercise and in line with the approach taken in the ICR, the project will be
                             assessed with reference to two sub-objectives as follows: “to create a comprehensive productive social safety


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



net system for the poor and vulnerable section of the Recipient's population; and “to create an efficient, well-
targeted productive social safety net system for the poor and vulnerable section of the Recipient's population.”

There is no Theory of Change (ToC) developed in the PAD. The PAD stated (pp. 11-12) that the project
(through an APL) would serve to support the first phase of the transition of the Tanzania Social Action Fund
(TASAF) towards the consolidation of a SSN system through support for the development of the building
blocks (the second phase would support expansion and functioning of the national SSN system). The overall
objective of the APL series was to increase income and consumption and improve the ability to cope with
shocks among targeted vulnerable population groups, while enhancing and protecting the human capital of
their children. The PAD (p.10) noted that the activities under the first APL (the project) would contribute to the
achievement the high-level objectives of a broader program, which would also include a set of investments for
gap filling in social and other infrastructure services. Taking into account the expansion of the project with AF,
the project’s rationale was as follows:

Through the provision of financing for basic cash transfers and variable conditional cash transfers, support for
employment through public works, and support for the mobilization and training of community savings groups,
the project would deliver basic and conditional cash transfers to targeted beneficiaries, employment
opportunities and the completion of public works identified as necessary by beneficiary communities, and the
establishment of functioning savings groups. This would result in an expanded SSN covering 1.5 million
people (60% female), 95% of the eligible poor receiving cash transfers and more than 30% of beneficiaries
better fed. Through the provision of support for the effective management of the project / system – financial
management, procurement, M&E, ICT – the project would deliver, for example, training, an MIS, a monitoring
system, impact and other evaluation reports, and beneficiary assessments that would result in a well targeted,
efficient and transparent SSN system that benefitted the target groups (the 20% poorest).

Although the project underwent two restructurings (one with AF) a split assessment will not be conducted.
Most PDO targets were unchanged. In the case of one PDO indicator, there was an upward revision of the
target. For another, there was a downward target revision, but both original and revised targets were
achieved. Given this, a split evaluation would be inconsequential to overall outcome assessment, which is the
reason why a split was not applied. Changes to other outcome indicators were made largely with a view to
ensuring enhanced clarity and precision without changing the logic of the project. Additional indicators -
assessed below - were added.



Intermediate Outcomes

The target (10,000) for the ‘number of villages selected’ was almost met (9,960) off a baseline of 5,000.

The ‘proportion of children in beneficiary households aged 0-24 months old attending health facilities regularly
(monthly)’ was 96%, just below a revised target of 98% off a baseline of 0% and a pre-AF target of 50%.

The ‘proportion of children in beneficiary households aged 6-18 years enrolled in primary schools with more
than 80% of attendance a month’ was 95%, well above the revised target of 80% off a baseline 50%.

The ‘number of households in the CCT components supported by the program’ was 1.1 million, meeting the
revised target off a baseline 0 and a pre-AF target of 250,000.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



The ‘proportion of households receiving timely and predictable CCT benefits’ met the revised target of 100%
against a baseline 0% and pre-AF target of 50%.

The ‘number of person days provided in PWP’ was 4.39 million, which exceed the revised target of 3.6 million
against a baseline 0 and pre-AF target of 2.5 million.



Outcomes

The number of ‘direct project beneficiaries’ was 5.4 million, which is below the revised target of 6.5 million
beneficiaries against a baseline 5,000 beneficiaries and -pre-AF target of 1.5 m direct project beneficiaries.

The ‘proportion of female beneficiaries’ was 52%, which was less than the targeted 60% female beneficiaries
and only modestly above the 50% target. The ICR (p.18) noted that this indicator recorded the general
proportion of male/female household members, mirroring the country-level male/female population proportion;
however, 83 percent of the direct recipients of the cash benefits on behalf of the households were women.

The ‘proportion of eligible households receiving cash transfers’ was 100%, exceeding the target of 95%
against a baseline 1%.

The ‘proportion of eligible households receiving conditional cash transfers’ was 100%, exceeding the target of
95% against a baseline 1%.

The ‘proportion of households receiving cash transfers through public works’ was 89%, exceeding the target
of 80% against a baseline 0.

The ICR (p. 20) noted that, according to the measurements of the extent to which the project is reaching the
poorest, the PSSN ranked among the best targeted / most efficient interventions in the world. The majority of
the PSSN beneficiaries (83 percent) were in the bottom 40 percent of the consumption distribution and almost
half (48 percent) were in the lowest decile. The targeting of PSSN was also briefly discussed in the 2019
Poverty Assessment, which found that the PSSN might have had significant poverty reduction impact and that
after three years in operation of the PSSN, about 57 percent of the PSSN beneficiaries were in the two
poorest consumption quintiles although the poverty assessment also suggests that about 69 percent of the
households interviewed that reported benefiting from the PSSN, were above the poverty line although many
risked falling back into poverty in the absence of ongoing support.

The ICR (p. 25) also noted other benefits associated with the project. The PSSN helped increase by 5.6
percent the school enrollment of children ages 5 to 19 years, and that of primary school-age children (ages 5
to 13) by 7 percent. Baseline results showed that only 23 percent of children under the age of 5 visited a
health provider, and when they did, 90 percent were already sick. With PSSN, however, over 90 percent of
the children in the same cohort visited health facilities for prescribed prophylactics. Furthermore, the Tanzania
Youth Study showed that PSSN had positive impacts for youth on knowledge of modern contraceptives,
aspirations for higher education, social support among males, and certain forms of empowerment among
females, including perceived ability to make household decisions and having control over their own life. The
ICR also referenced The Productive Social Safety Net (PSSN) Key Indicators Report extracted from the
2017/18 Household Budget Survey that showed the following results, among others: (i) 72.9 percent of PSSN
beneficiary households had their houses built with modern roofing materials (iron sheets); (ii) 67.2 percent of

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



PSSN beneficiary households had their walls built with modern walls (cement bricks, baked bricks, and
stones); (iii) 23.2 percent of PSSN beneficiary households had their houses built with modern floors (cement
and ceramic tiles); (iv) 12.1 percent of PSSN beneficiaries were food poor; (v) 32.9 percent of PSSN
beneficiary households used clean energy for lighting; (vi) 82 percent of PSSN beneficiary households used
drinking water from improved sources; (vii) 98.3 percent of PSSN beneficiary households used charcoal and
firewood as sources of energy for cooking; and (viii) 90.3 percent of PSSN beneficiary households had some
form of toilet facility. Furthermore, results of the assessment on the benefits realized from participation in the
PW subprojects in the communities indicated that a majority (97.2 percent) of the households reported
realization of consumption-based benefits, smoothening income over the lean seasons. More than 85 percent
of the households used the wages for their children’s education (clothing and health care).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To create an efficient, well-targeted productive social safety net system for the poor and vulnerable section of
the Recipient's population

Rationale
The theory of change set out for Objective 1 above, also applies here.



Intermediate Outcomes

The ‘% wages over total subproject costs’ was 79.4%, exceeding the target of 75% against a baseline 70%.

The ‘number of PWP projects delivered at the community’ was 7,775, which was above the revised target of
6,750 (original target was 3,500) against a baseline 0.

The ‘satisfaction level of the community with the asset created with respect to the expected value of the asset
during project selection process’ was 92.5%, which exceeded the 80% target against a baseline of 0%.

The ‘proportion of households receiving timely and predictable PWP benefits’ was 100%, which exceeded the
80% target against a baseline of 0%.

The ‘proportion of communities with climate risk assessment incorporated into a multi-year planning’ met the
70% target against a baseline of 0%.

The ‘proportion of projects identified by the climate risk assessment that include measures for reducing
climate risks or increasing climate resilience’ met the revised target of 60% (original target 50%) against a
baseline 0%.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



The ‘number of savings groups formed’ was 23,618, which exceeded the revised target of 9,058 (original
target 2,058) against a baseline 1,1778.

The ‘number of people participating in savings groups’ was 31,940 which exceeded the target of 25,130
against a baseline 21,712.

The ‘average amount of savings’ was US$250,000 which exceeded the target of US$50,000 against a
baseline US$0.

The ‘number of households enrolled in basic skills training’ was 72,000 which was below the target of 250,000
against a baseline 0. This indicator was added at the time of the AF. Enrollment of households for basic skills
training was done in 8 PAAs only as the development of training modules took longer than expected.

The ‘number of staff trained at district level and number of workshops held for training purposes’ was,
respectively, 6,299 and 161 against respective targets of 2,000 and 162. The respective baselines were 130
staff at 13 workshops.

The M&E system is generating regular, timely and adequate reports and is fully functional in 161 PAAs
supported by the MIS and URB.

The ‘proportion of registered households with complete information not older than 2 years’ is 100%, meeting
the target against a baseline 0%.

The GRM system is in place and is operational in all 161 PAAs. The system can record grievances received,
attended, escalated, closed and at various stages of implementation.

The ‘percentage of beneficiaries satisfied with the program’ is 88% which exceeds the 80% target against a
baseline 0%.



Outcomes

The ‘proportion of beneficiary households with an increase in food consumption’ is almost 44% against a 30%
target and baseline of 0%.

The ‘proportion of eligible households with consumption below the adjusted food poverty line’ is 64%, below
the target of 75% against a baseline 0%.

Benefits reached the poorest 20 percent of population in all areas which exceeded the revised target of 85%
(original target 100%) against a baseline 0%.

The ‘proportion of registered households with updated information on compliance with co-responsibilities’ was
90% which exceeded the target of 80% against a baseline 50%.

The ‘proportion of households enrolled in livelihood enhancing basic skills training completing the modules’
was 100% which exceeded the target of 60% against a baseline 0%.



                                                                                                Page 11 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



The ‘proportion of grievances resolved in a timely matter’ was 90% which exceeded the target of 70% against
a baseline 0%.

The ICR (p. 20) noted that the project established the main ICT systems needed for the functioning of the
safety net. These included financial MIS and human resources management system with biometric features,
fleet management, website and emails, PSSN operational systems, PSSN MIS, GRM and URB, car tracking,
human resources and payroll, and time and attendance system. All the PSSNP activities, targeting,
enrollment, payment, compliance, and grievance were done through ICT systems. The M&E system was
supported by ICT systems for timely generation of required information to aid sound decision making and
store huge amount of data.

The ICR (pp. 26-27) also noted that the large majority of the direct recipients of cash transfers payments were
women who, based on international experience, were more likely than men to spend money for the benefit of
the entire household, especially children. In this case, the PSSN enhanced the participation of women in the
process of household financial decision making and other community affairs. The PWP impact assessment
report showed that the majority of those who actually took part in the implementation of the PWP in the
communities were women (84.6 percent). The gender dimensions of livelihoods were also notable - a total of
23,618 savings groups were formed with a total of 319,940 individual savers, of whom the majority of 272,826
(85.3 percent) were women. A gender assessment of the PSSN program was conducted in 2017 and
confirmed that in over 80 percent of the cases, the direct recipients of the CCT benefits were female
household representatives thereby enhancing women’s social status and bargaining power within the family
and community.

The ICR (p. 27) also noted that prior to the PSSNP, the main instrument to support poor and rural populations
was through interventions based on traditional social funds that involved PW elements that were not labor
intensive or focused on the cash transfer aspect as well as an array of other small scale and
fragmented assistance programs. The PSSNP moved the system towards a more comprehensive and
integrated approach to supporting targeted populations. The PSSNP also managed to establish appropriate
institutional structures for program management at the national, regional, PAA, ward, and community levels
supported, as above, by the MIS, URB, GRM and so on. The ICR also identified the 2019 reconstitution of
TASAF’s National Steering Committee (NSC)/Board (established 2012) as a sign of growing ownership of the
program within the Tanzanian Government.

The ICR (p. 28) drew on the Tanzania Poverty Assessment (World Bank 2019b) to further demonstrate how
the PSSN program has helped strengthen resilience and reduce poverty. The assessment showed that 14
percent of poor households and 9 percent of total households in the country benefitted from the PSSN; the
PSSN reached 15 percent of extremely poor households, 14 percent of poor households, and 8 percent of
households not classified as poor. In line with the national distribution of the poor, 78 percent of households
benefiting were in rural areas (the program reached 11 percent of all rural and 5 percent of all urban
households). About 66 percent of beneficiaries reported using the PSSN income support to cover their food
needs, 13 percent to cover education and health expenses, and 21 percent to invest in productive assets and
improve housing (8 percent).



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall effort succeeded in delivering a comprehensive, well-targeted SSN system, and almost all
                            outcome and intermediate indicators were met or exceeded.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD (Annex 8, p.109) provided details of a project simulation that was conducted as part of the cost benefit
   analysis to ascertain which program combination would yield the maximum number of beneficiaries, and
   whether combinations of cash transfers and public work programs would result in the expected 5 percent
   decrease in the poverty rate, considering the maximum monthly and annual benefit amount per intervention. The
   simulation would, in turn, determine the total administrative cost to the government, the total number of
   beneficiaries actually covered and the overall effect on the targeted households’ consumption. The PAD (p.113)
   warns that findings were to be viewed carefully, given that some external factors (e.g., the literature shows
   better response in terms of enrollment when transfers are individual and possibly higher for older children that
   are more likely to drop out because of labor market demand and insufficient supply of close secondary schools)
   can strongly affect the predictions. In that regard the PAD noted that the PSSN could contribute to poverty
   reduction and to improved school enrollment, but other complementary actions would also be necessary. Overall
   the simulations showed that the PSSN represented a move in the right direction as a social protection program
   for the poorest population in Tanzania, due to its bigger effect on severity of poverty (15 percent) than in poverty
   headcount (6 percent) by itself (PAD, p.114)



   The ICR provided detailed discussion of the efficiency criteria (pp.21-25). Noting that the PDO is assessed on
   the basis of the efficiency of the productive SSN system, the ICR set out to support the project’s efficiency rating
   with reference to updating the original economic analysis (and to look at the efficiency of the SSN at large); and
   to review the efficiency of project preparation and implementation. The ICR noted that to inform the decision of
   scaling up the PSSN with AF, a series of ex ante micro-simulations, using the 2012 nationally representative
   household survey, was carried out to estimate the possible impact of the CCT program on poverty reduction and
   school enrollment. Assuming that transfers were perfectly targeted and that cash benefits were accumulated
   over time, after one year, the estimate was that the PSSN would reduce the headcount measure of extreme
   poverty by 5.4 percentage points and over 12.0 percentage points after four years, from a baseline of 14.7
   percent, which corresponded to lifting about 350,000 households out of extreme poverty after one year and
   750,000 households after four years (among the extremely poor households, reducing the poverty gap measure
   by 1.0 percentage point after one year and 2.3 percentage points after four years from a baseline of 2.8
   percent). Similar to the PAD, the AF Project Paper warned that the results should be interpreted with caution
   given assumptions made, for example, regarding the availability of an adequate number of secondary schools.
   The ICR also noted that the exercise relied on the assumption that the household’s consumption increased each

                                                                                                                          Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



year by the amount of the transfer, which, according to the ICR, may be an overstatement of the impacts. In that
regard the ICR suggested that the results of the simulation should be considered as upper bound estimates of
the potential impacts of the overall program.



With reference to implementation efficiency the ICR noted that the actual administrative costs by completion of
the project for the implementation of the components of the project, cash transfers and PW, were maintained as
planned. For the CCT aspect administrative costs represented 11 percent of the total amount spent for CCT,
lower than the planned ratio of 12 percent. For the PWP aspect, the required PWP labor intensity ratio for
materials and administrative costs was 25 percent, with 75 percent going to the payment of wages. The actual
labor share ended up being 79 percent. However, based on the overall project budget that includes all
overheads and administrative costs (rather than ring-fenced elements thereof), the overall administrative costs
were somewhat higher, at 17 percent. The ICR referred to a value for money study (Wylde, 2016) that largely
confirms the administrative efficiency of the project. The ICR also discussed other aspects including payment
and compliance monitoring in the field where there were unaccounted costs associated with manual payment
system at local level; targeting, where the use of combined community and PMT approaches was seen as both
more effective and more efficient; and the use of the MIS for targeting, enrollment, and payment noting that the
cost of the MIS was at the low end of the range of comparisons made in the Wylde study e.g., the cost of the
PSSN MIS was US$1.63 million in 2016 (at the time of the value for money study) which compared favorably
with costs in similar type projects in Costa Rica, Colombia, Chile, Argentina, and Mexico.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial based on strong alignment with both country and Bank
strategies. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial based on Substantial achievement of both objectives. Efficiency
is rated Substantial based on the favorable economic analyses and implementation efficiencies. Overall
outcome is rated Satisfactory.



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Notwithstanding renewed commitment by the government to the program and the ongoing project (PSSN II)
that was approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors on September 12, 2019, the ICR
identified growing risks to development outcome including the following: failure by the government over time
to meet its declared financial commitment to the core spending noting periodic renewal of the commitment
(including as part of the AF preparation for the current project) but actual spending of close to zero - the new
project shows a financing gap of almost US$250 million that may be difficult to fil; the COVID-19 crisis may
further undermine funding of the poverty agenda; the political environment continues to be complex, and
sudden policy changes are possible; and, on the technical side, the temporarily reduced staff and capacity
constraints in times of reduced funding may be exacerbated and may slow down the implementation of the
further reform steps.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Overall, design was robust and well thought through although, as discussed below under Monitoring and
  Evaluation, the results framework was weakly constructed. The PAD (pp. 13-14) discussed lessons
  learned and reflected in project design. This included reference to a 2011 World Bank study endorsed by
  the Government of Tanzania –Tanzania: Poverty, Growth and Public Transfers: Options for a National
  Productive Safety Net Program – that emphasized the role that productive SSNs could play in
  accelerating poverty-reduction by protecting immediate consumption while allowing the poor to participate
  more actively in the growth process, providing a cushion against shocks, and helping them escape inter-
  generational poverty traps. The PAD also noted that design was informed by lessons learned in the
  implementation of TASAF II and the SSN Review in Tanzania (2011) and had been informed by
  international experience with reference to the Ethiopia Productive Safety Net Program and conditional
  transfers in the LAC Region. Key lessons included the need to further enhance community based
  targeting through the incorporation of a proxy means to address elite capture and minimize inclusion
  errors; the value of sustained (rather than one-off) support to households over time; the value of support
  for household savings initiatives in helping beneficiaries on the pathway to getting out of food insecurity;
  awareness of costs and planning for same to support involvement of sector ministries; and the
  importance of involving and supporting local government leadership. The overall risk rating for the project
  was substantial (PAD, pg. 18) based on a number of factors, including stakeholder risks associated with
  pressure for a nationwide roll-out the program, as well as risks of elite capture. These would be mitigated
  by firm agreements on program roll-out and, for example, enhanced verification measures. Implementing
  agency risks associated with limited staff capacity in financial management, procurement and safeguards
  and the risk of disbursement delays at local levels would be mitigated by local level capacity building
  efforts, through recruitment and on-the-job training. Project risk associated with the innovative nature of



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



  the program (coupled with capacity limitations) would be mitigated by a focus on capacity building,
  awareness raising, phased roll-out and strong monitoring and evaluation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR noted that the team remained in close contact with the project over its cycle and was responsive
 to implementation challenges, especially during the initial period of delayed implementation associated with
 political changes (2015/16). The team proactively handled issues related to the design of the AF and
 safeguards issues and questions pertaining to indigenous peoples that took place during the preparation of
 the AF. The ICR also noted that the World Bank played a role in donor coordination that promoted effective
 joint monitoring and coordinated policy dialogue. That said, and as noted in the ICR, restructuring for the
 AF offered the chance to better address shortcomings in measuring and demonstrating impact i.e., to
 better address the deficiencies in the results framework. That opportunity was not fully availed although we
 note that impact evaluations and other reports were completed as part of the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD (pp. 16-17) noted that the Government had established a single monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
 system for the National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty II (NSGRP II) for both Tanzania
 Mainland and Zanzibar and that the PSSN was linked to the national monitoring system. Primary data
 would be collected by the Village Council and consolidated at the Project Authority Area (PAA) for analysis
 and sharing with the regional and national level for further aggregation and dissemination. At the PAA level,
 all data would be captured in an MIS. A village level paper-based system was in place and would be
 strengthened under the Institutional Support Component of the project. The PAD noted that, given the
 scale and innovative nature of project, it would be necessary to carry out continuous assessments
 (quantitative/qualitative surveys and spot checks), process evaluation and household impact evaluations to
 track project progress, inform further scale up, and adjust in line with feedback. As such, the project would
 finance an independent impact evaluation of the combined safety net intervention (public works plus and
 cash transfers), regular process evaluations, beneficiary assessments, transparency and accountability
 assessments, including Community Score Cards and Citizen Report Cards, social audits and controls,
 feedback tools, and financial and technical audits (internal audits and independent audits). However,
 despite robust plans for data collection and analysis, and as noted in the ICR (p.32), the project outcome

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



 indicators (essentially output-type indicators) did not adequately capture the aspiration of the complex
 project objective. Some measure of desired outcome - for example, related to increased learning outcomes
 rather than, simply, school enrolment - would have better determined impact.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p.33) stated that the M&E system provided regular information on progress relative to targets
  and outcomes. As per design, data entry was to be carried out by the Project Area Authorities (PAAs);
  however, due to connectivity issues, data entry had to be done centrally during targeting and enrollment
  and was later decentralized to PAAs once connectivity issues were resolved. All 161 PAAs were
  connected and used MIS for data entry. ICT equipment was provided to facilitate operations at PAAs.
  The Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) also allocated monitoring officers at each PAA to support
  M&E. The ICR stated that M&E contributed to timely implementation of the program. Initial geo-targeting
  data formed the basis for estimating the number of beneficiary households and resources. Further
  improvement of the targeting and enrollment process was tested, and subsequently rolled out, by
  deploying Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing for targeting and enrollment in three PAAs using
  Open Data Kit. Accountability tools, such as community scorecards that were used in six PAAs, were
  used to empower beneficiaries to know their entitlements and demand more accountability from services
  providers and to more generally provide valuable system feedback. The Grievance Redress Mechanisms
  (GRMs) were also linked to the MIS and rolled out in all the local government authorities providing a
  strong accountability tool. The M&E system also supported PSSNP impact evaluations, impact
  assessments, and other studies, and the ICR stated that the use of spot checks and other rapid
  assessments were crucial in getting structured evidence that allowed for course correction e.g., the
  PSSN scale-up assessment (Rogelio Gómez-Hermosillo 2016) conducted in 2016 recommended the
  implementation of an independent annual and ad hoc spot checks of payment process over the more
  than 54,000 payment events conducted every year.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p.34) noted that data on project indicators were regularly collected and reported and used for
  decision making, adjustments (restructuring), and planning purposes e.g., early experience with data
  collection for indicators was used to make the adjustments to the results framework at the time of the
  AF. As noted above, the project supported impact evaluation and other reports that, together with the
  more basic counting/throughput aspect associated of the indicators, provided a useful platform for
  forward planning, including planning for the follow-on project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



  No issues related to environmental safeguards arose during the life of the project. The project was rated as
  environmental Category B - Partial Assessment. To meet its requirements the government updated the
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the Tanzania Social Action Fund (2004).
  The updated ESMF was cleared by the World Bank at appraisal. Environmental guidelines were complied
  with and impacts, if any, were minimal and localized in nature. The ICR (p.34) noted the project had a
  number of positive environmental impacts, as the many PW subprojects focused on environmentally smart
  infrastructure like afforestation, water wells, and road improvements using the watershed management
  approach for identifying and designing subprojects. With reference to social impacts, the project at appraisal
  triggered OP/BP 4.10 due to the presence of indigenous peoples in areas where the project was expected
  to finance labor intensive PW and cash transfers. As required, the government held consultations and
  disclosed an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); however, at the time of the AF, the
  government requested (and was eventually granted by the World Bank) a waiver to the policy which it
  considered to be inconsistent with the Tanzanian Constitution. As a justification for the waiver, it was noted
  that while the project documentation had not been altered and the IPPF remained disclosed at the
  InfoShop, no Indigenous Peoples Plans had been prepared during project implementation until the AF.
  Instead, and consistent with the requirements of OP/BP 4.10, the project drew on the IPPF requirements
  and guidance in delivering cash transfers to indigenous peoples by consulting and engaging local
  communities in a socially appropriate manner, including communities in which indigenous peoples are
  present; establishing a Grievance Redress Mechanism; and putting in place a monitoring and evaluation
  system. The government also prepared and carried out consultations for a Vulnerable Groups Planning
  Framework (VGPF) which, for the AF, was considered consistent with the requirements of OP/BP 4.10. At
  closing, implementation of the VGPF was considered to be effective and informed the move toward the new
  ESF in PSSN II.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR (p.35) noted that there was adequate staffing for financial management (FM) and accounting at
  the TASAF and PAA levels resulting in annual work plans and budgets being prepared and approved in
  line with policy and guidelines. The last FM report by the World Bank (from May 2019) rated the project’s
  overall FM arrangements Satisfactory, which has been the case throughout the project duration. The ICR
  also noted smooth progress with procurement during the project cycle with procurement at the various
  levels undertaken in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement procedures and the community
  procurement guidelines and, as relevant, on the basis of approved Procurement Plans. The Procurement
  Capacity Assessment (carried out by the World Bank in May 2018) of the organizational structure,
  functions, staff skills and experience, and adequacy for implementation of the project at the TMU and a
  sample of PAAs and regions concluded that all the necessary bodies and processes for managing
  procurement activities had been established. The ICR noted (p.36) that the procurement audit conducted
  by the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority of Tanzania ranked TASAF as the best performer
  countrywide and awarded TASAF a Certificate of Recognition for Compliance with the Public Procurement
  Act (PPA) and its regulations for FY2013/14. TASAF was also awarded the East African Procuring Entity of
  the Year Award in Nairobi, Kenya, in November 2014 and a Certificate of Recognition for Compliance with
  PPA and its regulations for FY2015/16.




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (pp. 28-29) noted that community assets created through PW – afforestation and tree planting,
   rural access roads, agriculture and irrigation, environmental conservation, soil and water conservation -
   had important socioeconomic and environmental benefits including: positive impacts on natural resource
   conservation and mitigation of climate change effects (drawing on a 2019 Alpha and Omega Consulting
   Group report); improved agricultural productivity through irrigation, improved farming practices, and access
   roads; improved social services such as water points, construction/rehabilitation of schools, and health
   centers. The ICR stated that the subprojects also helped create household-level assets for 66.1 percent of
   the beneficiaries, and supported engagement in income generation activities for 81.5 percent of
   households. Based on these effects and as well enhanced saving and investment (76.9 percent of
   participating households) 65.8 percent of beneficiaries reported that the PW subprojects facilitated local
   economy and trade and 80.5 percent reported improvement of household health and nutrition. The ICR
   also suggested that the overall program (PSSNP) may have had significant effects in improving climate
   resilience of the poorest in Tanzania. The DFID PSSN Final Report (2018) found that unconditional cash
   transfers, livelihoods, and PW helped heads of household, often single women, create stability in the home
   and a level of economic independence and ability to manage periods of drought; as the foundation from
   which their children can be made healthy and attend school; and as the basis from which dependent ill,
   disabled, and orphans can be better cared for. The DFID report also suggested that the program also
   seemed to lead to behavioral changes with reference to health seeking behavior, and increased value of
   education.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided lessons at both the strategic and operational levels the most important of which
are:



Programs such as PSSN can operate more effectively within an accepted national social
protection/social safety net policy or framework to be sustainable. While there were attempts at

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



developing policy-level strategic documents on social protection in Tanzania, those are still at a
review, nonoperational stage. Presently, PSSN continues therefore to operate in a policy vacuum,
while it should be a part of a broader social protection policy and set of interventions. The current
plan for the PSSN does not extend beyond 2023, and it is not clear what happens beyond that date.
The Government should begin thinking actively about the future of the PSSN, which is a much-
needed policy tool in the fight against poverty in Tanzania. Institutionalizing PSSN within a clear
legal and policy framework would greatly contribute towards ensuring the program’s future.



Building systems around safety nets programs takes time. For all the achievement of PSSN, it needs
to be acknowledged that the URB is a registry of TASAF programs and not yet a social registry per
se. In the context of PSSN II, and as per the project’s design, the Government and donor partners
should advance their discussions on how to move the URB toward becoming a social registry that,
at a minimum, links the PSSN beneficiaries to complementary interventions. This would require
some policy actions on the Government’s side and is becoming even more relevant in the context of
unexpected shocks like the current COVID-19 crisis.



The ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic has all but highlighted the importance of programs such as
PSSN in cushioning the impacts of crisis on poorest households throughout the world… The current
crisis has also highlighted the importance of emergency response preparedness with respect to
social assistance programs, and of having a well-established information system or registry to adapt
programs to rapidly changing circumstances.



With respect to targeting, a combination of community targeting and Proxy Means Test promotes the
inclusion of genuine beneficiaries as both inculcate transparency in beneficiary identification.
Community targeting uses CB facilitators who are trained to use locally developed poverty criteria to
identify poor households and conduct surveys using the PMT questionnaire. This increases
communities' confidence on the program. More generally, a participatory approach to targeting
increases ownership of project and process. The accuracy in targeting was far better compared with
other countries as it minimized inclusion and exclusion errors. This could, at least in part, be
because of the program’s reliance on local staff who better understand the local environment and
culture which, in turn, increases accountability and supervision of the respective local government
authorities. This approach is critical for building long-term sustainability.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                  Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)



The report was comprehensive and followed the guidelines. The theory of change was clear and well-presented and th
ICR presented many well-articulated lessons under various headings. In supporting the achievements of the project, th
ICR drew on M&E data as well as beneficiary surveys and impact evaluation carried out under the project The ICR als
provided significant contextualized detail in support of both the efficacy and efficiency criteria. Despite the success of t
project, the ICR referenced relative shortcomings in Bank performance. On the other hand, there were some
minor inaccuracies in the ICR. For example, the original cost of the project seemed to be misstated (p.2) and, on p. 15
ICR stated that the project underwent two restructurings, which did not modify the original PDO, and that the first
restructuring was part of an AF package; however, it seems it was the second restructuring that dealt with the AF. Fina
the ICR did not discuss the Bank's interaction with other Development Partners (DPs) and did not explain why original
planned financing from DPs failed to materialize as part of the final project account.
  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
