     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022043

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P130328                                   DJ Crisis Response-SSN project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Djibouti                                  Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55440,IDA-58240,IDA-H7790             30-Sep-2016                                          13,388,420.81

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jun-2012                               30-Jun-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             13,999,997.19                                              0.00

 Actual                                         13,388,420.81                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ann Elizabeth Flanagan     Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project's development objectives, as laid out in the Financing Agreement dated August 21, 2012 (page 5),
   were “to (i) support the provision of short-term employment opportunities in community-based labor-intensive
   works for the poor and vulnerable, and (ii) support the improvement of nutrition practices among participating
   households focusing on pre-school children and pregnant/lactating women.”




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



   The project's revised development objectives, as laid out in the Financing Agreement dated June 6, 2016
   (page 5), were “to support a social safety net system for: (a) improved targeting; (b) improved nutrition
   practices; and (c) access to short term employment for the poor and vulnerable."

   The revised statement of objectives simplified and expanded the project's scope. The revision did
   not materially change the project's objectives. The ICR and this ICRR interpret the original and revised
   objectives as substantively the same. A split rating is therefore not required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Jul-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project’s original and revised components provided both emergency and development support. They
   supported:

         activities meant to meet the immediate needs of Djibouti’s poor through a cash-for-work scheme
          (workfare program) for working household members and a nutrition-based social assistance
          program for non-working and vulnerable members of the same household (children and pregnant or
          lactating women); and
         activities aimed at building the institutional framework for a national social safety net system that
          targets the poor and vulnerable and integrates the delivery of social assistance.



   Component 1. Community-Based Labor-Intensive Works and Services (appraisal US$2.1 million;
   additional financing 2014 US$2.8 million) was to finance short-term employment through community
   works and services. Eligible community works focused on upgrading and maintaining small-scale
   community assets through labor-intensive construction, and services consisted of maintaining communities’
   environments (for example, paving footpaths, constructing or rehabilitating small containment walls for flood
   control, upgrading small pedestrian bridges and stairs, cleaning streets, collecting garbage, maintaining
   feeder roads, producing intermediate inputs for infrastructure works, and rehabilitating community
   infrastructure). The component was also to provide support to train workfare participants to increase their
   manual labor skills and life-related skills.

   Component 2. Nutrition-Based Social Assistance to Support Investments in Human Capital
   (appraisal US$1.3 million, additional financing 2014 US$0.3 million) was to finance community-based
   activities targeting pregnant women and lactating mothers and children up to two years of age (first 1,000

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



days). The activities were meant to sensitize, train, and provide beneficiary households with nutrition-related
knowledge and resources so that their nutrition-related behaviors and, ultimately, nutrition would improve.
The activities included education and behavior change communication on good nutrition practices, child
care practices, education, health and hygiene promotion, handwashing (especially before eating, after
defecation, before feeding a child), cooking demonstrations, growth monitoring, personalized counseling,
micronutrient supplements for children 6-24 months old, food supplementation during the lean season for all
children 6-24 months old, referrals to health centers, early identification of pregnancy and promotion of
health seeking behavior (for example, ante-natal visits, use of iron and folic acids, and vaccinations), and
use of key micronutrients.

Component 3. Targeting, Monitoring, and Evaluation (appraisal US$1.2 million, additional financing
2014 US$0.8 million) was to support developing a national targeting system and improving monitoring and
evaluation capacity. Activities financed the development of a unified national registry of beneficiaries and an
integrated project monitoring system.

Component 4. Project Management and Administration (appraisal US$0.5 million; additional
financing 2014 US$.2 million; additional financing 2016 US$0.4; actual US$1.1 million) was to provide
support to the Djibouti Agency for Social Development (Agence Djiboutienne de Développement Social,
ADDS) to manage, implement, and coordinate the project.



Revised Component (level 2 restructuring and additional financing, December 2014)

Component 3. Targeting, Monitoring, and Evaluation (appraisal US$1.2 million, additional financing
2014 US$0.8 million) was to support improving the government’s ability to monitor project progress and
performance and target beneficiaries by developing a national targeting system. The project financed (i)
development of a social registry of potential beneficiaries of all social programs, including project
beneficiaries, housed in the Social Solidarity Secretary of State, and (ii) consolidation of an integrated
project monitoring system located at ADDS. The revision clarified the conceptualization of the social
registry, which would provide the building blocks for the government’s proposed national identity registry,
and introduced the proposed modular design of the social registry, which included modules that could be
designed and piloted during the (extended) project period as well as modules for the scaled-up national
identify registry.



Revised Components (level 1 restructuring and additional financing, June 2016)

In 2016, the project’s components were consolidated, its activities changed, and its scope modified. These
changes were based on (i) lessons learned during implementation; (ii) Djibouti’s new cash transfer program;
and (iii) adoption of a community-based approach to preventing malnutrition (Project Paper on the Proposed
Additional Second Credit and Restructuring 2016, p. 32).

Component 1. Nutrition and workfare activities (appraisal US$3.3 million; additional financing 2014
US$3.1 million; additional financing 2016 US$3.7 million; actual US$10.1 million) was to support
continued implementation, expansion, and adaptation of targeted nutrition-related social assistance and
community-based work, skill, and service activities for poor and vulnerable households with pregnant
women and preschool-aged children, and the definition of preschool-aged was extended from two years to

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



  five years old in all intervention areas. Nutrition activities were (i) expanded into areas with no workfare
  program, (ii) coordinated with the new cash transfer program, and (iii) significantly scaled up inside and
  outside of Djibouti Ville. Cross-sectoral collaboration and community structures established under other
  World Bank projects were leveraged to create sustainable structures to prevent malnourishment. The
  workfare program (i) was discontinued in high poverty areas inside Djibouti Ville covered by the social
  safety net (new cash transfer program), and (ii) was expanded in high poverty areas outside Djibouti Ville,
  such as rural areas with extreme poverty, food insecurity, and high levels of malnutrition. Its benefit
  structure was modified to reflect the supplement families received under the new cash transfer program.
  Basic skill training continued, but the activity focused more on linking beneficiaries to income generation
  activities in other projects.

  Component 2. Foundation of the social safety net system (additional financing 2016 US$2.7 million;
  actual US$2.7 million) continued to support the design and implementation of Djibouti’s social registry, to
  improve identifying, targeting, and delivering assistance to beneficiaries and coordinating social protection
  programs to reduce costs. The revised component (formerly Targeting, Monitoring, and Evaluation) (i)
  helped the government formulate a national vision for social protection and develop a social protection
  strategy beyond 2017; (ii) strengthened design features of social interventions, in particular the national
  cash transfer program; and (iii) supported further institutional strengthening, capacity building, and
  enhanced coordination across stakeholders.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs, Financing, and Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, total project costs were SDR 3.5
  million (US$5 million equivalent) financed by a grant from the IDA Crisis Response Window. At closing, total
  project costs (with two additional financings) were SDR 13.4 million (US$14 million equivalent). No borrower
  contribution was expected. The project fully disbursed all funds (SDR 9.5 million). The difference between
  the total commitment (US$14 million) and disbursements was due to exchange rate fluctuations between
  project preparation and additional financings.

  Dates: The project was approved May 23, 2012, became effective on January 10, 2013, and closed on
  June 30, 2019. The project’s closing date was extended twice, for a total of 33 months.

        On December 8, 2014, the project underwent a level 2 restructuring. Additional financing of US$5
         million supported increasing the number of beneficiaries and geographic areas receiving the
         community-based labor and nutrition safety net services; expanding and enhancing the social
         registry (e.g., introducing a modular design and piloting initial modules), laying the foundation for the
         government’s national identify registry that would collect socio-economic data and biometric data,
         among other things; restructuring the results framework “for better focus, clarity and ease of
         measurement, and target values will be adjusted to encompass the expanded scope” (Project Paper
         for Additional Financing for the Social Safety Net Project, 2014, p. 9). The closing date was
         extended by 24 months to September 30, 2016 to allow time to implement expanded activities
         associated with the project’s expanded geographic, beneficiary, and social registry coverage; for
         example, nutrition-related activities expanded to selected villages in three additional regions for a
         total of six regions (Balbala area, Dikhil Ville, Obock Ville, Tadjourah, Ali Sabieh, and Arta).
        On June 6, 2016, the project received additional financing of US$4 million and underwent a level 1
         restructuring. The project’s development objectives were revised, activities were added, and
         components were consolidated. The additional financing supported scaling up both the nutrition and

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



          workfare activities and expanding the project’s geographic coverage to increase the number of
          beneficiaries receiving support; implementing the social registry; and strengthening the social safety
          net system. The closing date was extended by nine months to June 30, 2019 to allow additional time
          to implement another expansion of coverage (nutrition activities expanded both inside and outside of
          Djibouti Ville).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project provided emergency support to Djibouti in accordance with OP/BP 8.00. The project's
objectives were meant to preserve human capital of vulnerable groups by providing new short-term
employment opportunities for the poor and vulnerable; preventing chronic malnutrition in the first 1,000
days; addressing chronic and acute malnutrition in children under the age of five; providing skills training to
poor and vulnerable individuals to enhance employment opportunities; and reducing the risks of associated
with crises by establishing a national registry system of poor and vulnerable households.

The project was highly aligned with relevant government strategies at approval and at closure. At approval,
the project was aligned with the government’s strategic priorities for growth and poverty reduction as laid
out in its Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, the National Initiative for Social Development: (i) accelerate
growth while maintaining macroeconomic stability; (ii) achieve universal access to basic services and the
development of human capital; (iii) promote harmonious and balanced local development that preserves the
environment; and (iv) improve governance and capacity building. Improvements in human capital focused
on access to basic services for women and children and tackling unemployment through labor intensive
activities, among other activities (Country Assistance Strategy, 2009, p. 11). The project promoted human
capital development by providing skills training as part of the cash-for-work program and supporting
improvements in nutrition practices of pregnant women, mothers, and very young children. The project also
sought to build capacity to increase and sustain human capital development through a social registry that
would identify vulnerable households and integrate and coordinate services provided to them.

The project was highly aligned with the World Bank's country strategies at approval and closure. The
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) FY09-11 focused on three themes (growth, human development and
access to services, and governance and public sector management). Under the human development
theme, the World Bank’s strategy specifically aimed to maintain dialogue with the government of Djibouti to
strengthen its social protection and direct support to poor people to (i) mitigate the vulnerability of the poor,
including against natural disasters impacting food security; (ii) improve the institutional framework for social
protection; (iii) identify the extent and causes of poverty; and (iv) propose a strategy to ameliorate its
effects. (World Bank 2009, p. 24). Toward the end of the CAS period, in 2011, a severe drought devastated
the Horn of Africa countries of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia. The social safety net project was
prepared and approved to directly respond to a crisis impacting already high levels of malnutrition. The
project was part of the World Bank’s regional response to the 2011 drought, which allocated a US$250
million grant from the IDA Crisis Response Window to the Drought Emergency in the Horn of Africa. For
Djibouti, 2011 was the fourth consecutive drought year, and drought had already led to loss of livestock,
failed crops, and increased malnutrition. The regional drought impacted Djibouti through rising food prices,



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



               which pushed vulnerable households over the poverty threshold. The World Bank’s response was critical
               given the lack of donor support for social assistance.

               At project closure, Djibouti’s level of human development continued to stymie its overall development. The
               government’s long-term development plan (Vision 2035) identified three cross-cutting themes—promoting
               women’s conditions and reducing gender inequality, supporting youth, and protecting the environment—and
               five key development challenges (peace and national unity, good governance, economic diversification and
               private sector-led growth, investment in human capital, and regional integration). The Country Partnership
               Strategy (CPS) FY14-17 continued to support human development to end extreme poverty and increase
               shared prosperity by (i) reducing vulnerability and (ii) strengthening the business environment. The World
               Bank’s support for reducing vulnerabilities explicitly aimed to strengthen Djibouti’s weak social protection
               system, including targeting (World Bank 2014, pp. 8-10). The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of
               the CPS noted (World Bank 2016, 4) that the nature of Djibouti’s increasing economic growth—capital-
               intensive and public-sector-led—did not provide employment for unskilled workers or reduce poverty.
               Extreme poverty and food insecurity in Djibouti’s total population remained high (20 percent) with significant
               variation by location (44 percent in rural areas). The project’s revised objectives statement was fully aligned
               with the adjusted CPS outlined in the PLR that focused on promoting a national vision for social protection,
               creating and implementing a social registry to improve service delivery and to coordinate delivery of multiple
               social assistance programs, and laying the foundation for a national cash transfer program (World Bank
               2016, p. 11). The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) identified Djibouti’s low human capital outcomes as
               a barrier to economic transformation. The SCD highlighted the importance of transforming human capital,
               especially improving child nutrition and growth, and the importance of multisectoral approaches to reduce
               stunting and combining nutrition-specific interventions with nutrition-sensitive interventions (World Bank
               2018, p. 5), which is the project's underlying design.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support the provision of short-term employment opportunities in community-based labor-intensive works for
                             the poor and vulnerable (original objective) / Support a social safety net system for access to short-term
                             employment for the poor and vulnerable (revised objective)

                             Rationale
                             The project was to provide poor and vulnerable households with immediate relief through a temporary
                             increase in household income. The cash-for-work program was meant to address households’ immediate
                             needs due to a rise in food prices caused a recent drought, to reduce food insecurity, to smooth consumption
                             over time, and to improve the communities’ environments. The work program targeted improvements in the
                             households' communities. Community work priorities were chosen through a participatory approach. Skills

                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



training was also provided based on the assumption that it would create more employment opportunities for
participants. On-the-job skills training was primarily related to handicrafts. Shortcomings in the theory of
change were the lack of strong arrangements to ensure a market for the goods produced and the low quality
of the handicrafts produced. This did not affect short-term employment generation or the emergency income
assistance but the project missed the opportunity to provide sustainable income generation.



Outputs

        671,820 person days of labor-intensive community work was provided to able-bodied members of
         poor and vulnerable households, exceeding the target of 600,000.
        631,626,820 Djiboutian Francs (DJF) were paid to beneficiaries (cash-for-work compensation),
         exceeding the target of 570,000,000 DJF.
        2,500 beneficiaries were trained in work-related skills or entrepreneurship, such as basic construction
         techniques and crafts or savings groups and microfinance, exceeding the target of 2,000.



Outcomes

The ICR reported interim results from an impact evaluation (page 15 and 41) of the cash-for-work program.
The results suggest that:

        the cash-for-work program had a significant short-term effect on the income of participating
         households (increased short-term household income by 40 percent); and
        the program had a significant effect on the employment of women and increased female labor force
         participation from 21 to 75 percent, with no intra-household substitution effect of labor supply.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support the improvement of nutrition practices among participating households focusing on pre-school
children and pregnant/lactating women (original objective) / Support a social safety net system for improved
nutrition practices (revised objective)

Rationale
The underlying assumption was that nutrition sessions would foster good-practice nutrition behaviors, and the
knowledge gained would ensure that the cash transfer was allocated to goods and services related to
improved nutrition. The project provided information, training, and sensitization programs to pregnant women
and mothers of infants to improve their awareness of good nutrition and care practices and, ultimately, to
change households’ behaviors with respect to nutrition, nutrition-related, and health-related practices. The


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



project provided tailored sessions and messages on prenatal care and nutrition to promote good nutrition,
health, and hygiene behaviors. The ICR (p. 17) reported that a behavioral approach was used. Along with
health facilitators, the project relied on a network of mère conseillères, women respected in their
communities, to deliver nutrition and health messages and information to beneficiary women, such as the
benefits of diversified diets; how to prepare meals; the need for prenatal care and nutritional supplements for
pregnant women; counseling mothers on breastfeeding, vaccination, deworming, and hygiene; measuring
children’s height and weight; what constitutes a severely underweight child; and when to go to a health
center.

Two shortcomings in the project’s theory of change are of note: (i) its focus on demand-side barriers to
nutrition with insufficient attention to supply-side constraints, such as limited health facilities or health
practitioners, and (ii) underestimating the constraints of collecting and reporting data from nutrition sessions.
A missed opportunity was the lack of stimulation activities during nutrition sessions.



Outputs

      Nutrition modules and materials to help women gain nutrition knowledge were designed, meeting the
       target.
      7,370 nutrition sessions were organized (no target provided).
      61 percent of nutrition sessions were entered into the management information system, falling short of
       the 80 percent target.
      23,110 pregnant or lactating women, adolescent girls, and children under the age of five were reached
       by basic nutrition services, exceeding the 15,000 target.
      168,483 nutritional supplement packets were provided to children under five years of age (Plumpy-
       Doz) (no target provided).
      22,040 micronutrient packets were distributed (no target provided).



Outcomes

The data suggest improved knowledge of good nutritional practices among participating women.

      70.1 percent of pregnant and/or nursing women have a diversified diet, an increase from 23.3 percent
       at baseline in 2013, and exceeding the 60 percent target.
      71 percent of children aged 6-24 months have a diversified diet, an increase from 32.1 percent at
       baseline in 2013, and exceeding the target of 55 percent.
      51 percent of women who participated in nutrition sessions exclusively breastfed for the first six
       months, an increase from 14.7 percent at baseline in 2013, and exceeding the target of 40 percent.
      83.2 percent of mothers who participated in nutrition sessions had at least three prenatal consultations
       during their last pregnancy, an increase from 78 percent at baseline in 2013, and falling short of the
       original target of 90 percent and the revised target of 85 percent.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



Note that these results reflect information from only 61 percent of the 7,370 nutrition sessions organized, and
missing data are primarily from poorer, more rural areas.

To compensate for these data limitations, the ICR (p. 15) reported interim results from an impact evaluation.
The results suggest that among nutrition program participants there were “considerable” differences in
behaviors, such as:

      the proportion of women’s youngest children eating a diversified diet was higher (76.3 percent versus
         69.4 percent) and this effect persisted in the medium term, suggesting that mothers and caregivers
         sustained the practices promoted by the project;
        the proportion of infants exclusively breastfed (0-six months) was higher;
        the proportion of children eating diverse foods (dietary diversity) was higher;
        the proportion of mothers eating diverse foods (dietary diversity) was higher; and
        the proportion of pregnant women attending three or four pre-natal consultations was higher.

There is a risk that some of the nutrition outcomes will not be sustained, particularly those that depended on
the short-term income gains. The impact evaluation found only a short-term income effect on dietary diversity
for children under five (see below), although the effect for the youngest child in a household persisted in the
medium term



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support a social safety net system for improved targeting (revised objective), sustaining the original
objectives' focus on "the poor and vulnerable" and "pre-school children and pregnant/lactating women"

Rationale
The theory of change assumed that support for information technology and technical assistance would lead to
institutional strengthening and therefore capacity for improved program targeting. Support for improved
targeting helped ensure that the poor and vulnerable received project support.



Outputs

      The capacity of the State Secretariat for Social Affairs (Secrétariat d’Etat chargé des Affaires Sociales,
       SEAS) to identify and target beneficiaries and to design and implement a national safety net program
       was strengthened, meeting the target.
      A proxy-means test that estimates a poverty score for every household was developed (in lieu of a
       household survey, no household income data exist), meeting the target.
      The information technology infrastructure needed for the social registry was developed, meeting the
       target.

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)




                                  A social registry, which included biometric information on individuals to ensure proper verification and
                                   to avoid duplication of benefits, was developed, meeting the target.
                                  62,752 households were registered in the social registry with a unique household identity number
                                   (administered the proxy-means test questionnaire to 62,752 households), exceeding the 20,000
                                   target.
                                  126,741 individuals were registered in the social registry with a unique social identification number,
                                   exceeding the target of 100,000.



                            Intermediate Outcomes

                                  11,484 individuals benefited from the safety net programs, exceeding the target of 8,000.
                                  10,800 women benefited from the safety net programs, exceeding the target of 5,000.
                                  23,110 pregnant women, lactating women, adolescent girls, and/or children under the age of five were
                                   reached by basic nutrition services, exceeding the target of 15,000.
                                  73.3 percent of the of the workfare program beneficiaries were poor (below the 40.8 percent poverty
                                   line), exceeding the target of 65 percent.
                                  Nine government programs use the social registry to target beneficiaries.



                            There were no outcomes associated with this objective. Improved targeting is a necessary input to achieving
                            higher-level outcomes (changes in behavior), such as improved nutrition practices. Output and intermediate
                            outcome data were provided in numbers and percentages. Although Djibouti is a small country, , it would
                            have been useful to understand what percentage of Djibouti’s poor and vulnerable benefitted from this
                            project.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project exceeded output and intermediate outcome targets for provision of short-term labor opportunities
                            and improved nutrition practices, and interim results from an impact evaluation indicate high achievement of
                            outcomes. Project targets were exceeded for the objective to improve program targeting, but the indicators
                            did not provide information on coverage. Given minor shortcomings in achievement of two of the three
                            objectives, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
There was no economic analysis conducted at appraisal due to the accelerated preparation of the emergency
project (in line with OP/BP 8.00—Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) as well as limited and unreliable
socioeconomic data. Both the Emergency Project Paper (p. 44) and ICR (p. 19) suggested four potential
economic returns from the project: (i) increased income for beneficiary households participating in the cash-for-
work program; (ii) increased beneficiary households’ future earning potential through expanded employment
opportunities; (iii) improved health and nutrition if beneficiary households’ incomes increase (no substitution
effect) and expenditures on food (a normal good) increase combined with improved dietary diversity, nutritional
supplements, and preventive health care; and (iv) improved targeting and accountability of government social
assistance expenditures due to support for the social registry.

There is an abundance of research that suggests successful efforts to preserve human capital are cost-effective
and have high economic rates of return (Emergency Project Paper 2012, p. 7). Evidence from the interim impact
evaluation combined with the cross-disciplinary evidence base on the high private and social rates of returns
and cost-effectiveness of investments in pregnant women and young children’s health and nutrition—the first
1,000 days—suggest the project was cost-effective.

The project's implementing agency, ADDS, had the capacity to manage the financial reporting, procurement
policies, and safeguards policies related to World Bank-financed projects. ADDS was the implementing agency
for the predecessor pilot Employment and Human Capital Safety Net project (2010-2014, US$3.64 million,
financed by the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF)), and the same implementation arrangements were
used to implement this project. The knowledge, capacity, and lessons learned increased implementation
efficiency in this project. For example, both the SEAS and ADDS had sufficient capacity manage the project's
activities and the ability to manage and correct implementation bottlenecks on an ongoing basis (ICR, p. 5).
Implementation efficiency was also enhanced through continuous technical support to enhance implementation
capacity, including technical assistance and training for high-level government officials, to build support for the
intersectoral coordination and collaboration required in early nutrition interventions (ICR, p. 22).

The social registry provided benefits that extended beyond this project. Improved targeting based on the newly
created social registry is being used for nine government programs, including the universal health care program,
the provision of social housing, the provision of micro-finance, and the national cash transfer program.

Moderate shortcomings in efficiency included: (i) skills training for beneficiaries of the workfare program was
costly to implement and was significantly delayed; (ii) income generation was unsustainable given the lack of
strong arrangements to ensure a market for the goods produced and the low quality of the handicrafts produced;
and (iii) delays in disbursing funds for the cash-for-work and nutrition-based social assistance programs due to
implementation delays in the JSDF.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the project objectives is rated high. Achievement of the objective to increase access to short-term
employment for the poor and vulnerable is rated high. The objective to improve nutrition practices is rated
substantial. The objective to improve targeting is rated substantial given the lack of outcome indicators, an
explanation of how targeting would help lead to changes in behaviors, or the percent of the target population
covered by the project. Overall efficacy is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated substantial. These ratings
indicate that there were no meaningful shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, resulting in
an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project produced sustainable outcomes, including a cost-effective targeting mechanism and a social
registry. The social registry provided benefits that extended beyond this project. Improved targeting based on
the newly created social registry is being used for nine government programs (see Section 5).The project
supported systems and capacity building that led to the government’s national safety net program, which was
rolled out in 2017 is being supported by both the International Development Agency and the European
Union. Evidence from the impact evaluation suggests medium-term impacts for the youngest children of
participating mothers; the follow-on project continues to support sustainable outcomes through behavior
change. The project missed the opportunity to provide sustainable income generation through the workfare
program, which could impact the ability to maintain key nutritional activities, such as the ability to purchase
nutritionally diverse foods.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared under OP/BP 8.00 Guidelines with no exceptions to World Bank policies. It was
  an ambitious project for an emergency operation, including both emergency and development elements
  in its design. The project's design--and therefore, its theory of change--was based on a pilot project (the
  Employment and Human Capital Safety Net Project, 2010-2014, financed through a grant by JSDF).The
  World Bank team built on its dialogue with the government and the conceptualized pilot project which
  included the social registry (with biometric data), a new targeting mechanism, and social assistance that
  combined public works with nutrition sessions. The World Bank team provided pragmatic support to the
  government of Djibouti by including the public works component, which provided the government and
  communities with tangible and needed outputs (community civil works chosen through a participatory
  approach, such as rehabilitating roads, paving footpaths, building pedestrian bridges, garbage collection).
  It also provided a way to distribute money up-front while the systems for a more comprehensive safety
  net system were being built (e.g., the social registry). The project was originally designed as a short,
  small project that leveraged nutrition sessions to change critical behaviors associated with malnutrition,
  well-known and evidence-based techniques targeting the first 1,000 days. The design of the emergency
  project provided an easy transition to a longer-term approach to social protection. The World Bank's
  technical assistance supported the government's new national social protection strategy, the roll-out of
  the national safety net program (cash transfer program), and the move to a more comprehensive human
  capital approach in the follow-on project. There remained, however, the minor shortcomings noted
  earlier in monitoring and evaluation and the theory of change.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank task team provided continuous technical assistance through regular supervision
 missions, just-in-time assistance, continuous dialogue, and system strengthening. The team identified
 issues with monitoring and evaluation and proactively provided solutions (see Section 9).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


a. M&E Design


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



 There were moderate shortcomings in M&E design. Foremost, M&E design was information and
 communication technology-based and relied on local nongovernmental organizations for implementation.
 Overall, the project’s M&E design was not aligned with the capacity of the country.

 The results framework had several shortcomings. For example: (i) the theory of change for the workfare
 component was poorly articulated, with no output or outcome indicator to determine if the immediate social
 assistance achieved its implicit objective of smoothing household consumption and reducing food insecurity
 and did not capture any data on public works, such as how subprojects improved the welfare of
 communities; (ii) several output and outcome indicators for the nutrition objective were not well defined,
 making measurement difficult; and (iii) the results framework for the restated objective to “improve
 targeting” was not linked to higher-order outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E design relied on local nongovernmental organizations for implementation. There were significant
  challenges and delays in the collection of anthropometric data given limited local capacity and
  technological barriers to smartphone data collection. Paper reporting was often used even with
  modifications that allowed off-line data entry (given weak or non-existent internet connections). As the
  project expanded its scope into more rural and remote areas, these limitations led to the low capture of
  nutrition session data.

  The shortcomings in M&E and the results framework were somewhat mitigated by the redefining of
  indicators (at restructuring); conducting separate, supplemental and representative surveys to collect
  data on key indicators, such as dietary diversity and exclusive breastfeeding (Task Team Leader
  interview, June 23, 2020); and adding an impact evaluation to assess the project’s impact (as reported in
  the efficacy section).



c. M&E Utilization
  The impact evaluation provided the government with evidence of the project’s effectiveness. It found
  significant and positive differences in behaviors between project participants and non-participants,
  behaviors that are critical to good nutrition, such as hygiene, dietary diversification, and prenatal
  consultations.

  The social registry, which includes socioeconomic, demographic, and biometric data, is being used by
  several government programs including its COVID-19 response (TTL interview, June 23, 2020).

  The project's M&E design and implementation contained significant shortcomings, but the proactive
  measures by the project team to collect additional data (using surveys) and to conduct an impact
  evaluation sufficiently compensated to merit an overall M&E rating of Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environment. The ICR (page 26) reported that the project complied with the World Bank's environmental
   safeguard requirements. The project was classified as Category B (partial assessment) given that it
   financed subprojects for small-scale, community-based civil works. OP/BP 4.01 (environmental
   assessment) was triggered, and an Environmental and Social Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
   was prepared. The ESSAF was updated at restructuring to cover the additional geographic areas impacted
   by the project and new subprojects in the catalogue. Triggers, categories, and all other safeguard issues
   remained unchanged.

   Social. The ICR (page 26) reported that the project complied with World Bank social safeguard
   policies. The updated ESSAF also reinforced social safeguards. The public works supported by the project
   were implemented on public land, and therefore there was no Involuntary land acquisition or involuntary
   resettlement, or loss of habitat or access to legally designated parks and protected areas. The ICR (p. 26)
   did note that the availability of first aid kits on project sites was not in compliance with the safeguard
   policies, and there were issues with the preparation of environmental and social management plans for the
   sites, but these issues were dealt with in a timely manner.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial. The ICR reported no fiduciary issues. The implementing agency was familiar with World Bank
   procedures. The project used the same implementing agency (ADDS) and the same implementation
   framework as the pilot project. Financial management was rated satisfactory at appraisal, but financial risk
   was rated substantial. The second additional financing reported delays in financial reporting, system
   customization, procurement, and contract management as well as issues in record keeping (ICR, p. 22).
   The ICR reported that the required Interim Financial Reports and the annual project financial statements
   were prepared and submitted in a timely manner in compliance with World Bank guidelines.

   Procurement. Procurement capacity was strengthened during project implementation, which included
   hiring consultants. Procurement was effectively managed given prior experience and the additional
   capacity. There were minor issues with procurement processing delays, but these were resolved quickly.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project contributed to improvement in the welfare and empowerment of women in Djibouti. The cash
   for work program was tailored to the specific circumstances of women (for example, practical
   accommodations, such as work hours and work activities targeting women (e.g., street cleaning and
   handicrafts)). These adaptations likely contributed to the predominantly female beneficiary populations—94
   percent of beneficiaries of the safety nets programs were women (10,800 beneficiaries). The project also
   promoted positive attitudes to women participating in public works; agency, voice, and empowerment were
   increased through participation in household and community decision-making and bank accounts. The ICR


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)



   (p. 20) reported that a process evaluation found that 96 percent of the women were empowered to decide
   how to spend the money they earned, and the majority of it invested in child nutrition and health.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 M&E arrangements outside the
                                                                                 project's M&E framework
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Substantial                mitigated the shortcomings in
                                                                                 the project's M&E design and
                                                                                 implementation.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The lessons learned are drawn from the ICR and adapted by IEG.

      It is possible to design and implement an ambitious project in the context of crises, bridging
       the gap between short-term emergency assistance and longer-term development. The
       project was designed under the IDA Crisis Response Window but contained both emergency
       and development aspects. Activities combined a short-term, quick response to a drought to
       prevent the loss of human life and to preserve human capital with medium-term activities
       targeting sustainable changes in nutritional practices through behavior change. Project
       activities also laid the foundation for providing a well-targeted national safety net system.
      Community-based nutrition promotion can be a powerful instrument to help improve health
       and nutrition practices. This community approach combined targeted communication, leader
       role models (mère conseillères), and positive reinforcement of good behaviors by bringing
       mothers in a community together through peer-to-peer interactions. The sessions provided
       tailored instruction on pre-natal care and for mothers with children under two years of age
       (up to the age of five years in rural areas). The sessions provided a platform to detect
       potential stunting of participating children and to provide a home visit for more individualized
       counseling and a referral to a health clinic if necessary.
      Targeting demand-side changes in behavior requires sufficient supply-side services.
       Inadequate or missing health facilities or services can constrain up-take of positive behavior
       changes. Needed investments on the supply-side include those in education, health, and
       water and sanitation.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Crisis Response-SSN project (P130328)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The project was innovative and produced quick results. It was the first social protection project in Djibouti,
  an emergency response with developmental aspects, and it laid the foundation for roll-out of a national cash
  transfer program.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR focused on outcomes but missed the opportunity to highlight that the objectives were primarily pitched
at the output level and that the overall theory of change linked these outputs—in particular, improved
targeting—to improving the nutritional practices of poor and vulnerable households. Analysis of attribution was
adequate and triangulated with results from an impact evaluation. The ICR was candid in reporting “what
worked” and “what didn’t work” during design and implementation. The outcome rating reported in the ICR was
not correctly derived from the constituent ratings (it focused on achievement of objectives – efficacy – and did
not mention relevance or efficiency). The lessons were evidence-based and reflected in the text of the ICR.
Overall, the ICR is well written and well organized, though there were duplications, including in the lessons.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
