     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022207

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P154149                                    Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vanuatu                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56320,IDA-59440,IDA-D1610,TF-          31-Dec-2019                                         73,755,571.71
 A0607

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 08-May-2015                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            59,800,000.00                                      300,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             73,900,000.00                                      300,000.00

 Actual                                         73,755,571.71                                      300,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Ramachandra Jammi            Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4):

   "To improve the operational safety and oversight of international air transport and associated
   infrastructure".


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was the third phase of the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP). The first
   phase, included Kiribati, Tonga and Tuvalu. The second phase, included Samoa, and reform of the Pacific
   Aviation Safety Program (PASO) in Vanuatu. This project had five components (PAD, pages 5 - 7).

   1. International Airport Infrastructure Investments. The estimated cost at appraisal (including
   contingencies and taxes) was US$44.1 million. The revised estimate with AF was US$64.5 million. The
   actual cost was slightly more at US$65.8 million.

   This component planned to finance international aviation infrastructure investments to meet International
   Civil Aviation Organization's (ICAO) safety and security standards in the three international airports
   (Bauerfield, Pekoa and Whitegrass). Activities in this component included: (i) rehabilitation of airport
   runway, apron and taxiway pavements at Bauerfield: (ii) extension of the apron area at Bauerfield: (iii)
   construction of new taxiways and widening the existing taxiway at Bauerfield: (iv) upgrading the airport
   runway lighting and cabling at Bauerfield, Pekoa and Whitegrass, and approach lighting at Bauerfield: (v)
   construction of a new domestic terminal, and demolition of the existing domestic terminal at Bauerfield: (vi)
   provision of air traffic control equipment at Bauerfield and Pekoa: (vi) provision of air traffic control
   equipment at Bauerfield and Pekoa: (vii) installation of aviation navigation kits: (viii) installation of weather
   monitoring equipment at Bauerfield and Whitegrass: (ix) upgrading the communications equipment and
   systems: (x) installation of ' Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) communications systems in the airports:
   (xi) provision of equipment for improved power supply for Bauerfield and Whitegrass: (xii) upgrading the fire
   safety equipment at Bauerfield and Whitegrass: (xiii) providing safety and security equipment for passenger
   baggage and cargo screening: and (xiv) providing design and supervision consulting services.

   Following an updated pavement investigation to revaluate the extent of damage after Cyclone Pam in
   March 2015, the scope of this component was expanded with AF. These activities were added: (i) The
   scope of pavement works was to be increased in the three airports: (ii) The operational capacity
   of Bauerfield was to be increased to receive larger jets: (iii) The existing apron at Bauerfield was to be
   expanded to accommodate larger aircrafts: and (iv) The activity of relocating the domestic terminal at
   Bauerfield airport was cancelled, in view of the government's decision to build a new terminal, and the need
   for more investments for pavement rehabilitation at the Pekoa and Whitegrass airports.

   2. Aviation Sector Reform and Training. The estimated cost at appraisal (including contingencies and
   taxes) was US$1.0 million. The revised estimate with AF was US$1.5 million. The actual cost was US$0.8
   million.

   This component planned to strengthen the capacities of the Civil Aviation Authority of Vanuatu (CAAV), the
   Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities (MIPU), and other line ministries. Activities in this component
   included: (I) developing an aviation sector strategy: (ii) providing advisory services to CAAV for updating

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



  the sector legislative framework, the national and international regulatory standards for the sector,
  and implementing the sector strategy: (iii) providing advisory services for the MIPU to
  manage oversight: and, (iv) capacity building training.

  3. Strengthening of Airport Operations and Management Capacity. The estimated cost at appraisal
  (including contingencies and taxes) was US$0.9 million. The revised estimate with AF was US$1.1
  million. The actual cost was US$0.5 million.

  This component planned to strengthen the capacity of Airport Vanuatu Limited (AVL). Activities in this
  component included: (i) developing an Airport Master Plan: (ii) Technical Assistance (TA) to
  improve planning, financial viability, and safety of airport operations: and (iii) training on aviation policy,
  operations and management.

  4. Emergency Reconstruction. The estimated cost at appraisal (including contingencies and taxes) was
  US$3.7 million. The revised estimate with AF was US$3.8 million, The actual cost was US$3.4 million.

  During preparation of this project, cyclone PAM devastated Vanuatu in March 2015, and the three
  international airports were affected. In 2016, key international airlines announced flight cessation at
  Bauerfield airport over runway safety concerns. This component planned to support the government
  with emergency reconstruction activities.

  5. Project Support. The estimated cost at appraisal (including contingencies and taxes) was
  US$2.1 million. The revised estimate with AF was US$2.8 million. The actual cost was US$2.7 million.

  This component planned to provide project management support. Activities in this component included:
  (i) management support to the Vanuatu Project Management Unit(VPMU) and the AVL: (ii) costs for the
  support services provided by the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP) to the VPMU and AVL: (iii)
  incremental operating costs of the PMU and TSFU: and (iv) support for financial audits.

  The scope of this component was increased with AF to provide additional support to the VPMU for
  implementing the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$59.8 million. With AF, the revised estimate
  was US$73.9 million. The actual cost was US$73.5 million.

  Project financing. The project was funded by an IDA credit of US$59.5 million. AF of US$14.1 was
  approved. With this, the total IDA credit for the project was US$73.6 million. The amount disbursed at
  closure of the IDA credit was US$73.4 million.

  The Government of Australia, through the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) Multi-donor Trust
  Fund was to provide co financing of US$0.3 million at appraisal. This amount was fully disbursed when the
  project closed.

  Borrower contribution. No borrower contribution was planned at appraisal. There was no borrower
  contribution during implementation.


                                                                                                         Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



   Dates. The project approved on May 8, 2015, became effective on June 3, 2015. AF was approved on
   January 10, 2017. The project closed as originally scheduled on December 31, 2019.

   Other changes. The following changes were made through a Level 2 restructuring on January 10, 2017,
   following the approval of AF.

         As discussed in section 2d, the scope of component activities was expanded significantly.
         The results framework was modified, and intermediate indications were added, in view of the
          expanded project scope.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. The Republic of Vanuatu, with 80 islands, is a small nation in South Pacific. Given its
geographical location and distance from key export markets, Vanuatu's economy is dependent on
tourism (with about a quarter of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) coming from tourism-related activities),
and remittances from workers employed abroad (accounting for 3.5% of the GDP). Vanuatu is also highly
vulnerable to natural disaster risks, with an average 7% annual losses to GDP due to climate related risks
and natural disasters.

Sector context. The aviation sector is vital to Vanuatu's economic development, by providing regional and
international connectivity. Carrying over half of the international visitors to Vanuatu, aviation service is a
prerequisite for the tourism sector. The sector, besides being essential to migrant workers, is also an
indispensable lifeline for international human relief campaigns. At appraisal, the three international airports
suffered from various infrastructure asset failures. Bauerfield, the main international gateway airport, was
operating with significant cracking, and immediate risk of complete runway pavement failure. The
situation was exacerbated by Cyclone Pam in March 2015, which led to actual flight suspensions from Air
Zealand, and Virgin Australia in early 2016. Given that, withdrawal of air services would not only have a
critical impact on GDP through the tourism sector, but also on the overall economic recovery in the
aftermath of Cyclone Pam, the PDOs were highly relevant to the government strategy.

Government strategy. The government strategy articulated in the Priorities and Action Agenda for 2006 -
2015 identified, safe and secure domestic and international operations as a priority. The PDO was also well
aligned with the government's vision articulated in Vanuatu 2030, the National Development Plan for 2016-
2030, and the Vanuatu Infrastructure Strategic Investment Plan for 2015-2024. Vanuatu 2030 clearly stated
the need for improving infrastructure quality, strengthening links between tourism and infrastructure, and
ensuring compliance with international conventions and standards for safe and secure transport. The
National Development Plan, Vanuatu's highest-level policy framework, stated the mission of building
reliable infrastructure for people and businesses. The Infrastructure Strategic Investment plan highlighted
the need for "ensuring adequate maintenance and upgrading of existing domestic airports and airstrips. The
PDOs were also well-aligned with the overall objective of the regional Pacific Aviation Investment Program.

Bank Strategy. The PDOs were well aligned with the Bank's Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for
the nine Pacific Island Countries (PICs), including Vanuatu. The fourth focus area of the RPF specifically


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



               identifies the need for strengthening the enablers of growth and opportunities, through investments in
               connective infrastructure.

               This project was the largest single donor financed in Vanuatu at the time of approval, although the Bank
               had financed a Port Vila Urban Development Project and an education project in Vanuatu. This project
               became effective at a crucial time, when the targeted airports were severely damaged by Cyclone Pam in
               2015, and faced a high risk of cessation of international flights. The rehabilitation of the international
               airports was urgently needed for restoring international visitors confidence and reviving the tourism sector,
               a major source of GDP for Vanuatu. The aviation investments in the airports were vital for the post-disaster
               response to Cyclone Harold, a category five hurricane, that affected Vanuatu in 2020. The disaster
               particularly hit the central islands of Vanuatu, including the Pekoa island. Owing to the upgrade under the
               project, the runways at Pekoa airport, and the other two international islands remained intact, and the
               airports proved critical for the humanitarian aid delivery to Vanuatu. Although challenging in the country
               context, the level of ambition was deemed to be appropriate, and the relevance of PDO is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To improve the operational safety of international air transport and associated infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The theory of change was sound, and the links between project activities, outputs, and
                             outcomes were logical. Rehabilitating the runways, taxiways and aprons of the international airports, installing
                             navigation aids and other key communication equipment, and upgrading the airport's rescue and fire fighting
                             equipment, would lead to improved operational safety of air transport. There was a reasonable cause and
                             effect chain for the project, and there was the distinct possibility that without the project, international flight
                             operations would be suspended, with a detrimental impact on the tourism sector in Vanuatu.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 12 -16, and pages 36-37).

                                        The runway at Bauerfield airport was rehabilitated, in accordance with the physical
                                          characteristics required by the Vanuatu Civil Aviation Rules and the International Civil Aviation
                                          Organization (ICAO) standards, as targeted. The apron, runway, taxiways at the airport were
                                          upgraded to receive larger aircraft.




                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)




      A new Airport Ground Lighting (AGL) system was installed at Bauerfield as targeted, to provide safe
         visual aids to aircraft operations. (The ICR (paragraph 28) notes that the aircraft lighting system at the
         airport had been completely damaged by Cyclone Pam).
        A fire tender shelter was constructed at Bauerfield, and the fire crew were trained as targeted.
        Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (AD -B) ground station was installed at Bauerfield.
        Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) communication systems were procured for Bauerfield, but not
         yet installed at closure (due to the international travel restrictions owing to COVID - 19). The ICR
         notes that the systems are expected to be installed by the end of 2020.
        The activity associated with the critical navigation aids package to support ground voice
         communications and radio navigation services, was not completed at Bauerfield when the project
         closed, due to a shortfall in project financing. The ICR (paragraph 33) notes that the government has
         allocated a budget, approved by parliament in July 2019, for completing this activity. This activity is to
         be completed by the end of 2020.
        Aircraft pavement surfaces (including the runway, a single taxiway and the apron), at the Pekoa and
         Whitegrass airports were rehabilitated, as targeted.
        Two staff houses that were severely damaged at the Whitegrass airport were demolished, and new
         houses were built for staff safety, as targeted. The aircraft and fire fighting operations were installed at
         the airport.
        Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS -B) ground stations were installed at the Pekoa
         airport.

Outcomes

      The Bauerfield international airport renewed its status as a Civil Aviation Authority Vanutau (CAAV)
       certified airport in May 2019. According to the inspection carried by CAAV, with support from the
       Pacific Aviation Safety Office (PASO), the aerodrome design and operations at the airport were
       compliant with the safety and security standards of the Vanuatu Civil Aviation rules, and applicable
       portions of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
      The ICR (paragraph 54) notes that the number of international visitors by air increased by 17%
       between 2013 and 2015 (from 90,000 in 2013, to 109,500 in 2015), following the suspensions of
       flights by Air Zealand, Qantas and Virgin Australia after cyclone Pam. With emergency repairs under
       the project, the international air traffic increased over the following years and recovered to the 2014
       level, by the end of 2017. By the end of the project in 2019, the number of international passengers
       through the international airports had increased to 120,500 .

Given that the outcomes were realized with the Bauerfield international airport receiving its certification and
growth in traffic of international passengers, and that most of the activities had been completed when the
project closed, efficacy of this PDO is substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)




Objective

To improve the oversight of international air transport and associated infrastructure.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change for this objective was based on the premise that to improve
oversight, capacity building of the relevant aviation agencies was required. Capacity building of the Airport
Vanuatu Limited (AVL, the enterprise managing Vanuatu's international airports) for developing airport
management plans, capacity building of the Civil Aviation Authority Vanuatu (CAAV), and technical
assistance to the AVU and CAAV for setting up a process for safety and security levy collection from
international passengers, were likely to improve oversight of the aviation sector. The links between project
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. These activities, in combination with the activities described
above, were likely to aid in the long-term development outcome of developing the tourism sector.

Outputs

      Training was provided to the CAAV for rewriting aerodrome manuals in accordance with ICAO
       standards.
      Technical assistance was provided by the Pacific Aviation Safety Office (PASO) inspectors to assist
       CAAV to renew Vanuatu's air operator certification.
      Airport master plans were completed for the three international airports as targeted. The plans
       included a twenty- year airport strategic development plan, a ten-year prioritized investment plan, and
       recommendations on financing options and implementation schedules.

Outcomes

      The aviation sector strategy (providing practical recommendations for future policy development and
       sector reforms), developed under the project, was endorsed by the government.
      Starting from September 1, 2017, the government started collecting a regional safety and security levy
       of five Australian dollars from departing passengers. As per law, CAAV and AVL must use the
       revenue solely for improving aviation safety and security.
      The oversight capacity of CAAV was to be measured by a third-party audit of the ICAO Universal
       Safety Oversight Audit Program (USOAP). The baseline for this indicator was from the USOAP audit
       conducted for Vanuatu in 2016, which resulted in an average implementation score of 49.24, far below
       the global average of 58.62. The ICR notes that there was no USOAP audit when the project closed,
       and hence no audit result to compare against the baseline. At the same time, the ICR captured the
       related progress under applicable audit areas.

This review concludes that the project had no control over the USOAP audit, and in view of the activities
delivered as planned and the outcomes achieved related to improving the oversight, the efficacy of this PDO
is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given that most of the outcomes were realized, overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost- benefit analysis was used to calculate the economic returns of the project
   activities. These activities accounted for 89% of the appraisal estimate and 90% of the actual cost. Without the
   project, the condition of the runways at the international airports would have resulted in more cessation of
   international air services through the airports. This assumption was realistic, given the actual flight suspensions
   from Air Zealand, Qantas, and Virgin Australia in early 2016, in the wake of Cyclone Pam. The economic
   benefits of the project were assumed to come from: (i) avoided operational accidents, caused by the
   deterioration of the runways and other safety and security risks at the airports: (ii) minimized GDP losses from
   tourism and travel related activities: and (iii) avoided runway repair costs from frequent condition failures. The
   Net Present Value (NPV) at 10% discount rate at closure was US$28.3 million, as compared to the NPV of
   US$12.0 million at appraisal. The ex post EIRR at 84.7% was marginally lower than the ex ante EIRR of 85.2%.

   Administrative and operational issues. As an emergency project, the project was prepared within four
   months, and the project design was made possible through leveraging the existing technical capacity and design
   features from other Pacific Aviation Investment Program. The costs were underestimated, due to the lack of
   comparable contract awarded in Vanuatu that could serve as a benchmark for the cost estimates. There were
   implementation delays following the change in project scope to receive larger air crafts at Bauerfield, at
   government request. The financing shortfall of US$6.0 million, contributed to the non-completion of the activity
   associated with the installation of navigation aids at Bauerfield airport. This activity was to be completed by the
   government budget. With the exception of this activity, all other activities were completed, and the project closed
   as scheduled.

   In sum, efficiency is rated as substantial, given the economic justification for the project and minimal
   administrative shortcomings during implementation.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)




                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      89.00
Appraisal                                                   84.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      90.00
ICR Estimate                                                85.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies for Vanuatu is High. Efficacy of the two
objectives is substantial, given that most of the outcomes were realized. Efficiency is substantial, in view of the
economic justification for the project. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Natural disaster risk and risks associated with exposure to pandemic. There are risks to ongoing
project benefits, due to the after effects of Cyclone Harold, a cyclone five hurricane that struck Vanuatu in
2020, and the global pandemic of COVID - 19, due to the following reasons: (i) The already allocated
government budget for the navigation aids package might be diverted for other purposes, such as for COVID
-19 and responding to Cyclone Harold: (ii) The safety and security levy could shrink due to the decline of
international travel. This could undermine CAAV's capacity to respond to aviation safety oversight: and (iii)
There is a risk that the reduced air traffic will have an adverse impact on the revenue raised by Airport
Vanuatu Limited's (AVL) by way of landing fees, to fund maintenance activities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation drew on the experiences from the first and second phase of the regional PAIP. As an
  emergency operation, the project was prepared within four months and the project became effective a
  month after approval. At appraisal, the preparation team mobilized US$1 million from the Bank's Project
  Preparation Facility (PPF), to support activities at the Bauerfield Airport, and the design included
  retroactive financing of up to US$10.0 million, to cover the cost of technical and fiduciary services until
  project effectiveness (PAD, paragraph 32). The Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities (MIPU) was
  overall in charge of implementation, and the Vanuatu Project Management Unit (VPMU) for fiduciary
  management and M&E. The arrangements were appropriate, as VPMU had experience with other donor-


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



  funded projects. Several risks were identified at appraisal, including risks associated with political and
  governance risks, weak institutional capacity and stakeholder risk. Mitigation measures incorporated at
  design, included representing all stakeholders through the VPMU, and technical assistance to the
  relevant agencies. Even with mitigation measures, project risk was rated as high at appraisal (PAD, page
  11). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance
  (discussed in section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings at quality at entry. One, the costs were underestimated, mainly due to
  lack of comparable costs in Vanuatu before the project. As a result, the preparation team had to come
  with the best possible estimate, using prices from previous PAIP projects; and two, there were
  shortcomings in M&E design, due mainly to the requirement of the regional IDA program (discussed in
  section 10a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Fourteen supervision missions were conducted during the lifetime of the project, representing three to four
 full-fledged missions until the middle of 2018. The ICR (paragraph 102) reports that the number of missions
 reduced, after the resident Task Team Leader (TTL) was deployed to Vanuatu. This presence of the TTL in
 country aided in providing more accessible technical support on site. The proactive support provided by the
 supervision team aided in resolving issues during implementation (such as, preparing an expedited
 emergency works program to repair the Bauerfield airport in less than three months, providing technical
 inputs to help the government to understand the cost and technical implications of changing work scope at
 Bauerfield, and providing advisory services during implementation). The Mid Term Review held in February
 2018, aided in identifying issues, particularly relating to the financing gap. The support provided by the
 team aided in procurement compliance (discussed in section 10b).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 This project was part of the Pacific Aviation Investment Program, and the M&E design was harmonized
 across the program. This approach was expected to provide comparable measurement across all
 projects. The Vanuatu Project Management Unit (VPMU) was to be in charge of collecting data for


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



 monitoring, with assistance from the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) of the Pacific Aviation
 Investment Program (PAIP).

 Although the key outcome indicators were sound, there were shortcomings at M&E design. One, the key
 outcome indicator - regulatory certification of safety and security - was defined to measure Bauerfield
 international airport's compliance with the Vanuatu Civil Aviation rules and applicable portions of ICAO
 guidelines. As the only indicator that measured the improvement of airport's safety compliance, it failed to
 cover the Pekoa and Whitegrass international airports; and two, the key outcome indicator "State
 requirements for safety and security reaches global average" depended on third- party audit. Since the
 project had no control over this aspect, this indicator failed to capture the actual progress relative to the
 baseline.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 86) notes that there were frequent delays in quarterly reporting of M&E data, due to
  the difficulty in communication between the VPMU and the TFSU. Because TFSU was not based in
  Vanuatu, it had limited means to help VPMU overcome challenges in timely data collection. Further, there
  was lack of clarity in the project implementation arrangement, regarding whether VPMU or TFSU, was
  ultimately responsible for the timely delivery of project reports.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E information was used for taking corrective actions for the issues that arose during
  implementation (such as, the delay in implementing the safety and security levy for international
  passengers, and financing gaps for the activity associated with installing the navigation aids package).



  In sum, M&E is rated as modest, in view of the shortcomings in M&E design and M&E implementation.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project, under World Bank safeguard
   policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   (Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 15). The ICR (paragraph 90) notes that no additional
   safeguards were triggered with the AF for the project.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



  Environmental assessment. The PAD (paragraph 58) notes that the project activities were to be
  undertaken within the existing airport precincts, and the potential negative environmental impacts were
  expected to be site-specific (such as noise and dust during construction). An Environmental and Social
  Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal (paragraph 62).

  The ICR (paragraph 91) notes that the overall rating for environmental compliance was moderately
  unsatisfactory when the project closed. The contractor did not have adequate understanding of the Bank's
  environment policies, and produced an Environmental and Management Plan (ESMP) approximately 160
  days after the project became effective. There were issues of occupational health and safety standards,
  with 20 reported incidents under the project. The ICR (paragraph 93) notes that two grievances submitted
  during implementation (termination of contracts with local workers without advance payment or adequate
  payment, and dumping of excess bitumen by the contractor's workers in the bush behind the Whitegrass
  airport), were addressed in a timely fashion.

  Involuntary resettlement. No land acquisition or resettlement was envisaged at appraisal (PAD, paragraph
  56). A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was included in the ESMP to cover any eventualities (PAD,
  paragraph 59). The ICR (paragraph 90) notes that there was no land acquisition, as all project activities
  were conducted within the existing airport areas.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. A financial management assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the
  financial arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 52). The ICR (paragraph 96) notes that there
  were frequent delays in the submission of Interim Financial Reports (IFRs), and audited project financial
  statements, due to inadequate staff with relevant experience at the VPMU. The first audited financial
  statement was submitted five months after the due date, and four overdue IFRs were submitted only at the
  time of the Mid Term Review in February 2018. At project completion, the audited financial statement for
  2018 was still pending. The CR provides no information on the quality of audits.

  Procurement. The ICR (paragraph 94) notes that a regional approach was used for procurement under
  the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP), with procurement centralized through the Technical and
  Financial Services Unit (TFSU) of the PAIP. This was appropriate, given the capacity constraints and the
  small and remote nature of the targeted countries There were no procurement issues during
  implementation and there were no incidents of mis - procurement (ICR, paragraph 95). However, there
  were seven unfinished procurement activities (mainly with respect to installation of the navigation aid
  package), that was currently under procurement by the government (as indicated in section four, the
  parliament has approved the government budget for completing these activities).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following three lessons are used from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language:

1. The regional approach could be an ideal option for countries with limited IDA allocation
and an urgent need for developing complex large scale investments. As part of an IDA regional
program, this project provided additional funding from regional IDA sources. This aided Vanuatu in
accessing additional resources and support from the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP)
aided in preparing the project in an expedited manner. Further, a regional procurement approach
can be helpful in enabling the participating countries to standardize their practice.

2. While maintaining the benefit of using harmonized solutions across participating
countries, regional programs need to allow a certain flexibility in tailoring the design to
reflect country context. In this project, the regional requirements on results indicators limited the
project's option to offset some shortcomings in the M&E framework by making it more relevant to the
country context.

3. Remoteness needs to be factored into project budgeting, especially when there are limited
benchmarks for certain sectors. Given that this was a first of its kind financing in the sector, cost
estimates proved to be challenging. The lesson is that higher cost contingencies need to be factored
into the project design at appraisal, and these estimates need to be updated continuously based on
the latest data available data during implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project in Vanuatu was the third phase of the Pacific Aviation Investment program, with the phase one
  and two, covering projects in the Republic of Kiribati, the Kingdome of Tonga, Tuvalu, Samoa, and the fourth

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)



  phase of the ongoing project in Solomon Islands. Once all these phases are completed, it would be instructive
  to conduct a field assessment to learn from implementation experience of an aviation program at the regional
  level.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written. It candidly discusses the issues associated with overestimation of costs, given the lack
of comparable benchmarks. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence. The ICR overall follows
the guidelines and is focused on results. The theory of change provided in the ICR helps the reader in
understanding how the outcomes have been reached. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

The details provided in the ICR on financial management is sparse. The main text of the ICR at 27 pages is
almost twice the recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 14
