     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022263

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P155257                                    Pacific Resilience Program - RMI

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Marshall Islands                           Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0790,IDA-D3770                        30-Nov-2020                                           2,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2015                                15-Jan-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              1,500,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               1,973,744.44                                              0.00

 Actual                                           2,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Stephen Hutton               Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. xxiii) and the Financing Agreement of July 25, 2015
   (p. 4), the original objective of the project was “to strengthen the financial protection of the Republic of
   Marshall Islands”.

   When the project received Additional Financing in September 2018, the project’s objective was revised to “to
   strengthen the financial protection of the Republic of the Marshall Islands from natural disasters”.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



   The objective was modified when the project received Additional Financing. However, the project’s scope was
   not changed, and the objective was only modified to provide more clarity. Therefore, this validation does not
   require a split rating.

   This project was part of the first phase of the Pacific Resilience Program (PREP), a multi-phase and multi-
   country series of projects. The aim of the program is to: (i) strengthen early warning and preparedness; (ii)
   create a framework for stronger and prioritized investments in resilience and retrofitting of key-public assets to
   meet international recognized resilience standards; and (iii) improve the post-disaster response capacity
   through strengthened financial protection. The initial participants for Phase I of the PREP were Samoa,
   Tonga, the Republic of Marshall Islands (RMI), Vanuatu, the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat and the
   Secretariat of the Pacific Community.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Sep-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Under this project, RMI participated in only a single component from the PREP.

   Component 3: Disaster Risk Financing (appraisal estimate US$1.5 million, estimate under Additional
   Financing US$4.0 million, actual US$2.0 million):

   This component was to support the Republic of the Marshall Islands’ (RMI) continued participation in the
   Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (PCRAFI) by financing part of RMI’s insurance premia for
   disaster risk financing or transfer products. This work would build on the previous Pacific Catastrophe Risk
   Insurance pilot, which offered technical assistance on public financial management of natural disasters to all
   Pacific Island Countries (PICs) and a parametric catastrophe risk insurance pool of five participating PICs,
   including RMI.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$1.5 million. The project received Additional Financing
   in the amount of US$2.5 million. Actual cost was US$2.21 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IDA grant in the amount of US$1.5 million, which fully
   disbursed, and an IDA grant of US$2.5 million, of which US$500,000 disbursed.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$150,000. Actual contribution was
   US$210,000.

   Dates: The project was restructured three times (level 2):

         On October 5, 2017 the project was restructured to: i) change the implementing agency; ii) change
          disbursement arrangements; iii) change legal covenants; iv) change institutional arrangements to
          allow the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) (through its Ministry of Finance) to enter into a Risk
          Transfer Agreement or an Insurance Contract with the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company
          (PCRIC) or other catastrophe risk insurance provider acceptable to the Bank; v) change financial
          management and procurement such as enabling the direct contracting of PCRIC on an exceptional
          basis; and v) change the implementing schedule.
         On September 27, 2018 the project was restructured to: i) receive Additional Financing in the
          amount of US$2.5 million for the payment of premia for catastrophe insurance coverage for an
          additional five years; ii) change the project’s objective to “to strengthen the financial protection of the
          Republic of the Marshall Islands from natural disasters”; iii) change in components and costs; iv)
          change in legal covenants; and v) change in procurement. There was no change to the closing date
          of the original grant (November 30, 2020) and the closing date of the Additional Financing was
          October 31, 2023, in line with the additional five years of insurance coverage. The amendment to the
          Financing Agreement required a continued sliding scale of counterpart funding to partially fund the
          premia under the project on an annual basis from 2018 until closure.
         On January 9, 2020 the project was restructured to change the closing date to January 15, 2020 and
          cancel the unwithdrawn financing of approximately US$ 2 million due to the government re-
          evaluating the suitability of available catastrophe insurance products to the country’s risk profile.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 57), the RMI is one of the world’s smallest, most isolated and vulnerable nations.
The RMI is vulnerable to occasional typhoons and is beginning to feel the effects of climate change through
sea level rise and more frequent typhoons/cyclones and droughts. Its 370 kilometers coastline is especially
vulnerable to extreme waves and high tides. Catastrophic risk modeling indicates that the RMI is expected
to experience, on average, US$3 million per year in losses due to earthquakes and tropical cyclones. The
PAD further states that in the next 50 years, the RMI has a 50 percent probability of experiencing a loss
exceeding US$53 million (as compared to 2013 GDP of US$190 million), and a 10 percent probability of
experiencing a loss exceeding US$160 million, not taking into account the effects of climate change which
may further exacerbate cyclone risks. Catastrophic losses of this magnitude would be overwhelming, hence
the need for financial protection including risk transfer. RMI also faces risks of drought affecting critical food
crops such as breadfruit, banana, and taro.

The government developed the National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management (2008 to 2018) and the
2011 National Climate Change Policy Framework to respond to disaster and climate risks.




                                                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



               According to the ICR (p.11), the project’s objective supported the government’s National Strategic Plan
               (2020 to 2030) by improving the country’s resilience to disasters and strengthening disaster preparedness.
               Also, the project supported the government’s National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Management (2008 to
               2018) by enhancing the government’s capacity for emergency preparedness and response.

               Furthermore, the project’s objective was in line with the Bank’s most recent Regional Partnership
               Framework (FY17–FY 21) and its focus area 3 “protecting incomes and livelihoods”.

               The Bank had previously supported financial protection in RMI as a pilot member country of the Pacific
               Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing initiative, under which RMI had previously received $850,000
               to support catastrophe insurance. Thus, the project was continuing existing support rather than introducing
               a brand new initiative.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the financial protection of the Republic of the Marshall Islands from natural disasters.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The fundamental strategy of the project was to improve financial disaster risk management by transferring
                             disaster risk from the RMI to international markets. The project’s theory of change envisioned that the
                             project’s activity of financing part of the RMI’s premia for disaster risk financing or transfer product would
                             enable the RMI to participate in a regional catastrophe risk insurance program, thus transfer its risk from
                             cyclones to the international markets. Under the insurance coverage, the RMI would receive payment within a
                             month of the occurrence of a major cyclone. By participating in a regional insurance program, RMI received
                             access to an insurance instrument that did not otherwise exist and faced lower premia than a simulated price
                             for individual insurance. These short-term outcomes were to result in the objective strengthening the financial
                             protection of the RMI from natural disasters.

                             Though it is difficult to be definitive within the scope of this validation, the available insurance instrument may
                             not have been a strong fit to the RMI’s risk profile. The instrument had been developed under the PCRAFI to
                             suit the broader Pacific Islands region. It concentrated on cyclone and earthquake/tsunami risks, because
                             these were the main disaster risks for the region as a whole, and also because they are more insurable risks,
                             with a long history of data and advanced modeling that allowed for reasonable estimation of the risks and with
                             established market appetite for holding these risks. It did not cover drought, which was perhaps the largest


                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



disaster risk for RMI, and whose cyclone risk was not as severe as some other Pacific Island countries
because of its location.

The scale of the insurance contract was significant but would provide only partial protection against
catastrophic losses. The instrument was designed to cover disaster losses that had a 2 percent to 10 percent
probability of occurring in each year; that is, it was aimed against both relatively frequent disasters as well as
infrequent severe events. RMI’s contract offered a maximum payment of US$10.2 million, which would not
fully cover the severe disasters identified in the catastrophic risk modeling, but would provide significant
protection, up to roughly 5 percent of GDP. In addition, RMI might expect other assistance in the event of a
severe catastrophe, including from bilateral sources especially under a compact with the United States.

Outputs:

      The project paid for cyclone insurance as expected. The RMI’s insurance premium rate under the
       project was 50 percent cheaper on average compared to the simulated market price the RMI would
       have had to pay if it had sought insurance individually outside the program (The price was simulated
       as no market insurance existed and pricing would have depended on negotiations with an insurer).

Outcomes:

      RMI received financial protection from cyclones during the project period. No disaster event insured by
       the project took place during the implementation period. However, the other PICs experienced events
       that were insured by the project and all received payments within 10 days of the occurrence of the
       insured event; this suggests that the financial protection was genuine, and the insurance would have
       paid out had a disaster occurred.
      However, the government’s decision to discontinue purchase of catastrophe insurance means that this
       financial protection will not be sustained. The government chose to seek financial protection from IDA
       funds through other instruments, including a CERC that would allow the remainder of the IDA
       envelope to be utilized within the period, and potentially a Cat DDO in the future. This decision was
       not unreasonable given that the government felt that the specific insurance instrument was not a good
       fit to their risk profile, and given the large IDA envelope for RMI compared to its size meant that the
       CERC and Cat DDO instruments might also provide financial protection of similar orders of
       magnitude.
      According to the project team, as a consequence of the project and associated policy dialog, the
       government has increased their capacity to consider their financial disaster risk and has become a
       more sophisticated consumer of financial disaster risk management products. The government
       remains engaged on financial disaster risk issues and may purchase insurance again in future if a
       product is available that meets their needs. However, little evidence was collected on this improved
       capacity.




Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project outcomes were achieved in a narrow sense within the project lifetime, but the cancellation of the
                            insurance contract means that the project has limited impact. This constitutes a moderate shortcoming.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   A traditional economic analysis (which concentrates on expected values and implicitly assumes risk neutrality)
   does not capture well the efficiency of a project on insurance, financial protection, and risk transfer.

   The PAD (p. 16) for the PREP did not include an economic analysis for this project. Its analysis covered only
   components 1 and 2 of the Pacific Resilience Program. Component 3, which this project financed, was not
   included. Due to the lack of an ex-ante economic analysis the ICR (p. 14) did not conduct an ex post economic
   analysis either – but an ex post analysis of insurance would not have been meaningful (else it would incorrectly
   conclude that any insurance contract that did not pay out was a poor return).

   However, during the 2018 restructuring, an economic analysis was conducted for this project to calculate the
   return from disaster risk insurance coverage under the regional pool over a five-year period. The forecast
   Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) under the case where a disaster occurred ranged from 133 percent
   (given a 16 percent probability of one severe disaster taking place) to 226 percent or more (given a 10 percent
   probability of at least one extreme disaster taking place). In the case that no disaster was to take place (a 59
   percent probability), there was not to be any payout. The analysis calculated on a long-term average an EIRR of
   23 percent. An average Net Present Value (NPV) of US$0.1 million (ranging from US$ negative 2.3 million if no
   disaster took place to US$9.4 million if one extreme disaster took place) was calculated using a discount rate of
   10 percent, indicating that this project was at least marginally worthwhile on strict expected value terms, which
   does not capture the benefits from risk transfer.

   Operational Efficiency

   The project did not encounter any implementation delays and the Central Implementation Unit within the Division
   of International Development Assistance (DIDA) at the Ministry of Finance was responsible for the yearly
   transactions. However, during the 2020 restructuring, the unwithdrawn financing of the original grant
   (US$33,736.32) and the additional grant (US$1.99 million) were cancelled due to the government re-evaluating
   the suitability of available catastrophe insurance products to the country’s risk profile given that no insured event
   took place during project implementation.



                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was substantial given its alignment with the Bank's most recent Country Partnership
Strategy (FY17-21). Efficacy was substantial but with moderate shortcomings as the financial protection
provided by the insurance contract may not have been a strong fit to RMI's disaster risk profile, and as the
protection was not continued following the government's cancelation of the project and cessation of the
insurance contract. Efficiency was rated substantial. Taking everything together, the overall outcome rating is
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The financial protection offered under the project will not be sustained, as the government chose not to
continue with the regional insurance mechanism. However, the government remains committed to other
forms of disaster risk management. According to the ICR (p. 21), the RMI continues to work with the Bank in
the second phase of the PREP where it will implement activities related to integrating governance of disaster
and climate change management, institutional strengthening, improving early warning systems for outer
islands and developing a roadmap and implementing priority improvements to modernize the National
Disaster Management Office’s facilities. In addition, the RMI continues to be a member Council Member of
PCRIC. This position allows the RMI to advocate for the development of post-disaster financing instruments
that are a better fit for the RMI.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 20), the project design took into account lessons learned from the Caribbean
  Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF), the world’s first multi-country risk pool and insurance
  program. The ICR (p. 17) stated that these lessons pointed out the importance of offering an integrated
  financial protection strategy beyond parametric insurance, and the need for avoiding fragmentation and
  ensuring clear project oversight and/or coordination by the Ministries of Finance. Also, lessons learned
  found that catastrophe risk insurance cannot cover all disaster losses and should be combined with other
  financial solutions as part of a wide package for financial protection against natural disasters. While there
  was no “written” financial protection strategy, the government has been combining Contingent
  Emergency Response Component (CERCs) in a number of different Investment Project Financings
  (IPFs) in the portfolio with retention instruments under the Compact with the U.S. and the Catastrophe-
  Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO) (being currently, prepared) to ensure financial protection against
  natural disasters. Also, the Ministry of Finance has been in charge for overseeing any projects or
  decisions in this area and therefore has been avoiding fragmentation.

  The project benefitted from country-specific risk modeling to inform the design and pricing of the
  parametric insurance products, which were offered by the re-insurance companies and later PCRIC.

  The project design was simple and given its nature only included a limited amount of activities. However,
  the ICR (p. 18) stated that the RMI’s involvement in the first phase of the program provided the
  opportunity to expand the scope of engagement in the second phase. The selection of catastrophe risk
  insurance was appropriate for ensuring a rapid payout following a natural disaster and for transferring risk
  to international markets. RMI benefitted from the regional pooling of countries in terms of being able to
  communicate and learn from other PICs.

  The Bank team included relevant expertise such as a disaster risk specialists. According to the ICR
  (p.17), the Bank facilitated dialogue across the region, which enhanced coordination among the different
  governments. Also, the project was ready for implementation when it became effective resulting in the
  first disbursement being made two weeks after project effectiveness.

  The Results Framework did not include the right mix of indicators to measure project outcomes (see
  section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 21), the Bank team included experts from relevant areas including disaster risk
 management, financial protection and fiduciary and safeguards specialists. The project had three different
 Task Team Leaders during a six-year implementation period. However, the ICR (p. 21) stated that these
 changes did not negatively affect project implementation due to the Bank team’s proactivity to address
 implementation bottlenecks. When the government requested Additional Financing, the project was

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



 restructured and received the Additional Financing within a month the request was received. The Bank
 team prepared regular Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and key project ratings were
 rated Satisfactory throughout implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified, and the theory of change was adequate. The selected
 indicators measured whether participating PIC's have received payment within a month of the occurrence
 of the insured event and if the premiums are lower than coverage bought individually in the market.

 However, the project’s M&E did not include a qualitative assessment and indicators on several other
 aspects such as: i) measuring the government’s gradually increase in annual contribution; ii) showing that
 the RMI has effective insurance coverage; and iii) measuring capacity strengthening.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Finance/DIDA and PCRIC monitored the insurance payouts of participating countries and
  annual premia.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p.19), the project monitored the amount and time of insurance payouts in other
  countries to assess the performance of the regional risk pool and to inform continual refinement of
  insurance products and coverage.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



   The first phase of the PREP was classified as category B and triggered OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitat), OP/BP 4.36 (Forest), OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP
   4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). The Bank prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which
   was disclosed locally in Samoa, Tonga, Fiji and the Bank InfoShop. However, none of the safeguard
   policies were triggered by this project because it supported only insurance and had no physical footprint or
   potential negative effects.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   The ICR (p. 20) reports that the project complied with the Bank’s Financial Management requirements.
   Also, the Ministry of Finance kept adequate accounting records of all transactions with PCRIC.
   Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance established a Division of the International Development Assistance to
   build technical capacity and to fulfill the project’s fiduciary requirements, which resulted in the project’s
   fiduciary risk being reduced from substantial to moderate in August 2019. The ICR stated that Interim
   Financial Reports were not required for this project since the project’s only activity was a single transaction
   for the payment of insurance premia every year. The project was audited as part of the National
   Government accounts and received unqualified opinions.

   Procurement

   The ICR stated that the Ministry of Finance prepared a timely and adequate Project Procurement Strategy
   for Development and the project’s procurement rating was satisfactory throughout implementation. The
   PCRIC was directly contracted on an exceptional basis as the provision of catastrophe risk insurance is
   form of ex ante contract, which provides support in the event of a natural disaster. According to the ICR
   (p.19), the project used a direct payment approach, which resulted in not needing a designated account.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Efficacy was substantial but with
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  moderate shortcomings leading

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)



                                                                                    to the overall MS rating, given
                                                                                    substantial relevance and
                                                                                    efficiency.
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR drew several lessons based on the project experience, including:

        Establishing a regional catastrophe insurance pool can have financial benefits and
         allows for knowledge exchange between countries. In this project, RMI was able to
         obtain insurance at a lower premium due to participating in an insurance pool rather than
         obtaining insurance individually. In addition, RMI was able to share its experience with- and
         learn from- other countries in a similar situation resulting in re-evaluating the suitability of
         available catastrophe insurance products.

        It is difficult to assess the contribution of a project on disaster financing instruments
         without some system for capturing evidence on this. In this project, capacity building
         goals were not captured well by either the results framework or other qualitative evidence.



IEG also finds that:

        Traditional economic analysis is not very effective for assessing the efficiency of
         instruments that offer financial protection. The Bank could investigate alternative metrics
         for demonstrating project efficiency.

        Even after experience with the instrument, governments may conclude that disaster
         insurance is not the right mechanism for disaster financial risk management. The RMI
         government was not willing to sustain support for the insurance mechanism, in part on the
         grounds that no disaster occurred during the project period and no payout was made. But
         this is in conflict with the goal of catastrophic insurance, which is precisely to cover events
         that are low probability but high risk.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program - RMI (P155257)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR is internally
consistent and concise and provided useful lessons, which can be applied to similar projects. The ICR would
have benefitted from making clear judgements about whether there was a design failure in terms of supporting
an instrument that was not a good fit to RMI’s risk context or not.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 12 of 12
