     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022213

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P144832                                     National Unified Registry and Outreach

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Jordan                                      Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-15887                                    30-Dec-2017                                          9,312,872.32

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Oct-2013                                 31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              9,500,000.00                                   9,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               9,500,000.00                                   9,500,000.00

 Actual                                           9,312,872.32                                   9,312,872.32




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as set out in the Financing Agreement (p. 5) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (p. 13) was to improve the targeting of social safety net programs and develop an
   efficient outreach mechanism.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



   During a project restructuring in 2016, the scope of the project was reduced while project commitments
   remained constant (see Section 2d). Consequently, a split rating will be applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Building and using a National Unified Registry (NUR) for targeting safety nets
   (estimated cost at appraisal US$2.50 million; actual cost US$2.46 million). The component, which was to
   improve enrollment and eligibility verification processes, had two sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Building a database. The project was to help improve the accuracy of a household
   database for eligibility to the government’s compensation cash program for fuel subsidy reform. The
   database was being developed by the Income and Sales Tax Department (ISTD) of the Ministry of Finance
   (MOF). The project was to support that database development by defining stronger predictors of household
   welfare, and developing data collection strategies that would ensure broad coverage of prospective
   beneficiaries and data accuracy. Support was to focus on defining an assessment methodology; rolling
   out an information campaign; processing data electronically and ensuring its availability to government
   agencies; and putting in place a grievance redress system.

   Sub-component 1.2: Developing and using the NUR platform at MOF. The project was to help
   consolidate a large number of existing databases into the NUR in MOF. The government was to mandate
   agencies (central and local government and others) to periodically submit required data to the unit. The
   NUR was to be updated every two years. The project was to finance the first two rounds of the NUR,
   consisting of the establishment of the database and one round of updating. Subsequently, it was expected
   that the MOF and the ISTD would have gained sufficient experience and expertise to operate the system on
   their own. Verification and validation was to be an integral part of the program with the support of an
   Integrated Outreach Worker Program (IOWP) established under Component 2 (see below).



   Component 2: Piloting an Integrated Outreach Worker Program (IOWP) (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$ 7.00 million; actual cost US$6.85 million). The two sub-components were:

   Sub-component 2.1: Outreach design, planning and training of Outreach Workers. The project was to
   support the: (i) development of assessment and documentation services and referral systems using
   evidence-based community assessment tools; (ii) development of a train-the-trainers model; (iii)
   establishment of household selection criteria; (iv) establishment of criteria for recruiting supervisors and
   outreach workers; and (v) collection of baseline data on households within the impact area. Training was to
   be launched upon completion of the design of the program. A leading educational university was to be

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



  contracted to conduct the training of 56 supervisors and work with the supervisors as they trained 896
  outreach workers. The government was to select the supervisors and outreach workers with the help of a
  lead non-governmental organization (NGO). The training and deployment of the workers was to be phased,
  eventually to reach 22,400 households.

  Sub-component 2.2: Outreach deployment and monitoring. A lead NGO was to be responsible for
  recruitment of the outreach workers. The deployment was to be launched in phases, first in urban areas to
  take advantage of higher population density and higher absolute number of households in poverty. Under
  oversight by the supervisors, the outreach workers were to conduct face-to-face visits/sessions with
  households and monitor progress for each family. Supervision sessions were also to serve to reinforce
  performance expectations and augment an outreach worker's professional development. Real-time data
  collection was to provide rapid feedback on program interventions and processes, allowing for quick and
  targeted course correction and quality control, and also to allow assessment of the overall efficacy of the
  program through an impact evaluation.



  Significant changes during implementation

  The project underwent one Level 2 restructuring. The restructuring was approved on October 8, 2016,
  responding to a change in the project's context. Following a fall in international fuel prices in December
  2014, the government suspended planned implementation of the fuel subsidy compensation program and
  discontinued ISTD's project-supported work on developing the database for that program. Instead, the
  scope of the project was reduced to focus on establishing the NUR to facilitate poverty targeting of benefit
  delivery by the National Aid Fund (NAF), the main public cash transfer program. While well targeted, it had
  only moderate coverage. This change also brought about a change in the implementation arrangements for
  the project, with the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC) given overall responsibility
  for project management, and NAF responsible for technical implementation. Indicators were revised to
  recognize the shift in focus from the cash compensation program to a more modest NAF.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$10 million, including a Trust
  Fund Grant of US$9.50 million. Actual project cost at closing was US$9.31 million, reflecting lower-than-
  estimated spending on IOWP.

  Financing. The project was financed by a US$9.50 million grant from the Middle East North Africa
  Transition Fund (a multi-donor trust fund administered by the World Bank) and a Borrower contribution of
  US$0.50 million to Component 2.

  Dates. The project was approved on October 8, 2013 and became effective on November 23, 2013. The
  original closing date, December 30, 2017, was extended twice: a first time on September 19, 2017, to
  December 30, 2018, to allow the NUR platform to be implemented, and reflecting the nearly 12 months it
  had taken to negotiate the 2016 restructuring; and a second time, on October 2, 2018, to December 30,
  2019, to allow the addition of an offline functionality to the NUR platform.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The PDO was relevant to country needs, government policy, and Bank strategy. At appraisal, the after-
               effects of the international economic and financial crisis, and regional political and social uncertainties, were
               exerting pressures on fiscal balances. Efforts at consolidation, notably the phasing out of energy subsidies,
               while creating fiscal space, were having adverse effects on employment and poverty, and increasing the
               need for social protection programs. Jordan did have several public and private safety net operations, albeit
               largely uncoordinated low capacity ones, with different targeting methodologies, low coverage, and little
               capacity to be scaled up. In 2012, the government had launched a broadly targeted cash transfer system to
               alleviate the effects of the fuel subsidy removal. The project was initially intended to support the
               development of the NUR as a means of better targeting the program. With the abolishment of the fuel cash
               transfer program in 2016, the project was retooled to support the NUR as a registry providing a gateway to
               existing safety net programs, in particular the NAF, the biggest public safety net program. The IOWP was to
               complement the NUR by helping to activate the poor to enter the labor market and other tailor-made social
               programs, i.e. essentially operating as a graduation program.

               The focus of the project – to develop a NUR - remains relevant. It aligns with the government’s social
               protection and poverty alleviation strategy for 2019-2025 that refers to NUR as a high priority activity. It also
               aligns with the current World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY17 to
               FY22. The CPS recognizes that social protection interventions to the poor and vulnerable remain a key
               challenge and continues WBG support for Jordan in creating a system of integrated data platforms for
               planning and implementing social programs as part of the NUR and the IOWP.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the targeting of social safety net programs (original outcome targets)

                             Rationale
                             The objective was to be achieved by building and implementing a national database (the NUR) to serve as a
                             single gateway for people seeking government services where they can be registered and be considered for
                             potential inclusion in one or more social programs based on an assessment of their needs and
                             conditions. Activities were to include an information campaign, defining welfare rankings, verifying data, and
                             developing a grievance system. The platform was to be based on a data-sharing agreement between NUR

                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



and relevant government agencies. That agreement was never ratified by the government. A household
database for targeting the fuel subsidy cash compensation program that was being developed by ISTD and
supported under the project was cut short with the abolishment of the scheme by the government.

With no reported outcomes, achievement of this objective is rated Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the targeting of social safety net programs (revised outcome targets)

Revised Rationale
The objective – better targeted safety nets -- remained the same but was refocused on supporting beneficiary
selection to the NAF. Targets were adjusted to the smaller scale of the NAF.

Originally, under Objective 1, the project had targeted 3.4 million poor and middle-income beneficiaries that
were most likely to be adversely impacted by the increases in fuel prices. At project closing in December
2019, the NUR was functional, and some 88,000 individuals had benefited from the selection process and
were eligible for NAF benefits, against a revised target of 112,400. The number of beneficiaries had increased
to 113,300 by end-January 2020, meeting the revised target. Over 50 percent of beneficiaries were
women. The number of agencies connected to the NUR and providing data to NAF had reached 15 by project
closing, exceeding the target of 3 agencies.

In summary, the objective - improving the targeting of social safety nets - was achieved with an established
NUR in place as a gateway for registration and potential inclusion in one or more social programs as well as a
gradually expanding database. Results indicate the number of NAF beneficiaries certified using the NUR
platform. While it is reasonable to assume that introduction of the NUR has brought added rigor into safety
net programs in terms of reduced errors of inclusion, the project does not provide quantitative information in
that area.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Develop an efficient outreach mechanism

Rationale
Achievement of this objective was to provide poor and vulnerable people with case management, and based
on their needs, referral to appropriate services. These services in turn were to help them graduate from

                                                                                                Page 5 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



                            poverty and facilitate their entry/re-entry into the labor market. The mechanism was to be piloted in three
                            governorates, and success was to be measured by the numbers of beneficiaries, outreach workers deployed,
                            and supervisors trained. The longer-term aim was to increase the impact of social programs and support
                            graduation out of the welfare system. The targets did not change during implementation.

                            The following outputs and outcomes were achieved:

                                  371 skilled outreach workers were deployed, against a target of 510.
                                  51 supervisors were trained to train outreach workers, against a target of 50
                                  93 percent of households were referred to (social) services by outreach workers, compared to a target
                                   of 70 percent
                                  23,471 individuals benefited from the outreach worker program, compared to a target of 22,000.
                                  In all cases, a case management approach was used to assess the needs of participating households.



                            While the IOWP pilot did introduce the building blocks for working outreach and referral functions, it also
                            identified challenges that still need to be addressed for a well-functioning outreach and graduation
                            function. Inter-agency coordination may have been insufficient in the pilot. In particular, the Ministry of Social
                            Development (MOSD) was involved in neither preparation nor implementation of the pilot. As a result, supply
                            was insufficient; the network of social services was uneven and often hard to reach, and resources at service
                            levels may have been inadequate for the increase in demand for services. Such challenges were further
                            discussed in p. 12 and Annexes 5 and 6 of the ICR. The challenges were reflected in pilot performance
                            service providers having accepted only a third of referral households, with only seven percent receiving
                            benefits within six weeks of enrollment, and led to the relevant outcome indicator – beneficiaries receiving
                            services – being dropped as services could not be assured.

                            The difficulties encountered during implementation of the IOWP justify the introduction of a pilot rather than a
                            more ambitious launching as an appropriate intervention.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The negligible rating for the original Objective 1 indicates that no progress was made on meeting the original
                            target: establishment of a single gateway for access to social programs. This was due to the abolishment of
                            the country’s main support program – fuel subsidy compensation – and the failure to ratify information
                            exchange between public agencies and NUR. Satisfactory achievement of the second original objective
                            reflects accomplishment of the outreach pilots as expected, albeit absent indications of the effects of the case
                            management system. Efficacy under the original outcome targets is therefore rated modest.


                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The substantial rating for the revised Objective 1 reflects a more focused approach to building the safety net,
         initially limiting the gateway to one main poverty program, although one that is being gradually expanded to
         cover other programs. Efficacy for the revised Objective 2 remains substantial, as the activity remained
         unchanged from the original objective. With satisfactory achievement of both objectives under the adjusted
         scope and revised targets for Objective 1, efficacy under the revised outcome targets is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR did not undertake quantitative analysis to determine efficiency. An economic analysis on the cost-
efficiency of the NUR for the fuel subsidy compensation scheme had been conducted at appraisal, but the ICR
team refrained from doing so in view of the reduction in the scope of the project and in view of the related delays
in implementation totaling 24 months. Implementation efficiency was also affected by several other factors:
complex implementation arrangements with several agencies responsible for different components; resistance
to adopting the program due to absence of early engagement by some implementing agencies; and absence of
formal agreements early on in the outreach program. All of these factors made implementation more
difficult. Still, the project was completed without cost overruns, and administrative costs were kept reasonable:
the latter accounted for 5.5 percent of project costs, lower than the average of 11 percent for comparable
situations. Given implementation inefficiencies, efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                      Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                            0
  Appraisal                                                        0
                                                                                             Not Applicable



                                                                                                            Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

According to OPCS/IEG guidelines for restructured projects, the final outcome rating is determined by the
ratings for the original project and the restructured project, weighted by the percentage of the grant that
disbursed before and after the restructurings. In this case, 73 percent of funds were disbursed under the revised
outcome targets.



The weighted value of the outcome rating under the original objective is calculated as follows: 3 for moderately
unsatisfactory x 27 percent of total disbursements before the introduction of the restructuring = 0.81. The
weighted value under the restructuring is: 4 for moderately satisfactory x 73 percent = 2.92. The weighted
average score is thus 0.81+2.92 = 3.73, or 4 when rounded to the nearest whole number. Therefore, the
combined overall outcome rating is moderately satisfactory, reflecting moderate shortcomings in the project's
preparation and implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The shift in focus from subsidy compensation transfers to strengthening safety nets has raised sustainability
surrounding the NUR, which has become a government priority. It is highlighted as such in Jordan's national
protection strategy for 2019-2025. Sustainability surrounding the IOWP is less, and commitment appears
weak with no budget moneys allocated to further IOWP activities. Still, there has been institutional
strengthening, with MOSD taking over the NUR system and the IOWP program with a well-qualified
workforce to fall back on, and the NUR platform having become a key government resource for beneficiary
targeting for social programs, including some 15 institutions participating in the NUR.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant in its original form in supporting government efforts to maintain
  budget balance while at the same time helping to better target needy people, initially through the fuel
  price compensation program, and subsequently through the NAF. Design drew on lessons from similar
  Bank interventions in other countries, notably Latin America for the NUR, and on developed and

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



  developing country experiences in developing the IOWP. At the same time, less attention was paid to
  potential challenges on the ground that seem to have influenced both restructuring and the pace of
  project implementation. The ICR (pp. 32 and 33) listed a series of institutional factors: the lack of a
  mandate to build a nationwide NUR linking administrative databases; unclear managerial responsibilities
  between Ministries of Finance and Planning; and the absence of the MOSD and NAF in project
  preparation. Moreover, implementation arrangements sometimes did not correspond to the core
  businesses of implementing agencies, raising issues of technical capacity during implementation.
  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements were relatively straightforward, but may not have focused
  sufficiently on outcomes beyond beneficiary numbers; a stronger focus on targeting and beneficiary
  impact might have been introduced.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Despite several changes in task management, supervision teams were able to adapt the project to
 changing circumstances on the ground, including new implementation arrangements as target programs
 changed. The ICR (p. 39) pointed to determined resourcing of task teams, especially in addressing the
 challenging technical requirements of platform development. Still, difficulties remained, especially in setting
 indicators and building the management structure for the IOWP, which post-project faces uncertainties
 concerning its future.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 In the original project design, project management units in ISTD and MOPIC were responsible for
 monitoring progress and evaluating results in implementing the NUR and the IOWP, respectively. Key
 outcome indicators focused on beneficiary numbers, drawing on participants in the subsidy compensation
 program. Intermediate indicators included some measures of the building and use of the NUR (for example,
 welfare rankings, the grievance redress system, functioning delivery and assistance mechanisms), and
 others for piloting the outreach worker program (supervisors, workers trained and deployed, use of case
 management approach). All of these indicators were relevant for the envisaged system, but did not go far


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



 enough: there was an absence of means to measure benefit incidence. Moreover, measurement of the
 outcome indicator for the IOWP – beneficiaries receiving services – was beyond the control of the project.

 In the revised project, NAF at the MOSD managed the NUR platform and its connectivity with safety net
 programs, with MOSD also managing the IOWP. The revised project maintained the key outcome
 indicators, albeit with targets scaled down to the size of the catchment population (beneficiaries now
 potentially numbered 100,000 rather than 3.4 million). Again, intermediate indicators measured progress in
 building the NUR system and piloting the IOWP. All of them were relevant, albeit absent indictors that
 would measure benefit incidence or behavior change.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring of the NUR was undertaken by the Bank supervision team in collaboration with the
  management teams at MOF and MOSD. Progress on the IOWP was monitored through a case
  management information system focusing on performance by outreach workers. Progress reports
  and quarterly interim financial reports were produced, as well as an annual audit.



c. M&E Utilization
  Monitoring of progress on the NUR was used to determine the pace and quality of implementation, and
  determined decisions on project extensions. Monitoring of the IOWP was regularly analyzed and
  reported. Information from project M&E was also used to update the results framework and prepare
  annual progress reports.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as environmental assessment category "C," triggering no environmental
   safeguards policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (as reported in the ICR, p. 37): The original project design delegated financial
   management responsibility to the ISTD for Component 1, and to MOPIC for Component 2, and two
   separate Designated Accounts were opened. The first restructuring transferred all financial management
   responsibility to MOPIC. The Project Management Unit (PMU) maintained adequate qualified financial
   management staffing and external auditing arrangements throughout implementation. The quarterly


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



   unaudited Interim Financial Reports were of acceptable quality and content, and were submitted in a timely
   manner. All annual audited financial statements had an unqualified audit opinion, and the management
   letters did not report any significant weaknesses in the project’s internal controls. The last audit report will
   cover the year ended December 31, 2019 up to the grace period ending April 30, 2020, and was to be
   submitted by June 30, 2020.



   Procurement (as reported in the ICR, p. 38). Prior to the first restructuring, the ISTD was responsible for
   procurement activities related to Component 1, and MOPIC for Component 2. The complex project
   implementation structure and the weak capacity of the PMU delayed procurement processes for
   Component 2 and slowed implementation. The procurement of consultancy services for the IOWP was
   also delayed by several months because the PMU asked for a bid security to be submitted with the
   technical proposal. As this went against Bank policy, the issue was escalated and all the short-listed firms
   were re-evaluated to finalize the selection. Following the first restructuring, the PMU became responsible
   for all procurement activities and appropriately conformed to World Bank guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following main lessons are drawn from the ICR (pp. 40-41):




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)



High-level government support can be critical for project implementation. The cash
compensation initiative depended on the implementation of politically sensitive energy subsidy
reforms, which quickly lost traction as oil prices fell. On the other hand, the decision to build the NUR
by anchoring it on NAF’s cash transfer program enabled its development, because this was an
established program. The subsequent high-level endorsement by the Government of Jordan to build
the NUR platform was critical for establishing data access.



Complex implementation arrangements can influence coordination and ownership. The
project had a complex implementation structure with critical responsibilities resting with different
government institutions. This arrangement necessitated lengthy negotiations to clarify
responsibilities and coordinate activities during project preparation, restructuring, and handover.
Simpler implementation arrangements at project design, with clear lines of responsibility and
accountability, would likely have expedited implementation significantly.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was thorough in its description of the project. The narrative of key factors that affected the project
during preparation and implementation provided a balanced overview of challenges and facilitated the IEG's
validation. The Tables underpinning the changes in the project and the assessment of outcomes were
straightforward and results-focused. The document was internally consistent and in line with guidelines, albeit
with a body text of 31 pages, a bit on the long side.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
National Unified Registry and Outreach (P144832)




                                                                                Page 13 of 13
