     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022264

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P120398                                  AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM)

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                              Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-99074                                 30-Jun-2014                                         66,470,490.96

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Feb-2011                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           86,000,000.00                                  86,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            70,000,000.00                                  66,470,490.96

 Actual                                        66,508,615.94                                  66,470,490.96




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               John R. Eriksson            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Grant Request Proposal (page 6) was
   identical to the one stated in the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) Grant Agreement (page 5)
   and aimed to :

   "improve agricultural productivity in project areas by enhancing the efficiency of water used."



                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. On Farm Water Management (appraisal cost: US$25.20 million, cost estimate at restructuring:
   US$42.60 million, actual cost: US$43.10 million). This component would support on-farm water
   management investments in the following project areas; (a) Kabul, (b) Bamyan, (c) Mazar el Sharif (Balkh),
   (d) Herat, and (e) Jalalabad (Nangarhar). In each area an average of 35 project sites were selected (175
   sites in total) consisting of small-scale irrigation schemes or tertiary canals (watercourses) in medium and
   large-scale irrigation schemes. This component includes three sub-components:

   1.1. Establishment and strengthening of irrigation associations (IAs) to enable them assume their role in
   management and operation & maintenance (O&M) in line with the new Afghan Water Law (1388).

   1.2. Improvement of on-farm physical irrigation infrastructure (tertiary networks or watercourses) in
   schemes which have already been rehabilitated by the Bank-funded Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation
   Project (EIRP)-in order to further reduce system water losses and facilitate water distribution.

   1.3. Establishment of demonstration Sites for dissemination of improved water saving techniques including
   high efficiency/pressurized irrigation systems, agronomic water saving measures and optimization of crop
   water requirements.

   2. Institutional strengthening and capacity building of the General Directorate of Irrigation of the
   Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) (appraisal cost: US$4.10 million, cost
   estimate at restructuring: US$8.20 million, actual cost: US$5.40 million). The Project will support
   institutional strengthening and capacity building of MAIL. The component would support three main
   activities: The first activity consists of a flagship 45-day training program at the Water Management Training
   Institute (WMTI-Lahore Pakistan) focusing on all aspects of applied on-farm water management. The
   second activity would involve Training of Trainers (TOT) to about 20 graduates of the 45-day program to
   develop their capacity to become trainers and transfer knowledge to a larger cadre of MAIL staff on all
   aspects of on-farm water management. The third activity would be a specialized training on more advanced
   subjects of on-farm water management. This component would also support the development of a database
   of irrigation infrastructure in the country to facilitate future investments in water management and
   agriculture.

   3. Project management, coordination and monitoring & evaluation (appraisal cost:US$6.20 million,
   cost estimate at restructuring: US$13.00 million, actual cost: US$15.10 million). This component
   would support: project implementation by the project implementation unit PIU in Kabul and in the five areas
   proposed; project management by the General Directorate for Programs (GDP) on fiduciary (procurement

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



  and financial management) and safeguard aspects; (iii) coordination with other projects, in particular the
  Irrigation Restoration and Development Project (IRDP) and the Horticulture and Livestock project (HLP), as
  well as with donors involved in the water resource sector; and (iv) an efficient monitoring & evaluation
  system.



  Revised Components.

  Component 1. The 2015 AF increased the total target for rehabilitation to 64,000 ha compared with the
  original target of 52,500 ha, of which 19,000 ha (100 schemes) had been completed pre-AF. The AF would
  cover the remaining 75 schemes which were identified pre-AF and for which IAs had already been
  established, and it would cover other schemes not initially identified pre-AF.

  Component 2. The AF added a policy instrument to support the irrigation sub-sector and the overall
  management of water resources. The inclusion of a policy agenda in Component B was intended to
  strengthen the inter-ministry collaboration among Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock, Ministry
  of Energy and Water, and Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (ICR, paragraph 22).

  New Component. Support for Productivity Enhancement (cost estimate at restructuring: US$5.90
  million, actual cost: US$2.90 million). This component was added with the AF in 2015. It was a reframed
  and scaled-up version of the original sub-component 1.3 (Establishment of demonstration Sites). Supported
  activities would include: the promotion of laser land leveling (LLL) and high efficiency irrigation systems
  (HEIS), training and capacity building for IAs and farmers in various agronomic practices and integrated
  pest management (IPM), demonstration sites to disseminate the range of improved water management and
  agronomic practices, and establishment of a famers’ information service center.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$41 million. This amount was initially revised
  downwards to US$25 million in 2013, then upwards to US$70 million in 2015 after the project received
  US$45 million in additional financing (AF). The actual cost reported in the ICR (page 2) was US$66.51
  million.



  Financing. The project was financed through a Grant worth US$41.00 million through the Afghanistan
  Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF). The Project was restructured in May 2013 with a cancellation of US$16
  million revising the Grant from US$41.00 million to US$25.00 million. An AF for US$45.00 million was
  approved in December 2015, increasing the grant from US$25.00 million to a total of US$70.00 million. The
  actual disbursed amount according to the ICR (page 2) was US$66.51 million.



  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through the ARTF, and no contribution was
  expected from the borrower.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)




   Dates. The project was approved on February 16, 2011 and became effective one month later on March 16,
   2011. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on February 6, 2013, about two years after
   effectiveness. The Grant Request Proposal did not include a specific date for the MTR. The project closed
   on December 31, 2019 compared to an original closing date on June 30, 2014. The extension was
   necessary to accommodate scaling-up the project activities after receiving US$45 million of additional
   financing. The project was restructured four times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring as follows:

   1. On May 1, 2013, when the amount disbursed was US$6.86 million, in order to change the Results
   Framework, change components and associated costs, and cancel US$16 million of the project financing.

   2. On May 1, 2014, when the amount disbursed was US$14.22 million, in order to extend the loan closing
   date by 18 months, from the original closing of June 30, 2014 to December 31, 2015.

   3. On November 8, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$25.00 million, in order to extend the loan
   closing date by four years to December 31, 2019.

   4. On 16 December 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$25.00 million, the project received
   US$45.00 million in additional financing, and changes were introduced to the Results Framework and
   components and associated costs.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Over 70% of Afghanistan’s population lives in rural areas. The National Risk and
Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA) 2007/08 data show that 36% and 6% of households rely on farming and
farm wages, respectively, as their main source of income. Irrigated land area used to be 3.2 million ha.
However, this decreased to 1.4-1.5 million of which only 10% is being irrigated using properly engineered
systems. Further, a third of the irrigated land is not currently cultivated due to water constraints. The project
aimed to reduce water loss in tertiary canals and support proper on-farm water management practices,
which would contribute to improving agricultural productivity. It is also worth noting that at the time of
appraisal the security situation was a major concern in the country.



At appraisal, objectives were in line with the Government's National Agriculture Development Framework
(NADF) where Agriculture Production and Productivity was one among three other pillars. Irrigation
development was included under the Agriculture Production and Productivity pillar. Objectives were also in
line with the the Bank’s Interim Strategy Note (ISM, FY09-FY11) for Afghanistan which under Pillar II
(promoting growth of the rural economy and improving rural livelihoods) emphasized increasing agricultural
productivity and improved social water management as two important components.




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



               At completion, objectives were in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY17-FY20)
               for Afghanistan. Specifically, under Pillar 2 (Supporting inclusive growth), Objective 2.4 (increased
               agricultural productivity) where increased agricultural productivity and increased access to irrigation
               services were emphasized. The ICR did not report on the relevance of objectives with regards to the
               borrower's priorities at completion.



               The statement of objectives was clear, but could have benefited from a reference to the beneficiaries (for
               example: small holders, poor farmers in project areas). Also, the term "efficiency of water used" could have
               been more specific for example efficiency of irrigation water at the tertiary canal level. Finally, the statement
               lacked a connection to higher level objectives, namely, improved household food security and improved
               rural incomes.



               Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve agricultural productivity in project areas by enhancing the efficiency of water used.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To address irrigation inefficiencies at the tertiary canal level, the project would
                             provide technical assistance and investments for the rehabilitation of tertiary canal infrastructure. This would
                             be complemented with supporting irrigation associations to manage the rehabilitated system. These activities
                             were expected to result in increasing the area with improved irrigation combined with better management.
                             The project would also provide demonstration sites for improved agricultural practices which would be
                             complemented with extension activities. These activities would improve farmers' access to technologies for
                             better water efficiency at the farm level. The project would also support capacity building activities to improve
                             institutional capacity and sustain the project's achievements. All these activities combined were expected to
                             enhance efficiency of the water used through increased conveyance speed and reduction of water losses.
                             This would result in improved agricultural productivity. Longer term impacts include improved household food
                             security and increased rural incomes.


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by five assumptions: selected sites have water available with
functioning secondary and primary canals, farmers are willing to form irrigation associations and share part of
the cost, successful maintenance of the rehabilitated infrastructure, farmers adopt relevant technologies and
practices, and favorable climate conditions and manageable pests during the production season. This Review
would also emphasize that the security situation was a major factor that impacted implementation.

Overall, the ToC included activities that were directly linked to the PDO and the stated assumptions were
logical.

Outputs

The outputs below were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) and targets are stated where available:

Improved agricultural productivity

      743 km of watercourse was rehabilitated compared to an original target of 138 km (target exceeded by
         438%).
      648 irrigation associations were established and strengthened compared to an original target of 325
         (target exceeded by 99%).
      3,938 farmers received training/demos of on-farm water-saving techniques (original target: 4000,
         almost achieved).
        408 ha of irrigation demonstration sites established including land leveling and advanced irrigation
         technology (original target: 120 ha, exceeded).
        6 farmers’ information centers built and operational (original target: 5, exceeded).
        1,937 annual on-farm job created (original target: 592, exceeded).
        By 2019, the project had reached 382,700 beneficiaries (of which 187,500 women), well above
         (219%) the target of 120,000 beneficiaries (of which 60,000 women) (ICR, paragraph 33).

Enhancing the efficiency of water used

      Conveyance efficiency reached 80% compared to a baseline of 40% and an original target of 60% and
         a revised target of 65% (target exceeded).
        Conveyance duration was decreased by 64% compared to an original target of 40% and a revised
         target of 65% (almost achieved).
        Time to divert water to farmers' fields was decreased by 65% compared to an original target of 70%
         and a revised target of 65% (target achieved).
        350 Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock staff received training in water management and
         irrigated agriculture (target: 50, exceeded by 600%).
        Draft Law on Irrigation and Drainage was prepared and approved (target achieved).
        4 staff were recruited to the Capacity Building for Results Facility based in the Irrigation Department
         (target: 46, not achieved).



Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



Assessing the outcome of this project is challenging because according to the ICR (paragraph 26) the
reliability of the Results Framework is limited for three main reasons: "First, several of the defined indicators,
baseline values, and set targets were kept vague or inconsistent after appraisal. Second, the reported
periodic achievements were inconsistent across various sources and their data sources unclear. Third, the
analysis of outcomes in the RF does not allow for a strong case for attribution." Due to the shortcomings of
the RF, the ICR relied on a reanalysis of impacts that used more reliable baseline data collected in 2013. The
reanalysis included control schemes as a counterfactual and estimated impacts by Grant closing in 2019."

Impact of the project activities on improving water efficiency. According to the ICR (Annex 1) as a result
of the rehabilitation of tertiary canals, conveyance efficiency reached 80% compared to a baseline of 40%
and an original target of 60% and a revised target of 65% (target exceeded). Also, conveyance duration was
decreased by 64% compared to an original target of 40% and a revised target of 65% (almost
achieved). Time to divert water to farmers' fields was decreased by 65% compared to an original target of
70% and a revised target of 65% (target achieved). While these results were encouraging, the ICR
(paragraph 32) noted that "it is unclear how and when these indicators were evaluated", which cast doubt on
the reliability and accuracy of the reported results. That said, the ICR (paragraph 32) confirmed that the key
output of rehabilitating watercourses reached 743 km exceeding the 138 km target (about 400%). That
said, an over-achievement of the target by 400% does raise questions about the reliability and accuracy of
the reported results and/or about the realism and level of ambition of the target.

Total irrigated hectares reached 75,787 ha by 2019 which exceeded the target of 6despite moderate
shortcomings owing to questions about the quality of output and outcome data. 4,000 ha (by 18%). Water
productivity increased by 17% compared to an ICR target of 20% and an appraisal target of 29%. The ICR
(paragraph 31) explained that the target for water productivity was revised downwards to accommodate
"adjustments to the baseline and end line values to make an accurate comparison."

Impact of the project on increasing agricultural productivity in project areas. Increasing agricultural
productivity was expected to result mainly from improving water use efficiency. According to the ICR
reanalysis, in 2019 wheat yield reached 3.44 tons per ha (t/ha) for the treatment group compared to 2.63 tons
per ha for the control. Meanwhile yield at baseline in 2013 was recorded at 2.27 tons per ha for the treatment
group and 2.08 tons per ha for the control. Using Difference-in-differences with the control group, the
estimated impact of the project was 0.65 t/ha or 34% (relative to baseline for control group). These results are
comparable to similar results cited in the ICR (Table 3) where the project impact evaluation report estimated
the impact of the project at 0.50 t/ha or 18% (relative to baseline), and to the Geospatial Impact Evaluation by
the College of William & Mary estimated the impact at 0.95 t/ha or 19% (relative to median). While the impact
on wheat gain was positive, there was a lack of data on other crop yields or income gains through crop
conversion (ICR, paragraph 30).

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, it is plausible to assume that improved water use efficiency
directly contributed to improvements in agricultural productivity as measured by wheat yield in the project
areas. That said, the targets on policy engagement and coordination were
"either unachieved (such as the intermediate results indicator on the Capacity Building for Results Facility
(CBR)-based staff recruited) or its achievement unclear given the lack of IRIs for other goals under policy
engagement (ICR, paragraph 34)."

Overall, the efficacy of achieving the PDO is rated Substantial based on the ICR reanalysis, but
with moderate shortcomings related to questions about the quality of output and outcome data.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR reanalysis showed that wheat yields increased by 34% in project areas compared to control areas. It
                            is plausible to assume that this increment was mainly a result of improved water conveyance
                            from the rehabilitation of irrigation canals in the project areas. Therefore, the overall Efficacy is rated
                            substantial despite some shortcomings, particularly concerning questions about the quality of the results data
                            generated by a poor M&E system (see Section 9a,b).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex ante

                               The Grant Request Proposal included a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) that used wheat as an example. The
                                CBA estimated that based on a 15% increase in wheat yields, an internal rate of return (IRR) would
                                be 67% at the farm level and 34% at the project level.
                               Wheat was used in the CBA because it was the dominant crop in the country and statistics were
                                available compared to other crops where data was not available.
                               Sensitivity analysis showed that with yield increases of 25% the IRRs would jump above 150% for the
                                farm level and 70% for the project level. If the investment costs would be 25% higher than projected, the
                                financial returns to the project would remain attractive, respectively 45% at the farm level and 25% at the
                                project level.



   ex post

                               The ex-post efficiency analysis at project completion used a two-scenario cost-benefit analysis (CBA).
                                First, a conservative scenario that accounted for costs across all components, the Economic Net Present
                                Value (ENPV) was $51.8 million and the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was 20.7%. Second, a less
                                conservative scenario that accounted for costs under component 1 only, estimated that economic net

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 16
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



         present value (ENPV) was $56.9 million and the economic rate of return (ERR) was 21.9%. The CBA
         was conducted over a 20-year period, with a discount rate of 12%.
        The quantified benefits focused on agricultural production gains (and reductions in cost of production)
         which resulted from higher crop yields and more land coming under cultivation (including an increase in
         irrigated area). These benefits resulted from activities, outputs, and outcomes in component 1. Other
         benefits from components 2 and 3 were excluded.
        A sensitivity analysis showed that under a relatively conservative scenario a decrease in benefits of 10%
         resulted in an ERR of 19.4%, whereas under a less conservative scenario, the same decrease resulted
         in an ERR of 20.4%.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 38) the project's ERR was comparable to other projects in Afghanistan,
         for example, "the ex-ante ERR for irrigation under the National Solidarity Program III (NSP III) was 22%."
        While the ERR of 20.7% at completion was higher than the opportunity cost of capital, it was lower than
         the ERR of 28% estimated at the Additional Financing (AF) in 2015. The annual average cost per ha (the
         sum of costs for Components 1 and 3) decreased from US$919 between 2013-2015 to $553 between
         2017-2019. However, the increase in time and finance was disproportionately higher than the increase in
         scale granted at AF. Financing increased by 70% (from US$41 million to US$70 million while scale
         increased by only 22% (from 52,500 ha to 64,000 ha). The ICR (paragraph 39) attributed this increase in
         cost to the deteriorating security situation and the fragile context of the country.
        According to the ICR (paragraph 96) "the ex post results and AF results are not comparable with the EFA
         results at either appraisal or restructuring due to substantial differences in methodology."



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

The project closing date was extended twice to a total of 5.5 years. This extension was necessary to
accommodate the scale-up of project activities following the Additional Financing. The project experienced
significant delays in rehabilitation activities, which would result in delays in materializing project benefits. There
were also delays in collecting M&E data. The lack of M&E data could potentially impact management decisions
and contribute to implementation delays. There were also implementation delays that stemmed from the lack of
access to rural areas in the country (ICR, paragraph 64). While component 3 (project management) was the
only component to exceed its spending with 23.5% of total disbursements, it was "lower than administrative
costs for other projects in this FCV context (ICR, paragraph 40)."

Overall Efficiency is rated Substantial despite some weaknesses at the administrative level. This rating reflects
a relatively high ex post ERR compared to the opportunity cost of capital, and the achievement of most targets
within budget. That said, this Review raises concern on the quality of data, particularly for benefits, used for the
ex post EFA given the poor M&E of the project (See detailed concerns raised about data quality in Sections 4
and 9).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                    34.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                 20.70
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial despite some questions
raised about the quality of the M&E data on results. The ICR reanalysis showed that wheat yields increased by
34% in project areas compared to control areas. This increment was mainly a result of improved water
conveyance from the rehabilitation of irrigation canals in the project areas. Efficiency was
rated Substantial despite some weaknesses at the administrative level and the same questions regarding data
quality that pertain to Efficacy.

Overall, despite frustrating limitations in the quality of data, the Outcome rating is Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraphs 77 & 78) discussed three main risks that could potentially impact the development
outcome:

1. Political risk and weak government ownership of project activities. The project staff failed to integrate
into the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock/Irrigation Department. This raises
concern whether the project interventions can be sustained and scaled up. Also, there are concerns
regarding the intra- and inter-ministry coordination. Lack of coordination could negatively impact productivity
if complementary investments in agricultural productivity and sustainability of water availability were to be
affected in project areas. Finally, the policy reforms supported by the project are important to sustain the
outcomes by creating strong and accountable institutions.

2. Security. The deteriorating security situation in the country could undermine the achievements of the
project as the rehabilitated works would fall into neglect and irrigation associations might cease to exist.




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



Functional irrigation associations are critical to overlook operation and maintenance of the rehabilitated
works.

3. Climate risk and COVID-19. The worsening climate risks and the recent COVID-19 pandemic pose a
serious challenge to sustaining the progress made on productivity, food production, and food security.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project aimed to develop tertiary canals (watercourses) in medium and large scale projects which
  had their main infrastructure rehabilitated under the Bank-funded Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation
  Project (EIRP). This would maximize returns of these irrigation investments as there is need to
  rehabilitate tertiary canals taking water to the farms and improve on-farm water management. The project
  design benefited from the experience of other irrigation projects in Afghanistan, namely the Bank-funded
  Emergency Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (EIRP) for lessons on improvement of physical irrigation
  infrastructure and the National Solidarity Program (NSP) for lessons on social mobilization and institution
  building. The project also benefited from a simple design that featured the rehabilitation of tertiary canals
  combined with capacity building to develop irrigation associations to manage the system. Design also
  supported approaches to improve on-farm water management through demonstrations and
  farmers training. That said, design could have benefited from more details on the training activities under
  the second component. Design also suffered from a disconnect between the broad scale of the project
  objective and the pilot nature of the project (ICR, paragraph 49).

  Five main risks were identified at the preparation stage, with an overall rating of Substantial. Notable risks
  identified included: the absence of experience on the project-supported activities which were new to the
  country, low overall capacity of ID/MAIL, and high capacity needs for coordination. The Grant Preparation
  Proposal included relevant risk mitigation measures. However, the ICR did not discuss which risk(s)
  materialized and whether the recommended mitigation measure(s) worked. M&E design was adequate,
  but there were minor shortcomings (see section 9 for more details).

  Overall Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating reflects moderate design
  shortcomings including a notable disconnect between the scale of the objective and the pilot nature of the
  project envisioned at the design stage.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented under a worsening security situation and considerable implementation
 challenges (ICR, paragraph 64). The Bank conducted the last mission with field visits in September 2013.
 By July 2014, field visits were cancelled due to security concerns, and project supervision relied on non-

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



 PIU Third-Party Monitoring (TPM). According to the ICR (paragraph 75) the "Bank was proactive in
 supporting necessary and timely adjustments to the project candid and clear in reporting on project
 performance, and diligent in monitoring fiduciary and safeguard compliance." However, the Bank
 supervision suffered from moderate shortcomings, most notable was the lack of oversight over M&E
 implementation (see section 9 b for more details). While a policy agenda was added under component 2 in
 the 2015 AF, it did not support the PDO, and lacked relevant indicators to track outputs and outcomes
 (ICR, paragraph 75). Finally, there were poor transition arrangements (such as the failure to integrate the
 project staff in MAIL/ID) which is a concern for sustainability. That said, the ICR (paragraph 75) noted that
 this was beyond the control of the Bank.

 Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating reflects moderate supervision
 shortcomings, most notable was the lack of oversight over M&E implementation.



 Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory which reflects moderate shortcomings for both the
 Quality at Entry and the Quality of Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Grant Proposal Agreement (GPA) did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not mandated at
 appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR (page 6) included one which reflected the relation between the planned
 project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts. The PDO was to be assessed through three
 project outcome indicators: land productivity of wheat and other crops, water productivity of wheat and
 other crops and the increase in irrigated area. The ICR (paragraph 7) correctly pointed out that the
 achievement of the first outcome was dependent on achieving the second outcome since water availability
 and water losses were the main constraints to improving productivity. While these indicators were relevant
 and directly linked to the PDO, "the source for baseline values was sometimes unclear, such as for land
 and water productivity (ICR, paragraph 65)." Also, set targets were inconsistent after appraisal. Also,
 assessing water productivity is complex and proved to be challenging in Afghanistan. The RF included ten
 intermediate outcome indicators to assess the achievement of the different activities supported by the
 project. These intermediate outcome indicators were relevant, measurable and linked to the stated
 activities. A notable shortcoming was the lack of an intermediate outcome indicator to measure adoption of
 new technologies promoted by the project. The ICR (paragraph 65) reported that the project
 implementation plan "did not detail sampling, data collection, or analysis methods, but it specified
 involvement of an external M&E agency in collecting baseline, midterm, and end-line data."



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



 While M&E design was adequate, it was undermined by the questionable baseline data.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation benefited from a Management Information System (MIS) that tracked outputs and
  gauged implementation progress. The baseline survey was only completed in May 2013 by an external
  M&E agency. The measurement, reporting, and evaluation of outcomes was poor. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 67) "follow-up data was collected in-house where capacity was weak, thereby putting into
  question the soundness of the data collection and analysis methodologies, as well as its independence."
  A notable shortcoming was that land and productivity targets were only measured for wheat, and did not
  include other crops as envisaged. The Mid-Term survey was never conducted, and no information on the
  achievement of outcomes was available until the end-line survey was conducted in 2018 and 2019 (ICR,
  paragraph 55).

  Revision of the RF after the 2015 AF. The original three PDO indicators, land productivity, water
  productivity, and irrigated area remained unchanged, but their targets were slightly revised upwards to
  reflect scale-up of activities. Also, four new intermediate outcome indicators were added to the RF
  (Annual farm jobs created; Number of farmer information centers built and operational; Preparation of a
  draft Law on Irrigation and Drainage; and Recruitment of CBR based staff in the irrigation department),
  and four indicators added in 2013 were dropped (Number of training sessions provided to each irrigation
  association each year; Associated command area covered; Number and type of water saving measures
  demonstrated; and Number of farmers adopting the demonstrated measures). A questionable
  modification was dropping the intermediate indicator measuring the adoption of new technologies,
  because this meant that the project would not track any adoption rates.

  Overall implementation was poor and the soundness of the data collected was questionable.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 68) "poor measurement, reporting, and evaluation of outcomes meant
  that such information could not be used to aid management and decision-making." That said, output
  data was reliable enough to be used by the project management to up scale the project in 2015.The late
  availability of data on achievements of outcomes meant that the project could not make evidence-based
  decisions on whether and by how much to change outcome targets.

  Overall M&E Quality is rated Modest. This rating reflects moderate design shortcomings, poor
  implementation and limited utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as environmental category B. Four safeguard policies were
  triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The social and
  environmental impacts of the project were expected to be small and overall positive. An Environmental and
  Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project was developed, building upon the generic safeguard
  framework developed and used for emergency operations in Afghanistan. The ESMF summary in English
  was sent to the World Bank’s Infoshop on November 12, 2011, and a revised ESMF at AF was disclosed in
  September 2015. Although OP/BP 7.50 was triggered, no notification to other riparian
  countries was required because the activities were rehabilitation works that did not result in exceeding the
  scope of the original scheme.

  Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 71)
  "environmental and social safeguards were satisfactorily complied with." The project conducted regular
  monitoring to ensure that contractors followed the approved Environmental and Social Management Plan
  and complied with environmental and social requirements. However, the project did not provide adequate
  reports on Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) management. A Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM)
  was established and a total of 345 grievances were registered and resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). Quarterly Interim unaudited Financial Reports were filed on time. The
  project addressed the observations of internal and external audit reports and shared evidence with the
  Bank. Two fiduciary issues were flagged: First, asset management remained a constant observation.
  Second, the project deducted a cumulative amount of US$ 122,143.73 as liquidated damages from the
  contractor from project inception until January 2018 and deposited this amount in MAIL Revenue Account.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 72), "Financial management gaps on asset management and liquidated
  damages were resolved."



  Procurement. Procurement of works and goods were all successfully awarded/completed with no
  outstanding issues. However, two procurement issues remain outstanding, first, the procurement plan
  continues to be outdated, and second, two procurement staff had their employment terminated without any
  reason (ICR, paragraph 73).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included seven lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

        To ensure achieving maximum benefits to farmers, projects involving irrigation
         scheme rehabilitation need to be complimented with on-farm technical support and
         investments. The project experience showed that integrating complementary non-
         rehabilitation interventions will help ensure that the benefits of scheme rehabilitation are
         maximized, sustained, and distributed more equitably within communities.
        M&E design needs to be oriented towards measuring and evaluating outcomes to
         provide a comprehensive assessment of the project achievements. The project's M&E
         system was heavily focused on outputs tracking, which introduced unnecessary complexities.
         For example, the project faced difficulties in measuring complex variables such as water
         productivity and income changes from crop conversion.
        Coordination between public institutions needs adequate incentives to ensure smooth
         cooperation in projects that involve irrigation and agriculture components. The project
         experience showed that the public sector coordination on irrigation and agriculture was
         problematic. There were efforts to encourage inter-ministry coordination across the Ministry
         of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock, Ministry of Energy and Water and Ministry of Rural
         Rehabilitation and Development (via engagement on policy development and reform) as well
         as intra-ministry coordination between the Irrigation Directorate and Directorate General of
         Agriculture Extension and Development. However, these efforts were futile or fleeting.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AF: ARTF-On-Farm Water Management (OFWM) (P120398)



Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that M&E design had shortcomings and implementation was poor.
The ICR relied on a reanalysis at completion to assess the project achievements.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible - given
the M&E weaknesses. However, the soundness of the project's M&E data is questionable.

Lessons were generally based on evidence and analysis, and reflected the project experience.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a good discussion on outcomes despite concerns on the accuracy of the
M&E data.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data-to the extent possible to justify the assigned
ratings. Discussion of outcomes was thorough, and the efficiency analysis was reasonable.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided thorough coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. The outputs in Annex 1
lacked targets, and the ICR could have discussed whether the recommended risk mitigation measures worked.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
