     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022195

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132698                                   Skills Development

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55160,IDA-55170                       31-Dec-2019                                         47,812,018.85

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jun-2014                               31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          101,500,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            58,504,065.39                                              0.00

 Actual                                        47,812,018.85                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Katharina Ferl             Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6) and the Financing Agreement of September 12,
   2014 (p. 5), the objective of the project was “to expand the supply of skilled and employable workers by
   increasing access to quality and labor market relevant training programs."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Program Support to the Skills Sector Development Program (appraisal estimate
   US$93.6 million, actual US$47.81 million.

   This component was to use a Performance–Based Financing (PBF) modality. Disbursements up to a
   capped amount were to be made against specific line items in the annual budgets of the Ministry of Youth
   Affairs and Skills Development (MYASD) budget. Disbursement against these eligible expenditure programs
   (EEPs) were to be conditioned on the achievement of specified results, as measured by disbursement–
   linked indicators (DLIs). Three closely related types of interventions were to be supported by this
   component, linked to the five Skills Sector Development Program (SSDP) policy areas: (a) strengthening
   governance and management (policy area 1 of the SSDP); (b) enhancing the quality and relevance of
   training (policy areas 2 and 3); and (c) increasing access to training opportunities (policy areas 4 and 5).

   This component was to finance the following pillars:

   Pillar 1: Strengthening Sector Governance and Management: The main objective was to strengthen
   governance and management of the sector through a tighter and more intensive focus on results and more
   efficient use of resources. This pillar was to support reforms to accomplish the following objectives: a)
   ensuring adequate and predictable financing of the sector; b) improving analysis of labor market supply and
   demand; c) improving monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of training provider performance; d) increasing
   coordination within MYASD and across ministries; e) rationalizing utilization of existing Technical and
   Vocational Education and Training (TVET) resources; and f) implementing performance–based financing to
   support institutions that perform well. For this pillar, the release of IDA funds was to be linked to
   achievement of three DLIs: a) MYASD’s annual budget approved and executed in line with the SSDP and
   its fiscal and budgetary framework (DLI1); b) timely availability of reliable institution and agency data and
   periodic analysis of courses, centers, and teacher performance (DLI2); and c) performance–based funding
   of public training providers designed, piloted, evaluated, and expanded (DLI3).

   Pillar 2: Improving the Quality and Relevance of Skills Development: The objective was to improve the
   quality and relevance of the skills development programs offered by all public and private institutions and
   non-governmental organizations. This pillar was to support: a) simplifying, updating and developing the
   National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) system to respond to employer needs, including increasing demand
   for soft skills; b) addressing the shortage of qualified instructors by designing and putting in place a revised
   teacher management policy (recruitment, retention, and career progression) with special allowances linked
   to performance; c) designing and implementing a teacher professional development program to upgrade
   instructor skills; d) establishing effective mechanisms and incentives to involve employers in training design
   and management of training institutions; and e) unifying the Sri Lanka qualification framework and
   establishing pathways between general and technical education. For this pillar, release of IDA funds was to
   be linked to the achievement of the following DLIs: a) more relevant training programs for students through
   increased employer participation (DLI4); b) improved quality assurance mechanisms (DLI5); c)


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Skills Development (P132698)



  implementation of a revised human resource policy and plan (DLI6); and iv) upgrading of teaching staff
  skills in priority areas (DLI7).

  Pillar 3: Expanding Access to Quality Skills Training: Under this pillar, the government was to increase
  equitable access to quality skills development programs through priority interventions that the project was to
  support and monitor: a) designing and conducting a social awareness strategy to inform the public of the
  benefits of skills training and reduce attached stigma; b) adopting a mechanism (the employment–linked
  training agreement (ETA)) to increase the number of trainees in key growth sectors by purchasing training
  services from private or public providers; c) designing and launching a targeted stipend program to remove
  financial obstacles for meritorious low–income students and workers; and d) expansion of market–driven
  middle–level technician training programs by setting up university colleges. For this pillar, the release of IDA
  funds was to be linked to the following DLIs: i) implementation of the ETA model (DLI8) and ii) improved use
  and dissemination of system information (DLI9).

  Component 2: Innovation, Results Monitoring, and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$7.9
  million, actual disbursement was zero): This component was to strengthen the capacity of the MYASD
  and its participating agencies and help them achieve the SSDP objectives. This component was to provide
  financing for M&E, coordination, planning, communication, financial management, procurement, and
  safeguards. It was to also support the MYASD to design and realize policy reforms, such as piloting and
  evaluating innovative approaches and facilitating regular dialogue between the public and private sectors on
  skills. This component was to finance training, recruitment of short- and long-term technical experts,
  studies, surveys and evaluations, and procurement of goods for specific activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$93.6 million. Actual cost was US$47.81 million due to
  implementation delays that resulted in the cancellation of US$43.4 million (differences in Dollar amounts are
  due to exchange rate changes).

  Financing: The project was part of the Skills Development Program (SDP), financed by a Bank credit in the
  amount of US$21.7 million (of which zero disbursed), a Bank credit in the amount of US$79.8 million (of
  which US$47.81 million disbursed), and planned financing in the amount of US$100 million by the Asian
  Development Bank (ADB), US$26 million by the Korean Government, and US$17 million by the German
  Technical Assistance Corporation, for which no actual financing data was provided in the ICR.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$417 million. The Bank team (July 2, 2020)
  stated that the ICR was not able to obtain any actual financing data from the Borrower.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 20, 2014. On September 23, 2019, the project was restructured
  to: i) shift responsibilities among implementing agencies; ii) amend components and costs; iii) cancel
  US$43.3 million in undisbursed funds due to unlikely achievement of the PDO, following lengthy discussion
  between the Bank and the government that did not reach an agreement on project restructuring; iv)
  reallocate between disbursement categories; v) change institutional arrangements; and vi) change the
  implementation schedule. The project closed as scheduled on December 31, 2019.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Skills Development (P132698)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), in 2012, two years before project appraisal, Sri Lanka was a lower-middle-
income country with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita of US$2,923. While the GDP was above
the South Asia region as a whole, it was considerably below the average for middle-income countries. The
economy was transitioning from a predominantly rural, agriculture-based economy to an urban economy
centered on services and manufacturing. Sri Lanka had been making significant progress on its human
development indicators. At the time of project appraisal, Sri Lanka’s workforce was the most educated in
South Asia with about 96 percent of its citizens completing primary school and 87 percent completing
secondary school. The primary net enrollment rate was 99 percent and the country had achieved gender
parity in both primary and secondary education.

However, the ICR (p. 5) stated that out of a cohort of approximately 450,000 students who finished the
grade 11 terminal exam from the general education system, only approximately 20 percent were expected
to obtain higher education and only a third of the remaining students were likely to pursue a TVET
program. This resulted in only a small fraction of the labor force having any vocational education and
training.

According to the ICR (p. 6), the government tried to address the skills gaps and mismatches of the
workforce through TVET. However, there were several challenges: i) low quality and relevance of skills
development programs, not meeting the needs of the labor market; ii) low access to TVET, especially for
women and economically disadvantaged youth; iii) limited public financing for skills development, resulting
in underinvestment; and iv) centralized structures and procedures that negatively impacted demand-
oriented skills development opportunities.

In order to address these challenges, the government adopted the SSDP for the period 2014-2020. The
project’s objective supported the SSDP. Also, according to the ICR (p. 12), the project’s objective was in
line with the 2019 National Policy on Technical and Vocational Education, which aimed to: i) improve the
quality and relevance of TVET programs, increasing employer and industry collaboration in TVET provision,
and enhancing human resources in TVET; ii) improving access to training; and iii) fostering more efficient
use of resources. Furthermore, the project was in line with Sri Lanka’s Vision 2025, which aims to drive
economic transformation by increasing annual export income, attracting foreign direct investment, and
creating employment opportunities for at least one million people by 2025.

At the time of appraisal, the project’s objective was in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy
(FY12-16), which aimed to aimed to support Sri Lanka in achieving its middle-income country agenda,
especially through investments in education, skills, and research, and innovation to support structural shifts
in the economy. At the time of project closure, the project’s objective was in line with the Bank’s most recent
Country Partnership Framework (FY17-20), which aims to “strengthen education and training systems to
deliver the skills needed for the advanced industrial and service sector activities of a globally competitive
middle-income country" (p. 24).


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Skills Development (P132698)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Expand the supply of skilled workers by increasing access to quality and labor market relevant training
                programs

                Rationale
                The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as spending recurrent and capital budget
                releases in accordance with an imprest plan, implementation of M&E plans, and production of analytical
                reports were to result in the intermediate outcome of improved governance and management of the skill
                sector. Also, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as establishing Industry
                Sector Skills Council (ISSCs) for priority sectors, training registered providers, accrediting training programs,
                setting up Quality Management Systems (QMS) in training institutions, recruiting TVET teachers, and training
                TVET teachers and other staff were to result in the intermediate outcome of improving quality of training
                programs. These two intermediate outcomes were to result in the project’s objective of increasing the supply
                of skilled workers.



                Outputs to strengthen skills sector governance and management:

                        104 public training institutions developed and implemented Center Management Plans (CMPs) that
                         were used to inform the government’s regular funding allocation to centers based on the needs
                         identified. These plans were also an incentive for the centers to increase the number of students,
                         utilization of resources, introduction of new courses, improvement of industry and community
                         involvement in skills training, etc. The PBF model that was envisioned for the project included two
                         aspects: first, the development and implementation of CMPs by each institution, and second,
                         additional funds against several defined performance criteria following the implementation of CMPs.
                         However, government policy was not amended as planned to support application of the PBF model.
                         Therefore, the target of 80 public institutions being covered by PBF was not achieved (DLI3).
                        ISSCs in four economic priority areas such as information and communication technology (ICT),
                         construction manufacturing, and tourism were established. The aim of the ISSCs was to foster
                         industry expertise for sector skills gap analysis, development and updating of competency standards
                         and training programs, teacher training, industry orientation and career fairs, and awareness building
                         activities on TVET, in order to improve the market relevance of training programs and alignment of the
                         skills of workers to job market demand.
                        A quality assurance system to register 1,290 public and private institutions under the Tertiary and
                         Vocational Education Commission was established, not achieving the DLI5 target of 2,481 institutions.
                         2,691 courses were accredited, not achieving the target of 3,601 courses.

                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills Development (P132698)




     The number of training providers with NVQ levels 1 to 6 and with a QMS increased from 8 in 2013 to
        234 in 2019, not achieving the target of 340 providers.
       The percentage of capital releases spent in accordance with the imprest plan increased from 75
        percent in 2013 to 100 percent in 2019, exceeding the target of 85 percent. The percentage of
        recurrent releases spent in accordance with the imprest plan remained steady at 98 percent, meeting
        the target.
       In 2013 only two out of nine entities submitted audit reports in a timely manner. This increased to 39
        entity audit reports of MYASD and participating agencies being submitted on a timely basis (by June
        30th) in 2019, not achieving the target of 45 entities.
       Four ISSCs or equivalent were functional in priority sectors by project closure, achieving the target of
        four ISSCs. According to the Bank team (July 2, 2020), the aim of the ISSCs was to provide industry
        expertise for sector skills gap analysis, development and updating of competency standards and
        training programs, etc.
       Five institutions provided timely reliable data on institutional and sector performance, achieving the
        target of five institutions (DLI2). Data provided included information on enrollment, completion rates,
        and certifications by courses, centers, and teachers, as well as data on employment outcomes of
        TVET graduates.
       The implementation of the MYASD annual budget was approved in line with the government’s SSDP
        and medium-term budgetary framework, achieving the target of DLI1.
       The proposed restructuring included a new activity, the establishment of Centers of Excellence
        (CoEs). According to the ICR (p. 25), implementation of this new concept required substantial capacity
        building within the implementing agency. Also, it took a long time for the MYASD's Skills Development
        Division (SDD) and the Bank to agree on the activity's design, and several issues came up. First, there
        was disagreement on the autonomy of CoEs, which, according to the government, would have
        required a lengthy approval process including the Department of Management Services, the National
        Budgets, and other agencies. These consultations would have required an extension of the
        implementation period. Second, several actions that had to be implemented by the SDD in preparation
        for the restructuring, such as selecting the COEs, were not completed during the set time period.
        Third, after ministerial leadership changes, the Bank was asked to include the construction of housing
        facilities for school principals under the proposed restructuring. The Bank asked for further clarification
        on this request, which was not received. And fourth, the National Agency for Public Private
        Partnerships under the Ministry of Finance was to implement a sub-component on private sector
        training delivery. However, the Ministry of Skills did not agree. All these bottlenecks prevented
        agreement on pathways forward, resulting in the cancellation of remaining undisbursed financing.



Outputs to improve the quality of teaching:

     To improve teaching strength, a human resources (HR) policy and professional development plan was
      developed, followed by implementation of staff performance allowances in five implementing agencies
      under the new HR plan. These reforms were seen as important to attract and keep talent in the skills
      sector. However, the target for DLI6 - teacher recruitment (at least five major TVET entities having
      filled 90% of needed teacher positions) was not achieved.
     832 teacher posts were sanctioned and 596 posts were filled between 2014 and 2019.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills Development (P132698)




      The teacher vacancy ratio decreased from 34.46 percent in 2013 to 33.40 percent in 2019, not
       achieving the target of 10 percent.
      6,049 TVET teachers were trained in subject-based training, updated curricular activity delivery,
       leadership and soft skills, induction training for new staff, and diploma and postgraduate programs,
       surpassing the DLI7 target of 2,640 teachers. Also, 1,492 assessors were trained in ICT, assessment
       practices, leadership, and soft skills to improve the quality of assessments, surpassing the DLI7 target
       of 1,000 assessors.



Outcomes:

      The number of trainees enrolled in public and private training institutions increased from 148,131
       trainees (of whom 81,047 were male and 67,084 were female) in 2012 to 940,848 trainees (of whom
       538,781 were male and 402,067 were female) in 2018, surpassing the target of 827,241 trainees
       (452,609 male and 374,632 female). Of these trainees, 291,397 received competency-based training
       and certification (NVQ), exceeding the target of 180,000.
      However, according to the ICR (p. 13), the provision of free TVET in public institutions in 2016
       resulted in a surge in enrolled trainees, but many were not committed to completing their programs.
       The completion rate of trainees enrolled in public institutions decreased from 77 percent (74 percent
       male and 81 percent female) in 2012 to 67 percent (64 percent male and 72 percent female) in 2018,
       not achieving the target of 81 percent (78 percent male and 84 percent female). In addition, a "chronic
       shortage" of assessors resulted in a longer waiting period for assessments, which then led to
       some students completing their trainings and starting jobs even though they had not undertaken a
       final assessment (ICR, p. 13; the ICR did not discuss the reasons for the shortage of assessors even
       with the target for assessor training having been exceeded). Overall, while the number of students
       recruited to public TVET institutions rose as a result of the project, the number of students completing
       these programs, while remaining marginally above baseline for most years of the project, did not
       increase commensurately (ICR, Annex 11).



While some of the targeted outcomes were achieved, completion rates declined, and the absolute number of
program completers remained relative stagnant. Several outputs related to the improvement of quality of
teaching and strengthening of governance and management were not achieved. Overall, the achievement of
the first objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Expand the supply of employable workers by increasing access to quality and labor market relevant training
programs

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Skills Development (P132698)




Rationale
The project’s theory of change envisioned that project outputs such as the ETA model being piloted,
implemented, and scaled up in priority sectors, placing students in jobs through the ETA program, conducting
awareness programs, and disseminating labor market information were to result in the intermediate project
outcomes of enhanced labor market relevance of TVET programs and increased access to quality and
relevant programs and improved social perception of TVET. Neither the PAD nor the ICR provided a
definition of “employable."



Outputs:

      291,397 trainees (of whom 118,383 were female) received competency-based training and
       certification aligned with industry needs, surpassing the target of 180,000 trainees. Of these NVQ
       graduates, 7,247 trainees (of whom were 2,601 female) completed the highest two levels of
       accreditation (NVQ5-6).
      An ETA model was piloted and scaled up to promote public-private partnership in skills training and
       encourage private providers to raise the quality of training and ensure employment of graduates
       through an incentive-based scheme, achieving DLI8 (implementing the ETA model). The ETA model
       was piloted in the construction sector in 2015, and in 2019 was expanded to four additional economic
       priority sectors: manufacturing, hospitality, ICT, and health care). A total of 5,092 students (of whom
       2,601 were female) benefitted from the ETA program, surpassing the target of 3,500 students. The
       ICR (p. 19) stated that, according to the SSDP, the average employment rate of NVQ-certified ETA
       beneficiaries six months after completing the program was 69 percent in 2016 and 50 percent in 2017
       across the supported sectors and occupations. The average employment rate for ETA graduates in
       high-demand sectors was higher in 2018: for construction, 95 percent, and health care, 88 percent.
       The ICR also stated that when the program expanded, the tracking of graduates became more
       challenging due to the lack of a Management Information System (MIS).



Outcomes:

      The average earnings of TVET graduates relative to earnings of General Certificate of Education
       (GCE)-O level graduates increased from a ratio of 1.08 in 2013 to 1.15 in 2018, surpassing the target
       of 1.12. The average earning of male TVET graduates relative to earnings of GCE-O level graduates
       increased from a ratio of 1 in 2013 to 1.18 in 2018, surpassing the target of 1.04.
      In 2017, a Skills Demand Survey found that 43.2 percent of employers were satisfied with TVET
       graduates, not achieving the target of 55 percent. According to the ICR (p. 17), the baseline and
       midline used different questions to capture employer satisfaction. Therefore, these two data points do
       not provide a reliable comparative measure.
      The ICR (p. 18) used National Labor Force Survey (LFS) rounds to calculate employment rates
       among youth with and without TVET. The employment rate among youth between the ages of 15 and
       25 with TVET increased from 70 percent in 2014 to 74 percent in 2017. Among youth without TVET,
       there was no change in the average employment rate during the same time period.



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Skills Development (P132698)




                                   Two rounds of an ADB tracer study of graduates from training institutes under SSDP support showed
                                    that the employment rate among TVET certificate graduates increased from 47.5 percent in 2011 to
                                    54.5 percent in 2016, but then declined to 51 percent in 2019. The ICR (p. 18) stated that the main
                                    reason for the decline was an increase in the number of TVET graduates pursuing higher education
                                    (approximately 31 percent more in 2019 than reported in the 2016 tracer survey). According to the
                                    tracer study, TVET graduates who received a NVQ accreditation had a consistently higher
                                    employment rate than non-NVQ qualified graduates. Furthermore, using the national employment rate
                                    definition (employment rate = number employed within six months of course completion / total
                                    surveyed sample – voluntarily unemployed), the employment rate among TVET graduates increased
                                    from 56.2 percent in 2016 to 64.8 percent in 2019. For NVQ certified graduates, the rate increased
                                    from 57.8 percent in 2016 to 65 percent in 2019.
                                   The average earnings of female TVET graduates relative to earnings of GCE-O level graduates
                                    decreased from a ratio of 1.14 in 2012 to a ratio of 1.04 in 2018. According to the ICR (p. 17), the
                                    reason for the decline in female TVET graduates’ income might be related to the programs they
                                    chose. The ICR stated that females might have chosen courses that did not respond to labor market
                                    demand and hence lowered the chances of employment and income increases compared to male
                                    TVET graduates.



                            Although employment and earnings rates of TVET graduates increased, the ICR presented insufficient
                            evidence of a direct correlation between the project's activities and the improved employability of workers.
                            The selected indicators (“average earning of TVET graduates” and “employer satisfaction index”) to measure
                            achievement of the objective were not adequate, as they were affected by exogenous factors; it is not clear
                            whether gains were due to project-supported training or to other factors related to economic growth and the
                            labor market. Furthermore, the indicator “employment rate of TVET graduates” was not measured by the
                            project, as the baseline was set based on a Skills Toward Employment and Productivity (STEP) survey, and a
                            planned follow-up round of this STEP survey was not conducted. Achievement of this objective is therefore
                            rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of both objectives is rated Modest. While enrollment in public TVET programs increased,
                            the number of skilled graduates remained relatively stagnant due to program non-completion and student
                            entry into the job market without completing assessment. Various measures show improved employment
                            performance of TVET graduates, but there is inadequate information to demonstrate that this was due to
                            project-supported training rather than general labor market trends. In addition, the ICR provided a useful
                            Annex 7 with detailed information about contributions in the sector from other partners, but it did not include


                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Skills Development (P132698)



  an analysis of how this project fit into that landscape. Taking everything together, the project’s overall Efficacy
  rating is Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence


 5. Efficiency
The PAD (p. 90) included an economic analysis of the project. The PAD identified the SSDP's expected
benefits, to which the project was expected to contribute, as increasing the employability and earnings of TVET
graduates by improving the quality and relevance of the skills they acquire. At the sectoral level, project-
supported interventions were expected to: a) improve TVET system management and sector financing efficiency
through organizational and managerial reforms and better M&E; b) enhance the quality and relevance of TVET
programs by increasing employer involvement in program design and delivery; and c) expand private
participation in the delivery of training programs by creating incentives and a more favorable environment. For
society, project benefits were expected to include: a) a more productive labor force of workers with quality labor
market-relevant skills; b) strengthened firm productivity and competitiveness through the more productive labor
force; c) heightened performance of the economy because workers and firms are being more productive; and d)
potential reduction of school-work transition times for TVET graduates, which could help to address Sri Lanka’s
youth unemployment problem.

The PAD calculated for the SSDP (2014-20) an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 3 percent and a Net
Present Value (NPV) of US$ 40.1 million (using a discount rate of 12 percent). The ICR (p. 20) recalculated the
NPV and EIRR at appraisal, as the PAD used 2012 STEP data, but labor market outcome indicators have since
been updated using the annual LFS (2013 – 2017), which is not comparable to the STEP 2012 data. The
recalculated NPV at appraisal was US$131.9 million and the EIRR was 5 percent.

According to the ICR (p. 20), at project closure, based on the actual number of TVET graduates and the cost of
the SSDP, the NPV was calculated at US$107.8 million due to lower benefits arising from fewer people
completing TVET compared to the target. The IRR was estimated at 16 percent due to the reduction in project
costs.

The ICR conducted an additional cost-benefit analysis on the investments made through the government’s
SSDP. The analysis was based on cohort-based-age-specific earning profiles between 2014 and 2019. The ICR
(p. 20) stated that, since earnings increase with age, using average earnings differences between TVET and
non-TVET graduates of all age groups from the beginning of their careers distorts the discounted value of the
benefit at present. The analysis used target beneficiaries with base scenarios and actual beneficiaries with base
and high-impact scenarios, resulting in a NPV of US$170.3 million and an EIRR of 10 percent.

These analyses suggest that the project was a worthwhile investment.

However, there were significant shortcomings in operational efficiency. The project experienced significant
implementation delays, especially during the first year, due to national elections and resulting changes in
ministries. Across the implementation period, frequent institutional changes, high staff turnover, and lack of
continuous leadership as well as skills sector coordination and engagement issues all resulted in implementation
delays. According to the ICR (p. 23), due to limited planning, communication, and coordination of technical

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Skills Development (P132698)



assistance between the Bank, the government and the ADB, the government was reluctant to use the technical
assistance credit under component 2 because of a grant-based technical assistance that supported similar
activities under an operation implemented by the ADB. Also, all DLIs were of equal weight independent from
their significance for achieving policy reforms, resulting in the implementation of easier to achieve DLIs first.

Furthermore, discussions between the Bank and the government regarding project restructuring lasted 16
months and did not result in an agreement. These challenges resulted in the cancellation of approximately
US$43.4 million.

Based on these significant shortcomings, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objectives was High, given alignment with the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (FY17-20), which aims to “strengthen education and training systems to deliver the skills needed for
the advanced industrial and service sector activities of globally competitive middle-income country." Efficacy
was Modest. While enrollment in public TVET programs increased, the number of skilled graduates remained
relatively stagnant due to program non-completion and student entry into the job market without completing
assessment. Various measures show improved employment performance of TVET graduates, but there is
inadequate information to demonstrate that this was due to project-supported training rather than general labor
market trends. Efficiency was Modest due to operational inefficiencies such as significant implementation delays
and the cancellation of US$43.4 million. Therefore, the project experienced significant shortcomings, and the
overall Outcome rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The potential risks to development outcome can be classified into the following broad categories:

Political: According to the ICR (p. 31), the project’s objectives continue to remain relevant for economic
development. Some of the project activities, such as quality assurance under TVEC and the expansion of the
ETA program, have already been taken up as regular activities with a dedicated budget under the
government program.

Technical: The ICR (p. 21) stated that the project was able to improve budget planning and built
management capacity at the ministerial and implementation levels. Also, TVET sector planning capacity was
improved and the HR system of the MYASD strengthened by introducing an HR policy and professional
development plan aiming to support need-based teacher recruitment, incentivize good performance to keep
talented staff, and build teaching capacity in priority areas through relevant professional development
opportunities.

Financing: Changes to the economic environment or rapid technological advances will require continuous
financing to developing TVET training that incorporates newly introduced technology. According to the ICR
(p. 31), the new government is continuing to work with development partners such as the Bank and the ADB
in these areas.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 10), the project design took into account lessons learned from previous IDA-
  financed projects in Sri Lanka and skills operations in other countries financed by the Bank and the ADB.
  These lessons included: i) sustained leadership and commitment are critical in raising awareness of skills
  development and making it a priority in the country’s economic development plan; ii) coordination and
  monitoring are essential for reducing inefficiencies in the delivery of skills programs and meeting labor
  market skills demand; iii) a market-driven, responsive skills development system is critical; iv) policy
  interventions to incentivize training providers are essential for enhancing diversity and excellence in
  training and improving accountability for training results; v) adequate and predictable short- and medium-
  term financing is essential for rational planning; vi) a robust M&E system is critical for achieving results;
  vii) donor activities need to be coordinated.

  According to the ICR (p. 23), the Bank did not sufficiently coordinate with other development partners
  such as the ADB, which prepared a project to support the SSDP at the same time. While the ADB also
  used DLIs, they were significantly different for similar interventions and project results targets. Also, the
  ICR (p. 29) stated that the design of component 2 (technical assistance) was not sufficiently coordinated
  with analogous activities to be implemented by the ADB. Therefore, the government did not want to use
  component 2 to finance technical assistance, since the ADB supported similar activities.

  Implementation risks in the PAD (p. 13) were identified. The risk of limited implementation and absorptive
  capacity was rated as High. The risks of fragmentation of responsibilities between ministries and

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)



  agencies, lack of coordination (making accurate identification of development needs difficult), budget
  shortfall and unavailability of resources on a timely basis, and limited involvement of the private sector
  were rated as Substantial. However, mitigation strategies were inadequate. The project design was
  complex and included the involvement of nine implementing agencies and university colleges. Also, the
  project was to be implemented by a new ministry and implementing agency using the PBF mechanism.
  Furthermore, it was the first project for the Bank in the sector.

  The ICR (p. 23) stated that mitigation measures included DLIs on adequate and timely budget availability,
  fostering links with the private sector, and providing technical assistance to strengthen implementation
  capacity. However, according to the ICR (p. 29), institutional changes and frequent turnover in leadership
  had a negative impact on the adequacy of mitigation measures. It was not adequately anticipated that the
  government would not develop policy to permit full implementation of the PBF mechanism (see Section
  4).

  The results framework was comprehensive but had several significant shortcomings (see Section 9a for
  more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 30), the project had four different Task Team Leaders over a five-year
 implementation period, which did not allow for continuous dialogue and follow-up with the project
 management unit and other stakeholders. Also, the Bank did not conduct regular supervision missions.
 The Region's comments (September 28, 2020) on the draft of this ICR Review stated that the Bank could
 not conduct regular supervision missions due to a highly volatile political environment. The comments
 further stated that due to frequent changes in counterparts, issues had to be re-debated and agreements
 reached several times over a period of 18 months. Also, supervision was hampered due to government
 requirements to hold off on supervision missions (between 2014 and 2016 only four supervision missions
 were conducted) until new authorities came on board, resulting in delays.

 According to the Bank team (July 2, 2020) a total of 11 supervision missions were conducted, but the ICR
 stressed that a single consultant in the field provided daily project support. Furthermore, the lack of
 supervision resulted in reporting delays of untracked PDO indicators, and lack of progress on actions
 decided during the 2017 mid-term review (MTR). The lack of regular supervision activities resulted in
 delays. The Bank team did not note until the MTR that three out of four PDO indicators and several
 intermediate outcome indicators were not being tracked. The ICR (p. 30) stated that until the MTR, the
 project’s focus was mainly on achieving the DLIs rather than the project’s objectives. Even though the
 government and other development partners adjusted program activities when bottlenecks had been
 identified, the Bank did not do so. According to the ICR (p. 30), the project would have benefited, in the
 case of DLI5 - quality assurance, from integrating the QMS activity into a rebranded Quality Improvement
 System. Also, since PBF could not be completely implemented, the project could have benefited from
 tracking CMP development and implementation in public training institutions (DLI3). Furthermore, the ICR



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)



 (p. 30) stated that, while the project’s Implementation Status Reports and Aides Memoire were generally
 candid and submitted on a timely basis, they lacked focus on results.

 Given several implementation challenges, the Bank and the government aimed to restructure the project.
 However, due to overly lengthy discussions that did not reach agreement and the project being in an
 Unsatisfactory status, it was decided to cancel the remaining funds instead.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s results framework was comprehensive and included four PDO indicators and 14 intermediate
 outcome indicators. The majority of the indicators had a baseline and all included a target. The project’s
 theory of change and linkages between key activities, outputs, and intended outcomes were sound and
 reflected in the results framework. While the first part of the objective (“increase the supply of skilled
 workers”) was clearly defined, the second part of the objective (“increase the supply of employable
 workers”) was not sufficiently defined. Therefore, it was not clear how “employable” should be measured.
 The selected PDO indicator “average earnings of TVET graduates relative to earnings of GCE-O level
 graduates" was not a good measure for this objective, since earnings of TVET graduates were influenced
 by external factors beyond the project’s scope. Also, the PDO indicator “employer satisfaction index” could
 not be directly linked to the objective. The third PDO indicator measured the completion rate for trainees in
 public institutions, but there was no measure of outcomes related to the project's efforts in raising the
 quality of private training providers.

 Disbursements up to a capped amount were to be made against specific line items in annual MYASD
 budgets. In addition, disbursement against these EEPs was conditioned on the achievement of specified
 results, as measured by the DLIs stated above.

 The SDD of the MYASD was responsible for the project’s M&E activities, which were to include periodic
 review of program and project progress, preparing and disseminating periodic progress review reports on
 monitoring indicators, preparing and communicating progress on DLIs, and preparing and disseminating
 Annual Performance Reports on the National SSDP and any other report requested by the MYASD.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 11), the MTR in November 2017 found that out of the four PDO indicators, only
  the first PDO indicator (number of trainees enrolled in public and private training institutions) was on track
  to achieve its target. The second PDO indicator (completion rate of trainees enrolled in public institutions)

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)



  was significantly below target, and the third PDO indicator (average earnings of TVET graduates relative
  to earnings of GCE-O level graduates) and fourth PDO indicator (employer satisfaction index) were not
  being measured. The ICR (p. 25) stated that the project’s M&E shortcomings were due to the lack of a
  dedicated M&E expert within the SDD, poor understanding of the third and fourth PDO indicators, and
  gaps in data collection. Also, M&E arrangements were complex and required coordination with partnering
  agencies and training institutions. Furthermore, an MIS was not implemented as planned.

  The ICR (p. 25) stated that most of the intermediate outcome indicators were tracked on a regular basis
  based on administrative data and published statistics from national surveys. Also, according to the ICR
  (p. 27), some important studies such as a performance analysis report of four major TVET agencies
  (Ceylon German Technical Training Institute, Department of Technical Education and Training, National
  Apprentice and Industrial Training Authority, and Vocational Training Authority) and four skills gap
  analysis for ICT, construction, tourism, and light engineering sectors were conducted.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 27), progress reports on project activities informed decision-making on follow-
  on activities. Also, the skills gap analysis provided information for training programs and other activities,
  which were implemented by four ISSCs for the ICT, construction, manufacturing, and tourism sectors.
  However, the ICR also stated that the tracking of intermediate outcome indicators was insufficient. Also,
  the lack of an integrated MIS and analysis resulted in a low utilization of M&E data for decision making
  such as adjusting activities to address declining completion rates of TVET students and low employer
  satisfaction.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) due to the financing of rehabilitation/renovation/refurbishment of existing
   training institutions. According to the ICR (p. 28), an environmental due diligence guideline was developed
   that focused on environmental standards for planned rehabilitation and construction in existing TVET
   institutions. The project also adopted the Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework
   developed by the ADB, which was accepted by the Bank as the environmental assessment. The ICR stated
   that the project management unit had an environmental safeguard expert to ensure compliance with the
   Bank’s safeguards. The project did not experience any significant safeguard-related issues. However, due
   to the slow handling of one complaint, the project’s safeguard rating was downgraded to Moderately
   Unsatisfactory in August 2019. However, the complaint was addressed appropriately, and the complainant
   received compensation for damages from the project. Overall, the project complied with OP/BP 4.01 (ICR,
   p. 28).




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Skills Development (P132698)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (p. 29), the project’s procurement was rated Satisfactory throughout project
   implementation. The project did not implement any procurement activities under component 2. However,
   the project management unit's procurement staff was trained on preparing procurement plans and use of
   IDA’s electronic Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement system.

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (p. 28), the project’s Financial Management (FM) performance was rated Satisfactory
   throughout most of the implementation period. During two supervision missions it was downgraded to
   Moderately Satisfactory due to delays in external audit, weaknesses in financial reporting, and inadequate
   financial management staff. The ICR stated that the project management unit experienced FM staffing
   issues but addressed these issues by speeding up the process for identifying qualified FM staff. According
   to the ICR (p. 29), interim unaudited reports were submitted in a timely manner, and the quality of the
   annual consolidated audited financial statements was found satisfactory. However, the audit opinion was
   qualified in some of the consolidated annual financial statements. The Bank team (July 2, 2020) stated that
   this was due to delays in the submission of audit reports (in some instances due to elections, a terrorist
   attack, and changes in government personnel).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Skills Development (P132698)




The ICR (pp. 31-33) included several key lessons learned, adapted here by IEG:

        Identifying a stable location for basing the project management unit so that it is not
         affected by ministerial and leadership changes has a positive impact on project
         implementation. In this project, the project management unit was moved among eight
         different ministries and was subject to continuous changes in leadership at various levels
         resulting in implementation delays and significant loss of institutional memory. Also, due to
         these changes, the dialogue with the government stopped, resulting in a two-year stalemate
         and the cancellation of IDA resources.
        Tying appropriate incentives to targets to ensure timely achievement of DLIs is critical
         in a results-based operation. In this project, all DLIs were of equal weight independent
         of their significance for achieving policy reforms. Process-linked DLIs were achieved much
         more easily than output- or outcome-linked DLIs. Linking the output-outcome results to
         higher value amounts during the final years of implementation might have helped to place
         greater emphasis and incentives among different actors to achieve the desired results.
        Coordinating and cooperating with other development partners positively affects
         strengthening project outcomes and avoiding duplications. This project and a project by
         the ADB were prepared at the same time. While both entities agreed to coordinate, there
         were significant differences in the DLI design and project result targets. This resulted in
         inefficiencies and ultimately a government not to use the Bank’s financing for the
         project's technical assistance component. Also, the government having to work with two
         different DLI designs might have added an extra administrative burden.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation, complied with guidelines,
and included an appropriate economic analysis. Also, the ICR was internally consistent and relatively concise,
providing additional data where needed outside the results framework. Especially, the ICR included a useful
analysis of DP contributions, and provided additional data to support the efficacy discussion. Furthermore, the
ICR provided useful lessons learned that were sufficiently detailed to allow for a learning experience for other
Bank projects. However, the explanation for the project's cancellation of funds did not become clear until
relatively late in the document, and the impacts of frequent government changes on project implementation
were not fully explained. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Skills Development (P132698)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
