     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022199

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P099895                                      MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Bulgaria                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78340                                   31-Dec-2015                                           63,797,393.70

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Nov-2009                                  31-Dec-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             118,700,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              102,580,246.91                                                 0.00

 Actual                                            64,854,030.71                                                0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero          Victoria Alexeeva            Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Objectives

   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 10),
   the project development objectives (PDOs) were:

           to improve the reliability and quality of water provision to the communities in selected settlements in
            the project area

                                                                                                       Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



          to assist municipalities to improve investment planning capacity.

   Revised Objectives

   According to the Second Amendment to the FA (paragraph 1.1), the PDOs were revised:

          to improve bulk potable water provision in target areas
          to assist municipalities to improve investment-planning capacity



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  04-Aug-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Project Implementation Support (US$7.47 million at appraisal, revised to US$11.4 million, further
   revised to US$15.4 million, US$11.17 million actual). According to the PAD, this component would finance
   support to carry out activities under the third component below, including consultant services associated
   with project implementation. These would include preparing feasibility studies, updating designs and
   Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), preparing bidding documents, and construction supervision.
   Other consulting services for project support included audit, develop and implement a communication plan
   to raise awareness in project-related land issues, training of the project implementation unit and staff of the
   Ministry of Regional Development and Public Works (MRDPW).

   2. Preparation of Master Plans (US$30.60 million at appraisal, reduced to US$23.7 million, reduced again
   to US$18.0 million, and further reduced to US$17.10 million, US$13.08 million actual). This component
   would finance the preparation of forty eight (48) regional Master Plans for Water Supply and Sewerage
   systems (ViK systems), including forty (40) Master Plans for urban settlements, within the six (6) economic
   development regions, as described in the Operational Manual. These master plans would support
   the MRDPW to: (i) identify investment needs for rehabilitation of water supply networks and construction of
   sewerage networks and wastewater treatment plants and (ii) meet applicable EU commitments for
   directives in water and wastewater . The Master Plans would include corporate development plans
   and other activities promoting improved service delivery and greater efficiency. At the 2011 restructuring the
   preparation of Urban Master Plans was removed from this component. The component retained support for
   the preparation of regional master plans for water supply and sewerage systems. The Bulgarian
   government passed the Urban Water Act, established Water Associations and removed the responsibility of
   preparing Urban Master Plans from the project's implementing agency, the Ministry of Regional
   Development and Public Works (MRDPW) (ICR, paragraph 16). This removal reduced the budget for this


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



  component. Component 2 budget was further reduced during the 2014 restructuring to acknowledge the
  cost underrun for completed activities.

  3. Completion and Rehabilitation of Dams (US$109.91 million at appraisal, increased to US$112.8
  million, reduced to US$94.8 million, and increased to US$95.70 million, US$49.85 million actual). This
  component would finance the completion of Luda Yana, Neikovtzi, and Plovdivtsi dams and rehabilitation of
  the Studena dam. The Studena dam was operational at project start and supplied water to the town of
  Pernik. This component would also finance the completion of water treatment plants. The feasibility studies
  for the dams would be financed under this component and completed during project implementation. During
  the 2014 restructuring, the budget for this component was reduced because the Neikovtzi dam and its water
  treatment plant were dropped from the project and replaced by the Studena water treatment plant.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was US$148.3 million at appraisal, according to the PAD. The actual
  cost was reported US$74.33 million in the ICR (Annex 3) and US$79.2 million in the ICR data sheet; the
  difference is most likely due to exchange rate fluctuations between dollar and euro. The amount disbursed
  was low because the construction of the Neikovtzi dam and water treatment plant were dropped from the
  project.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financed this project,
  originally at US$118.70 million. This was later revised to US$102.58 million and disbursed at US$64.9
  million.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$29.6 million, revised to US$25.6 million and
  disbursed US$14.4 million. The project maintained a co-financing ratio of 80% (IBRD) /20% (government)
  throughout implementation.

  Dates: The project was approved on November 24, 2009 and was made effective on April 30, 2010. The
  Mid Term Review (MTR) was completed on November 18, 2012. The project was originally scheduled to
  close on December 31, 2015 and was extended twice for 24 months each time and closed on December
  31, 2019. The project was restructured three times:

        On April 26, 2011, a level 2 restructuring revised the resource allocation among the components
         (see above) and introduced changes to the Results Framework at the outcome indicator level,
         removing the 40 urban master plans but retaining the 48 regional master plans for water supply and
         sewerage system to cover the entire country excluding the municipality of Sofia. The country's
         Urban Water Act established the Water Associations and removed the responsibility of preparing
         Urban Master Plans from the project implementing agency, the Ministry of Regional Development
         and Public Works (MRDPW).
        On August 4, 2014, a level 1 restructuring revised the PDO and the associated outcome indicators;
         reallocated resources, and extended the closing date to December 31, 2017. The scale of the
         project was reduced by the removal of the construction of the Neikovtzi dam and water treatment
         plant, and replaced by the rehabilitation of Studena water treatment plant. The PDO was revised to
         better align with the reduced scale of the project.
        On July 15, 2016, a level 2 restructuring reallocated cost savings to component 3, extended the
         closing date by another 24 months to December 31, 2019, and amended the Results Framework

                                                                                                Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



          arising from this reallocation and extension. The project was extended a second time
          to complete two contracts that could not proceed earlier because of insufficient budgets.
          This financing gap was belatedly resolved by the government and required an additional 24 months
          to complete. In addition, the name of the implementing agency was changed from the Ministry of
          Regional Development (MRD) to the Ministry of Regional Development and Public Works
          (MRDPW).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Bulgaria acceded to the European Union (EU) in 2007. In preparation, the government prepared the 2004
Strategy for Water Supply and Sewerage Management and Development. The strategy outlined a plan of
actions to meet the 1998 EU Drinking Water Directive and the 2000 EU Water Framework Directive. These
directives contained EU-wide minimum quality standards for water supply systems, water supply planning,
regulation, monitoring, and reporting. At the same time, the country experienced precipitation patterns that
negatively affected the volume and reliability of its water supply. In response, the government began
investments to complete eight water supply dams that were under construction during the 1970’s and
1980’s, but stopped due to lack of funds. This project included three of those eight dams - Luda Yana,
Neikovtzi, and Plovdivtsi. However, following accession, a global recession affected the local economy by
mid-2009. The government responded by reimposing fiscal discipline, reduced budgetary spending, while
complying with the legal, regulatory, and organizational needs of the sector directives. These factors
affected how the government planned its water related investments outlined in its strategy. Plans
included (i) replacing about 70 percent of existing water transmission and distribution networks, thereby
reducing Non-Revenue Water (NRW) from around 60 percent; and (ii) increasing coverage of sewerage
connections from 50 percent to 85 percent and wastewater treatment coverage from 35 percent to 85
percent as provided in municipal-level water supply and wastewater utility Master Plans. This project
offered support for these Master Plans to identify priority investments to meet EU directives.

The revised PDOs remained aligned to the country's national development program, Bulgaria 2030. This
plan set out 3 strategic goals - accelerated economic development, improvements in demographic
indicators, and reduced inequalities. The PDOs supported priority 6 - Sustainable Agriculture, and priority 9
- Local Development. The PDOs were relevant to efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change,
promote sustainable development and the efficient management of natural resources such as water, soil
and air, protecting biodiversity, improving ecosystem services, and safeguarding habitats and
landscapes (Bulgaria 2030, p. 21). Under local development, resources would improve residents' quality of
living conditions by construction and/or rehabilitation of technical infrastructure, such as those in the water
sector by reconstructing and modernizing the supply network to increase efficiency in
use, increase connections to wastewater treatment plants, and improve treatment technologies (Bulgaria
2030, p. 29)

The PDO remained relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Bulgaria (FY17-22).
Under Objective 5: Improved access to essential services (housing, water, early childhood development
(ECD), long-term care) including for the bottom 40 and marginalized groups. The Plovdivtsi dam would
benefit an estimated 30,000 people in poverty. The PDO was relevant to Objective 3: Better protected
natural assets and improved efficiency in use of resources, noting the support for the construction of two

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



               dams - Plovdivtsi and Luda Yana - and the rehabilitation of Studena dam. These dams would provide
               access to reliable water supply of good quality to 40,000 people, 100,000 people, and 40,000 people
               respectively.

               The Bank had substantial water sector knowledge in Bulgaria. From October 1995 until December 2002,
               the Bank supported the Water Companies Restructuring and Modernization Project (P089152) and
               developed 21 water and wastewater utilities (Vodosnabdiavane i Kanalizacia or ViKs). In early 2000, with
               support from the Bank's Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), the Bank assisted the
               government in drafting legislation to establish the water regulatory framework and included the water
               regulator in the State Energy and Water Regulatory Commission (SEWRC). In April 2005, the Bank
               prepared, ‘Bulgaria-Financing the Water and Wastewater Sector,’ that outlined sector issues and reviewed
               the government financing plan to meet EU directives. The Bank partnered with the MRDPW in these
               activities. The preparation of the Master Plans in ViKs in this project were similar to this earlier project. In all
               prior activities mentioned above, it was the Bank’s primary sector partner. This long-standing partnership,
               Bank familiarity with the sector, and MRDPW familiarity with Bank procedures would facilitate project
               implementation (PAD, paragraph 6).

               The revised PDO remained relevant to the EU accession program, in particular, to the 2021-2027 EU
               funding program. This program outlined enabling conditions that required strengthening the state and its
               institutions through better management and institutional settings. The government expressed interest in
               continuing the World Bank Group (WBG) support to strengthen its institutional capacity, particularly in the
               areas of water resource management and disaster risk mitigation. Unaddressed concerns in water security
               weakened the formulation of the PDO. The development challenge posed by water security and maintaining
               climate resilience required more than improving bulk water supply. Reliability, acceptable quality, adequate
               quantity, and uninterrupted availability of water to consumers for health, livelihood, and economic activity
               were also important considerations. This weakness brought the rating of the relevance of the objective of
               this project to substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the reliability and quality of water provision to the communities in selected settlements in the
                             project area.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The causal chain indicated that new water storage dams and water treatment plants
                             would be constructed in Prodvist, Luda Yana, and Neikovtzi, and rehabilitate a water storage dam in Studena.
                             The dams and the plants would increase the capacity of reservoirs. The facilities would increase the volume

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



of water stored to serve target municipalities. The new dams would improve the reliability of water delivered to
the consumers in the target area by making available uninterrupted water supply. The water treatment plants
would improve the quality of water delivered by generating potable drinking water that met national or EU
standards, whichever was higher. However, the outcome indicators were not sufficiently clear in
measurement of improved reliability and quality of the water provided to target beneficiaries. The target
beneficiaries were also not defined. The causal chain assumed that:(i) a distribution network existed; (ii)
uninterrupted access would be maintained; (iii) operations and maintenance (O&M) needs of the
infrastructure in storage, treatment, and distribution met industry standards - target municipality water
management systems monitored quality and regulated water withdrawals; and (iv) the authorities maximized
benefits from improved drinking water supply. In its October 6, 2020 email to IEG, the Task Team clarified
that the municipal water operations were tasked with and budgeted for O&M function of the local water
management systems. The scope of the project addressed the needs of the target communities. However,
the scale was not sufficient to achieve the uninterrupted availability (reliability) aspect of the PDO. Budgetary
constraints emerged during implementation resulting in a scale-down (see ToC in revised objective below).
The following risks were not adequately addressed and marked a lack of readiness to implement the project:
(i) lack of technical and project management capacity - both the Bank and the government were
simultaneously rebuilding operational experience in storage infrastructure; these were the first contracts to
use templates of the Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs-Conseils (FIDIC); (ii) budget constraints
from fiscal measures; and (iii) government decision-making processes (ICR paragraph 55).

OUTPUTS

The following targets were achieved:

      All preparatory studies were completed for Plodivtsi, Luda Yana, and Studena dams and water
       treatment plants (baseline 0, original target, 100 percent, revised target 98 percent). The Neikovtzi
       dam and water treatment plant site investigation and due diligence studies to update the earlier
       feasibility and design studies were completed. Construction of the Neikovtzi dam and water treatment
       plant was dropped under the 2014 restructuring (ICR, paragraph 34).
      The construction of the Plodivtsi water storage dam was completed (baseline 36 percent completed,
       original target 100 percent)
      The construction of the Plodivtsi water treatment plant (WTP) was completed with equipment installed
       (baseline 0, target 100 percent)

The following target was partially achieved:

      The rehabilitation of the Studena dam was 90 percent complete (baseline, original target 100 percent).

The following targets were not achieved:

      The construction of the Luda Yana dam was 37 percent completed (baseline 0, original target 100
       percent). Three overhead power lines were relocated. Completed 49 percent of the dam
       wall. Completed the ground works for the dam service building. Completed 55 percent of the spillway,
       chute and stilling basin. Completed 9 percent of the works for the water intake tower and water supply
       pipeline.
      The construction of the Luda Yana water treatment plant was 8.5 percent completed (baseline 0,
       original target 100 percent).

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)




      The Neikovtzi dam and water treatment plant were dropped from the project.

OUTCOMES

With regard to the reliability and quality of water provision to the communities in selected settlements, the
following outcomes were partially achieved:

      The Plovdivtsi dam contributed 2 million cubic meters a year in storage capacity (original target was
         2.45 cubic million meters, target achieved). The Plovdivtsi (2 million cubic meters a year) and Luda
         Yana (6 million cubic meters a year) dams would store an additional 8 million cubic meters a year. The
         overall target was not achieved since only Plovdivtsi dam was completed at closing.
        The Plovdivtsi water treatment plant contributed 6.6 million cubic meters a year of potable water
         (original target was to enhance the reliability and quality of 32.1 million cubic meters a year coming
         from all water treatment plants). 100 percent of samples from water produced by the Plovdivtsi water
         treatment plant met or exceeded national standards (baseline 0, original target 95 percent). Meeting
         EU standards was not mentioned but the Task Team confirmed in its October 6, 2020 email to IEG
         that Bulgaria's national standards were harmonized with those of the EU. The facilities served
         Rudozem and Madan or a combined population of 19,306, exceeding the revised target of 17,000 and
         females were 50 percent of the beneficiaries, as planned. The original target were residents of
         Rudozem, Madan and Smolyan or 40,000 residents. Smolyan was not yet served at closing because
         the planned conveyance from the reservoir to the municipality of Smolyan had not been
         constructed This conveyance was outside the project scope and was to be undertaken by the
         government.
        The contracts for the remaining 10 percent of the works to complete the rehabilitation of the Studena
         dam and 50 percent of the Studena water treatment plant were in place by closing. According to the
         ICR, the government's 2020 budget included funds to complete the project (ICR, paragraph 29).
         Because the Studena dam continued operating during construction, the municipality managed to
         deliver water supply during the dry season. The project contractor indicated a November 2020 target
         completion date but a drought in Pernik that fed Studena dam in 2019 and the ongoing Covid 19
         pandemic might delay it.
        The potable water from the Studena water treatment plant, when completed, would store 16.4 million
         cubic meters a year of potable water, to indicate reliability of water supply to its communities. 100
         percent of the water samples taken from Studena met national standards for water quality. The
         Studena dam and water treatment plant, when completed, would serve seven settlements (no
         population data provided), including Pernik with 90,000 residents.
        The Luda Yana dam and water treatment plant, was only partially completed. The contract for this
         sub-project remained in place but the report indicated a moderate likelihood of completing the sub-
         project in the near term. This sub-project once completed would benefit Panagyurishte with 35,000
         residents and settlements in Strelcha, Pazardzhik, Lesichovo, and Septemvri. No population data
         were provided for these settlements but when completed, the sub-project would serve 69,000
         consumers by 2050. (ICR, footnote 11). Once completed, the Luda Yana dam would contribute 6
         million cubic meters per year to achieve the original target of 8 million cubic meters a year in additional
         storage capacity. And, once completed, its water treatment plant would add 9.1 million cubic meters a
         year of potable water to the original target of 32.1 million cubic meters a year. These were not
         achieved at closing.



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)




      The Neikovtzi dam and water treatment plant were removed from the scope of the project based on
       the 2014 restructuring because of slow implementation progress and insufficient budget. This sub-
       project did not contribute to achieving the original objective.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve bulk potable water provision in target areas.


Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: The causal chain indicated that new water storage dams would be designed
and constructed in Prodvist and Luda Yana, and a rehabilitated water storage dam in Studena together with
three new water treatment plants. The increased capacity in these reservoirs would provide year round bulk
potable water for the target municipalities. The revised PDO was expressed as an unconventional outcome
indicator, to avoid misinterpreting project achievements (see the 2014 restructuring paper, p.7). The project
would contribute to the long term goal of uninterrupted water supply by making available bulk potable water
year round, mitigating seasonal water shortages. The revision introduced specific target outcome indicators to
measure how the activities would contribute to improving potable water. The outcome indicators were made
more quantitative and components revised in direct response to the budget constraint that emerged during
implementation. This constraint did not figure as a critical assumption of the original causal chain. The scope
and scale of the project were adequate to achieve the revised PDO. Inputs and outputs were expected to
achieve the revised PDO. The assumptions used in the above original PDO also applied here.

OUTPUTS

      The outputs achieved under the original objective above also apply to this revised objective. The
       reduced scope referred to replacing the construction of the Neikovtzi dam and water treatment plant
       with the construction of the Studena water treatment plant. The Studena water treatment plant was 50
       percent complete at closing (original target 100 percent, not achieved).

OUTCOMES

      The improvement in providing bulk potable water was expressed as a percentage of samples from the
       water produced by the completed dams and water treatment plants that met national standards
       According to the ICR, 100 percent of the samples from the completed Plodivtsi water treatment plant
       and the rehabilitated Studena water treatment plant met these national standards (original target 95
       percent, target exceeded).
      An additional 2 million cubic meter per year was attributed to the Plodivtsi dam. The potable water
       from the Studena water treatment plant, when completed, would store 16.4 million cubic meters a year
       of potable water, which would contribute to the volume of bulk potable water. The Studena dam and
       water treatment plant, when completed, would serve seven settlements (no population data provided),


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



       including Pernik with 90,000 residents. In addition, the rehabilitation of the Studena dam replaced
       ageing infrastructure to reduce safety risks to workers, downstream assets, and target communities
       (ICR, paragraph 53). When completed, the Luda Yana dam would contribute another 6 million cubic
       meter per year to achieve the additional 8 million cubic meter per year of bulk potable water.
       This target was not achieved at closing. According to the ICR, the Bank was not optimistic that the
       ongoing Luda Yana contractual dispute would lead to completing the dam in the near term (ICR,
       paragraph 62).



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To assist municipalities to improve investment planning capacity.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The causal chain for this objective involved the preparation of diagnostics showing
the current status and identifying investment needs for water supply and sewerage systems. Outputs were 48
Regional Master Plans for Water Supply and Sewerage systems and 40 master plans for urban settlements in
the six economic regions of the country. MRDPW would prepare these plans to identify investment in water
supply networks, sewerage networks, and wastewater treatment plants to meet EU directives in water and
wastewater. The investments would be funded from the national budget and the European Union Structural
Funds. These investments would contribute to the higher level objective of improving service delivery, meet
EU directives in water and wastewater sector, and facilitate Bulgaria's integration into the EU (PAD,
paragraph 7). The investments would also contribute to a higher level objective of reducing the incidence of
water borne diseases thereby reducing associated hospitalization and health care costs. Consultative
processes involving stakeholders from the national, municipal, and non-governmental
organizations accompanied the preparation of these plans. These actions enhanced the capacity of
municipalities to plan and mobilize resources for investing in the water supply and sanitation sector. The TOC
was valid and the causal chain was logical. The activities were properly sequenced. When the government
passed the Water Act creating the Waster Associations, the MRDPW was no longer responsible for
preparing Urban Management Plans. As a result, plans were to be submitted to both MRDPW and the Water
Associations. Urban management plans were dropped and were not required to achieve the PDO, as stated
by the ICR (paragraph 16). The outcome indicator was replaced by the number of plans that would be
accepted by Bulgaria and the European Commission. This indicator was an output and not an outcome. The
TOC did not offer critical assumptions that would affect the achievement of this PDO.

OUTPUTS

The following targets were achieved:

      Completed 51 Regional Master Plans for Water Supply and Sewerage systems and submitted to the
       MRDPW and Water Associations. The plans satisfied quality standards and were accepted by the
       government and the European Commission (baseline 0, original target 48, revised target 51).
       These plans included current status, management practices, planning criteria, assessed demand,

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



       defined technical solutions, compared options, and proposed medium and long term investment
       programs. These plans also included corporate development plans, outlined organization and
       institutional arrangements, assets control and management, budgeting, accounting and cost control,
       tariff setting methodologies, revenue collection procedures, and operational performance to
       improve service delivery and achieve greater efficiency.
      The project supported the planning and investment capacity of 51 municipalities (baseline 0, original
       target 51). Monthly meetings were held by water authorities for development planning. Municipalities
       commented on the plans. Non-governmental organizations and communities were consulted during
       plan development.
      Feasibility studies were completed for 14 water associations and construction works underway to
       benefit 12 water associations - Varna, Plovdiv, Smolyan, Stara Zagora, Kurdjali, Sliven, Yambol,
       Pernik, Vidin, Silistra, Ruse, and Vratsa). Feasibility for six additional water associations (Veliko
       Tarnovo, Gabrovo, Haskovo, Sofia district, Pleven, and Targovishte) were under preparation at project
       closing.
      Urban management plans were dropped.

OUTCOMES

      The Water Associations in 20 of the 51 municipalities used the regional master plans to generate
       investment proposals for national and EU financing (baseline 0, original target 51, target achieved). In
       its October 6, 2020 email to IEG, the Task Team confirmed that the original target was 51
       municipalities. This was evidence of moving toward the higher level outcomes of
       significant investment in the sector.
      More than 2 billion BGN (or approximately US$1.1 billion or Euros 1 billion) were mobilized for water
       supply and sanitation investments arising from the plans as confirmed by the Task Team in its
       October 6, 2020 email to IEG.

The Task Team confirmed in its October 6, 2020 email to IEG that the US$1.1 billion generated for water
supply and sanitation investments were obtained from the plans that were generated by the project.
According to the ICR, the completion of the cancelled Urban Master Plans were not required to achieve the
PDO (ICR, paragraph 16).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Unchanged. As above.

Revised Rationale
Rating and outcomes remained unchanged.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Contributions to achieving the target outcome indicators reflected modest achievement under the first original
                            objective. The efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective is rated substantial because of the
                            investments generated from using the regional plans as confirmed by the Task Team in its October 6, 2020
                            email to IEG. The overall efficacy of the original objective is rated modest due to the low achievement of
                            outcomes.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project to achieve the second objective remained substantial. With the low achievements
                            in target indicators primarily of the revised first objective, the overall efficacy of the project was rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                          Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, there was no economic assessment of the project.
   According to the PAD (paragraph 32), economic analyses of the dam and water treatment plant sub-projects
   were to be part of the feasibility studies. Ex-ante cost-benefit analyses (CBA) for the three dam sub-projects,
   Luda Yana dam and water treatment plant, the Plovdivtsi water storage dam and water treatment plant; and
   Studena dam, were prepared using the "with and without project' methodology to calculate the Economic Rate of
   Return (ERR) for a 30-year project period. A CBA was not conducted for Neikovtzi sub-project. Benefits came
   from: (i) savings in healthcare (or over 60 percent of benefits); (ii) savings from hospitalization (or 20 percent of
   benefits); and (iii) new jobs created (during construction and operations). Costs and benefits of the institutional
   strengthening support were not included in the ex-ante analyses. An aggregated ex-ante cost-benefit analysis
   for the project was calculated at closing, using individual sub-project CBA data and including costs occurred
   under Component 1 and 2 of the Project. The aggregated ex-ante ERR was estimated at 2.21 percent (it is not
   reported in the table a below as it was not calculated at appraisal). The ICR reports (paragraph 43) that the ex-
   ante NPV for the full Project produced a negative NPV due to limited consideration of benefits of the Project and
   because all anticipated Project costs were included in the ex-ante aggregate calculations.



                                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



At closing, an ex-post ERR was prepared for each sub-project and then aggregated for an overall project level
inclusive of all dams sub-projects and costs of the institutional strengthening activities. The applicable EU
Regulation (480/2014) for 2014-2020 program period called for the use of a 5 percent discount rate and a 30-
year infrastructure life. The ex-post analysis envisaged materialization of benefits once the corresponding dam
was in operation given that water supply distribution networks were in place in Project areas and no additional
physical works were required to realize the benefits of more reliable and improved quality of water supply
provided by the Project. At closing, the project ERR was 10.09 percent while those of the sub-projects ranged
from 6.16 percent for the Luna Yada dam, 10.46 percent for the Plovdivtsi dam, to 15.37 percent for the Studena
dam. The aggregated EER accounted for all project costs, including institutional strengthening, project
implementation support and preparatory studies for Neikovtzi.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project, originally planned for a four year and eight months
implementation period, closed after two extensions, at nine years and eight months. Similar projects
carry a conventional eight year implementation period. The following contributed to implementation delays: (i)
dam design were not ready at approval due to insufficient budget arising from government expenditure ceilings;
(ii) a lack of responsive bidders for major works; (iii) a slow decision making by the authorities; and (iv)
unfamiliarity with the FIDIC contract template used in procurement (see Section 10 for details). Project
implementation was extended twice but works were not completed for two of the three dams. Budget
constraints during implementation resulted in hiring less staff for the implementing agency. A Project
Implementation Support Assistance (PISA) consultant was added in 2011. The specialized technical needs of
constructing dams, prolonged implementation period, and government requests for additional expert reviews
raised the costs of project support (ICR, paragraph 45). The Covid 19 pandemic and the impact of the 2019
drought in Pernik region that fed the Studena reservoir might delay the estimated November 2020 project
completion of the remaining works (ICR, paragraph 29).

In sum, the modest ERRs at closing was accompanied by the operational and administrative setbacks during
implementation. The lengthy implementation period did not complete all the planned works for two out of three
dams. The ICR acknowledged (paragraph 46) that project efficiency was lower than the industry standard.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   100.00
 ICR Estimate                                            10.09
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was rated substantial. The efficacy of the project in achieving the first objective was
rated modest because of low achievements in meeting the outcome indicators. Similarly, the efficacy of the
project in achieving the revised objective was rated modest because low achievements remained.The efficacy
of the project in achieving the second objective was rated substantial because, as clarified by the Task Team in
its October 6, 2020 email to IEG, substantial investments in the water and sanitation sectors were generated by
the regional master plans funded under the project. The efficiency of the project was rated modest.

According to the guidelines, a split rating is applied because the objectives and outcome indicators
were revised, and the project scope was reduced. The overall outcome rating is moderately unsatisfactory
under both the original and revised objectives. At the time the PDO was revised, the loan had disbursed
US$18.35 million (out of a total disbursement of US$64.85 million) or 28.3 percent (the ICR data sheet).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risks to development outcomes:

      Risk of losing the government's commitment to complete remaining works. At closing, some
       works were not completed but contracts remained in place. Funds were allocated in the 2020 budget.
       The contractor estimated project completion by November 2020. However, impact from the 2019
       drought in Pernik reduced the runoff to the Sudena reservoir, and may lead to further
       delays. Budgetary commitments may also be affected by the Covid 19 pandemic response.
      Financial risks from insufficient resources for operation and maintenance (O&M) of
       infrastructure. The ICR was unclear regarding the availability of O&M resources for the built
       infrastructure but the Task Team noted in its October 6, 2020 email to IEG that water operators and
       their budgets are tasked with O&M functions for the local water systems. The ICR mentioned and
       confirmed by the Task Team in the same email to IEG that there are O&M capacity needs for water
       management systems and in managing reservoir levels. These capacity gaps may result in water
       shortages, such as that experienced in Pernik at project closing. To mitigate this risk, the government
       may consider including measures to address capacity gaps in investment packages of the Water
       Associations.
      Risks from encountering technical design setbacks of the remaining works. The technical
       design of the remaining works were addressed before closing. However, when implemented,
       technical design revisions may require more resources. To mitigate this risk, the implementing
       agency needs to complete the works according to specifications.
      Risks from noncompliance with environmental and social safeguards. The government is fully
       funding the completion of the remaining works. They may not comply with the World Bank's
       environmental and social safeguards processes. This risk is mitigated by the government's adoption
       of the European Union environmental regulations and social measures into its national law, according
       to the ICR. These measures were similar to the World Bank safeguards. In addition, at closing, the
       Bank team and the supervisory engineer offered the government expert advice for completing the

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



      Luda Yana dam. These included securing the site, and how to avoid accidents in abandoned sites
      with partially completed infrastructure. Project completion will not require further land acquisition.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project supported the country's and the World Bank's strategy for cooperation and
  development. After acceding to the EU in 2007, the country needed to invest in water supply and
  sanitation services to meet EU drinking water regulations. Water storage and dams, however, were not
  supported by EU structural funds. The country last invested in dams in the 80s, had no recent studies or
  designs for dam sub-projects, nor technical capacity to oversee its construction. At the same time, the
  Bank began to re-engage in 'high-reward–high-risk' hydraulic infrastructure, using a more effective
  business model, based on the 2003 Water Resources Sector Strategy. The technical, financial, and
  economic aspects of the projects were prepared with the knowledge that both the Bank and its client
  were rebuilding their operational experience in storage infrastructure.

  Environmental and social risks were adequately assessed. In contrast, operational risks were poorly
  assessed. The project was approved in 2009 just as the government adopted fiscal controls to address
  the impact of global recession. Governmental priorities shifted. Budgetary spending
  was reduced. Measures to address the operational risks posed by budgeting issues, complex design,
  contracting challenges from using the International Federation of Consulting Engineers (Fédération
  Internationale Des Ingénieurs-Conseils or FIDIC) contracts, and delays in decision making reared its
  shortcomings during implementation. The inadequate assessment of the risks associated with
  restrictive government fiscal controls and overestimated project management capacity to
  implement complex infrastructure projects proved to be a shortcoming. According to the ICR (paragraphs
  24 and 56), the project was not ready for implementation. Dam design were not ready at approval
  because the government was unable to allocate sufficient budget due to expenditure ceilings. The Bank
  may have rushed to remain a relevant partner in the EU market. The country may have adopted political
  expediency in response to the drought preceding the project. At preparation, there was no economic
  assessment of the project (see Section 5 Efficiency above). The implementation arrangements proved
  inappropriate (see restructuring during implementation below) and the implementation period proved
  unrealistic. The M&E arrangements were a weakness (see Section 9 Monitoring and Evaluation below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 21 supervision missions over the 10-year implementation period. Seven task
 team leaders managed this project. Specialists on the Bank team also changed frequently. Eight
 governments spanned the implementation period. The Bank team's commitment and attention to the
 project varied over the project period as shown by delays in decision making, meager staff resources to

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



 coordinate implementation, and limited ability to resolve project-related challenges. As the project was
 implemented, the country acceded to the European Union and was simultaneously maneuvering through
 new administrative, policy, and regulatory environments, ranging from establishing Water Associations for
 water and sanitation planning and development to permitting requirements. These actions resulted
 in delays in decision making (see Section 5 Efficiency above).

 The Bank team restructured the project three times to address the weaknesses in the quality at entry and
 implementation delays due to procurement and technical design setbacks. World-class experts were
 mobilized to advise the government in complex and innovative actions, such as those required for the
 Studena dam rehabilitation. Budget resources were reallocated following shortfalls brought about by
 persistent government budgetary constraints. Candor and quality of performance reporting were captured
 in acknowledging the impact from poor decision making as the sector evolved to conform with the
 European Union's regulatory environment (ICR, paragraph 60). After the project reached the 10 year
 implementation period, the Bank did not extend the project because capacity and experience gained were
 sufficient to complete the remaining works. In addition, the dispute surrounding the Luda Yana dam
 contract was anticipated to take some time to resolve.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD outlined a results framework and monitoring arrangement (Annex 3) and described the reporting
 arrangements (PAD, paragraph 23). The baseline for the water quality to be delivered was "to be
 determined" but with no further explanation in the PAD. The outcome indicators for the first original
 objective did not show how the outputs would improve reliability and quality of water. M&E arrangements
 and reporting needs were identified and embedded in the implementing agency. M&E design improved
 after the 2014 restructuring and those improvements covered 71 percent of the loan disbursements.

 At the 2014 restructuring, M&E design improvements introduced quantitative targets for the outcome
 indicators. The specified additional volume generated by the dams measured the revised objective of
 providing bulk potable water. The Bank acknowledged, however, that this indicator was not well defined nor
 it was widely used. In addition, another outcome indicator provided a target for the samples from the water
 treatment plants completed under the project to measure improved quality of water. There was no outcome
 indicator for the Studena dam that replaced the Neikovtzi sub-project in the 2014 restructuring. Even after
 the introduction of new metrics, baseline data remained uncollected.




                                                                                                Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Regional Development and Public Works implemented the M&E. The revised PDO
  and additional outcome indicators monitored implementation progress until closing. Benchmarks were
  introduced, problems and challenges identified and corrective measures suggested during M&E
  implementation. Additional information showed results from beneficiaries, and supplemental outcome and
  impact data were gathered.




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that based on M&E monitoring for master planning and a consultative process, 20 of the
  51 municipalities submitted water and sanitation investment applications for financing by the national
  and European Union following consultative planning efforts. Dialogue between the task team and the
  government supplemented the weak M&E design to inform the Mid Term Review and project
  restructurings.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an environmental assessment category A due to the works related to
   completion of the dams and possible environmental impacts during dam construction and operation. The
   supporting and relating dam infrastructure, such as the rehabilitation of water treatment plants and
   temporary road in Ploddivtsi was classified as category B; no significant environmental impacts were
   anticipated for these components and were managed through site specific Environmental Management
   Plans (EMPs). The following safeguards were triggered under the project: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams, and OP/BP 7.50 Projects on
   International Waterways.

   Environmental safeguards compliance: Some of the works on sub-project investments were started prior
   to Bank involvement. The Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) were updated to comply with World
   Bank requirements. Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared. For Luda Yana and
   Neikovtzi dams, EIAs were not required under Bulgarian law but were prepared in compliance with OP/BP
   4.01. For Plovdivtsi dam, an EIA was approved by MoEW in 2000, and a supplemental document was
   prepared with additional information and analysis to comply with OP/BP 4.01. EIA documents were
   disclosed prior to appraisal and updated in the feasibility studies for the dams. For the Studena dam, a
   stand-alone EMP was prepared and disclosed.



                                                                                               Page 16 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



The project triggered OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats because small areas of or or more dams sites may fall
within Protected Areas. Only the protected sanitary zones of the dams overlap with the Protected Areas and
their management regime were compatible with the Protective Area management. The updated EMPs
included required mitigation measures. During the works on Luda Yana Dam, a colony of European ground
squirrels was discovered and successfully relocated.

The project did not trigger OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources but EMPs included provisions for
cultural heritage and archaeology if chance finds occur during construction. The EAs included a chance-
find clause that was triggered and applied on the archaeological findings at the Luda Yana Dam.

The project triggered OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams because of the completion of the Luda Yana, Neikovtzi,
and Plovdivtsi dams, and the rehabilitation of the Studena dam. Bulgarian dam safety requirements were
aligned with those of the Bank. Design, construction, and operation of the dams followed the Bulgarian and
Bank policies. The government appointed a panel of experts on dam safety to review the feasibility studies
and engineering designs and provide guidance during implementation of works.

The project triggered OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways because the four dams were located
on streams that discharged to riparian countries or international waterways. On March 19, 2008, and then
again on May 13, 2009, the riparian countries, Turkey and Greece, and the International Commission on
Danube River Protection were notified and were requested to reply by June 15, 2009. This was extended to
July 15, 2009 and again to August 27, 2009 at the request of the Government of Greece. No further
comments were received after the deadline or since. The Studena water treatment plant investment added
during the 2014 restructuring fell within the exception notification provided in paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50
since the activity was limited to rehabilitation of existing facility. There was no change in current capacity.
The Europe and Central Asia Vice President signed the exception notification memo. An Environmental
Management Plan was prepared, disclosed, and included in the bid document for the Studena water
treatment plant contract, as reported in the Restructuring Paper. There were reported incidents of adverse
impacts to the environment. According to the ICR, safeguards compliance was moderately satisfactory
(ICR, paragraph 70).

Social safeguards compliance. The scale of social impacts of the three dams (Luda Yana, Neikovtzi, and
Plovdivtsi) was limited because dam constructions were partially undertaken in the 1980s and 1990s. Most
of the necessary land acquisition had been completed prior to the Bank's involvement. Past land acquisition
was deemed a legacy and not a current issue; OP 4.12 was not triggered. A Land Acquisition Policy
Framework (LAPF) was prepared to address the needs of project investments to be identified under the
plans funded by the second component. People were not expected to lose their residences or other
structures. All three dam areas had informal use of the land for grazing animals; local authorities agreed
that project- affected people would be provided alternative land for grazing purposes.

The ICR reports (paragraph 71) that land acquisition and introduction of restrictions on land use were in
compliance with the Bank social safeguards requirements, the Land Acquisition Policy Framework (2009)
and Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plans (ALAPs), and applicable national legislation. No land acquisition
procedures were undertaken for Neikovtzi Dam because this component was replaced by the Studena dam.
Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plans for the Luda Yana and Plovdivtsi dams were implemented. Land
acquired were compensated. With the dropping of the Neikovtzi dam and water treatment plant, no land
acquisition took place at the site. In the case of Plovdivtsi dam and its water treatment plant, private
individuals were compensated for 0.99 hectares or equivalent to 13 plots from 2008 to 2014. In the case of
the Luda Yana dam, 6.89 hectares of private land and easement rights for 0.25 hectares from 2014 to 2016.


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



  In the case of Studena dam, there were no lands acquired. During the construction of Luda Yana dam, the
  Panagyurishte Municipality published information annually about alternative pasture lands to address the
  loss of access to grazing land. No negative impacts on livelihood or physical displacement were reported
  during project implementation.

  Municipalities with land acquisition had Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs) in place. In Luda Yana, an
  additional Commission for voluntary settlement on grievances related to land acquisition was
  established but never utilized. The only land-related dispute for Luda Yana was settled by the administrative
  court in 2014. In 2018/9, the information boards at Studena and Luda Yana dam construction sites were
  supplemented with information on various grievance channels, including onsite grievance logs.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: At appraisal, the implementing agency was found to have adequate financial
  management capacity. According to the ICR, the project financial management performance was
  found satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 76). The project was staffed with an experienced team who used the
  Project Operational Manual's accounting policies and internal control procedures. Quarterly Interim
  unaudited Financial Reports were submitted on time and accepted by the Bank. The annual audits were
  also submitted on time with unmodified (clean) opinion throughout implementation. The last project
  financial audit was due on June 30, 2020.

  Procurement: At appraisal, procurement risk was rated high (PAD, Table accompanying paragraph 26)
  because of difficulties in retaining trained staff in the implementing agency. A Project Operations Manual
  and training of the staff of the implementing agency and planned targeted training were identified to
  mitigate this risk. In addition, a covenant in the FA indicated that the implementing agency would retain
  adequate and competent staff, with reviews ex-ante or ex post reviews of procurement activities following
  Bank guidelines (PAD, paragraph 41). At closing, implementation delays were attributed to procurement
  and contracting challenges and slow disbursements. The local market did not have sufficient contractors to
  undertake complex projects. In some key contracts, only one bid made an offer, or bidders were deemed
  unresponsive, impeding award negotiation. In the Luda Yana sub-project, a dispute arose between parties
  to a joint venture that was awarded the construction contract because one partner declared insolvency
  (ICR, paragraph 33). Onsite mobilization was slow and disagreements between contractor and
  design/supervisory engineer over materials meeting specifications or the conduct of laboratory testing. The
  implementing agency was unable to resolve these disputes in a timely manner. In some design or technical
  investigation contracts, contract periods proved insufficient requiring extensions. The implementing agency
  reflected limited procurement capacity in the use of the contract template and in managing large contracts
  for complex infrastructure projects.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  According to the ICR, while the Plovdivtsi dam was not designed for flood control, the completed dam
  would regulate flow in the catchment area. This would benefit downstream communities and reduce their
  losses from floods. The PDO outcome indicator did not include flood reduction as an outcome indicator. In


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



   addition to flood control, the rehabilitated Studena dam enhanced the safety of the facility, protected
   workers, assets and neighboring communities (ICR, paragraph 53).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The Review selected two lessons from the ICR, with some adaptation of the language:

      Complex projects require laser focus in assessing readiness to implement. This project
         lacked technical and operational readiness in designing and implementing at the time of
         approval and those risks delivered the delays. Corrective measures could not keep pace
         with the implementation challenges. The timeline was underestimated and unrealistic.
         Convention for the sector pointed to an even lengthier period to implement such a complex
         project. Recognizing these challenges may reduce frustration and repeated project
         extensions. Some of the readiness factors to consider include adequately assessing capacity
         to manage operationally complex projects and large contracts (e.g., capacity to respond to
         complex technical issues that may arise during implementation and resolving these in a
         timely manner) and adopting a procurement strategy that responds to market conditions
         (e.g., availability of local contractors to undertake complex projects). Other vital readiness
         factors include having key contracts at advanced stages of procurement prior to approval, or
         bundling procurement packages for efficiency so that timely technical studies are undertaken
         in time to implement sub-project investments.

      Institutional capacity building may be a powerful development tool that could trigger
         further investments in support of infrastructure development. In this project, the master
         planning component, which focused on capacity building at the local level,
         generated discrete investments in water and sanitation of more than one billion
         euros. Clients are usually reluctant to borrow for capacity building alone. The rest of the
         Bank, both at the central office through its global practices, and in the region, could advertise
         the positive outcomes of strong institutions built over the years. In addition, technical
         breakthroughs or procedural efficiencies or emerging best practices in the sector arising from

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



        project experience would also prove useful in increasing client interest in enhancing
        native technical capacity. For example, in this project, lessons learned from the use of
        technical elements related to geomembrane attachments and working with divers would be
        useful to design and implement future dams.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  An assessment may be useful to go over lessons learned regarding the use of Bank procedures tor financing
  complex projects such as dams. In this case, the accession of the country to the European Union and
  continually competing for time, resources, and attention to the project while complying with accession
  procedures pose vital lessons to the Eastern European lending market of the World Bank. An
  assessment could also highlight complementary or conflict in safeguard procedures and laying out measures
  or frameworks to mitigate conflicts in processes and compliance needs. The convention regarding how dams
  are typically implemented, how this fits into the Bank's project cycle may also strengthen the case for flexibility
  in implementation or adopting a Multi Phased Approach to complex infrastructure projects. Documenting the
  procurement and technical lessons from this project may also serve design and implementation of future dam
  projects.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided a detailed narrative to support the project outcomes and ratings.
A theory of change, prepared at project closing, framed the discussion of results. The report was candid,
pointing out the deficiencies in the formulation of the objectives, both original and revised; the choice of
weak indicators; and implementation setbacks from overestimated capacity in procurement and contracting. An
exhaustive analysis of efficiency was presented in Annex 4. Evidence were appropriately referenced throughout
the report. For example, the government's commitment to complete the remainder of the project, referenced in
the report, was evident in the implementing agency's Minister's letter to the World Bank in Annex 5. The report
was internally consistent, cross referencing the setbacks brought by the lack of procurement and contracting
capacity in discussions of the efficacy of the sub-projects (paragraph 33), lack of readiness to implement
(paragraph 56), likelihood of completion (paragraph 62), fiduciary compliance (paragraph 77), and
underestimating time required to implement a complex project, among others. The report highlighted the impact
of capacity building in support of the master plans for investments (second component) and how these
generated almost one billion euros in investments as a result. Lessons were based on operations, highlighting
hurdles inherent in complex projects that Bank processes could not overcome and discoveries in technical
design. A minor shortcoming was the missing information regarding the O&M capacity needs of the project (to
be clarified by the Task Team) and its length exceeded the recommended 15 pages.




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCT DEVT (P099895)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                      Page 21 of 21
