     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022155

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P123133                                    CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81700                                31-Dec-2017                                         100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2012                               30-Nov-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         100,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Elisabeth Goller            John R. Eriksson            Victoria Alexeeva               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Loan
   Agreement (LA), was "to assist Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban infrastructure services,
   including urban roads and urban environmental services."

   The PDO remained unchanged throughout project implementation. In the 2016 and 2018 restructuring
   papers, the PDO reads "to assist Xifeng District" instead of "to assist Qingyang Municipality". However, these


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



   restructuring papers do not mention a PDO change, and the LA was not amended. Therefore, this validation
   of the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) sticks to the PDO mentioned in the original LA.

   It is worthwhile highlighting that although the project interventions focused on the Xifeng District, which is the
   capital of the Qingyang Municipality (PAD, para 9), capacity strengthening also directly targeted the Qingyang
   Municipality as such (see section 2.d).

   For the purpose of this review, the PDO will be parsed into two parts as follows, in the same way as the ICR:
   (i) to assist Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban roads infrastructure services, and (ii) to assist
   Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban environmental services.

   Note: This validation considers "urban environmental services" as services related to storm drainage, sewage
   collection, and sewage treatment infrastructure in line with the definition of "environmental infrastructure" in
   the PAD (annex 2, para 5).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was structured along the following two components:

   Component 1: Urban Infrastructure Improvements (cost at appraisal US$163.68 million, excluding
   contingencies; cost revised in 2016, US$172.47 million; actual cost US$186.96 million)

   Subcomponent 1.1: Urban Bypass (cost at appraisal US$82.26 million; cost revised in 2016, US$96.18
   million; actual cost US$124.56 million - the cost overrun was due to increased resettlement costs explained
   in section 10). This subcomponent was to finance (i) the construction of bypass roads of the southern
   section of Xifeng District’s West Ring Road and the northern section of Xifeng District’s East Ring Road with
   installation of associated pipes; and (ii) the construction of three connection roads to the two bypass
   corridors of the West Ring Road and the East Ring Road (connection road from the West Ring Road to
   Provincial Highway 202, section of Anding Xi Road linking to West Ring Road, and section of Guxiang Road
   linking to the East Ring Road) with installation of associated pipes.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Integrated Road Corridor (cost at appraisal US$11.53 million; cost revised in 2016,
   US$11.00 million; actual cost US$3.02 million - the cost underrun was because of the use of local financing
   not captured in the total cost in the ICR). This included (i) the improvement of three selected main road
   corridors (Nan Bei Street, Anding Dong Xi Road, and West Ring Road), including road pavement, traffic
   channelization, lighting, and greening, along with drainage and sewage system improvements; (ii) the
   rehabilitation of three selected backstreets and small lanes for slow traffic (Nanyuan, Tianhe, and Xifeng


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



  lanes); and (iii) as part of the design of the integrated road corridor, the preparation of a parking action plan,
  public transport action plan, and traffic safety, education and enforcement action plan.

  Subcomponent 1.3: Drainage and Sewage (cost at appraisal US$37.28 million; cost revised in 2016,
  US$35.20 million; actual cost US$28.40 million - the cost underrun was because of the use of local
  financing not captured in the total cost in the ICR). It was to finance (i) the construction of drainage and
  sewer mains for a section of each the West Ring Road, the Anding East Road, and the Anding West Road;
  and (ii) the rehabilitation of sewage collection pipes in Xifeng District and associated improvements of
  road pavement, street lighting, and greening along these roads.

  Subcomponent 1.4: Wastewater Treatment Plant (cost at appraisal US$32.31 million; cost revised in
  2016, US$30.11 million; actual cost US$30.98 million). This subcomponent included the construction of (i) a
  new wastewater treatment plant in the eastern area of Xifeng District; (ii) a wastewater pumping station in
  Xifeng District’s northern area; and (iii) wastewater trunks and collectors associated to the investments in (i)
  and (ii) above.

  Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (cost at appraisal US$3.30 million,
  excluding contingencies; cost revised in 2016, US$3.07 million; actual cost US$2.37 million - reason
  for cost underrun not provided in ICR)
  This component was for technical assistance to (i) carry out a water resource study covering, among
  others, water reuse, subbasin water environment improvements, and industrial wastewater discharge
  licenses in Xifeng District, which were expected to support the then ongoing investments of wastewater
  management; (ii) improve the operation and maintenance capabilities of Qingyang Municipal Water
  Supply and Sewage Company and Xifeng District Public Utility and Transportation Bureaus to provide urban
  infrastructure services in the drainage, wastewater and urban road transport sectors; (iii) build capacity and
  training for Qingyang Municipality’s and Xifeng District’s agencies involved in project implementation; (iv)
  strengthen Qingyang Municipal Water Supply and Sewage Company's GIS-based system to manage its
  drainage and wastewater pipes networks; and (v) strengthen the Qingyang Municipality’s capacity for
  project management and construction supervision.

  The 2016 restructuring cancelled a one-kilometer section of the Western Ring Road from subcomponent
  1.1 because a nearby existing road provided a similar connection between the ring road and the provincial
  highway S202. According to the 2016 restructuring paper (pages 6 and 7), this change did not negatively
  affect the achievement of the PDO because the additional travel length without the cancelled section was
  marginal. The restructuring also cancelled the planned purchase of vehicles from component 2.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  According to the ICR datasheet, the total project cost was US$188.99 million, which is 98 percent of
  the appraisal estimate of US$192.35 million. Annex 3 of the ICR mentions a total project cost is US$189.22
  million. According to the Bank task team, the total project cost is US$188.99. The cost indicated in annex 3
  includes the front-end fee of US$0.25 mil.

  Financing



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



   The project was financed through an IBRD loan of US$100 million (ICR, datasheet and annex 3), which was
   fully disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution

   The expected Borrower contribution at appraisal was US$92.35 million (PAD, datasheet). The actual
   Borrower contribution was US$88.99 million (ICR, datasheet), which is 96 percent of the expected amount.

   Dates and Project Restructuring

   The project was approved on May 31, 2012, became effective on September 24, 2012, and was originally
   expected to close on December 31, 2017. The project had two level-two restructurings. The first
   restructuring took place on August 23, 2016, when an amount of US$30.63 million of the loan amount
   was disbursed. With this restructuring, the loan closing date was extended by 12 months, to December 31,
   2018, to account for delays in project implementation. In addition, the restructuring (i) made minor changes
   to project activities (see section 2.d above); (ii) adjusted the project costs mainly because of the changes to
   project activities and higher resettlement costs than expected, and to reflect actual contract prices; (iii)
   increased the disbursement percentage for works to reduce immediate pressure on counterpart funding; (iv)
   adjusted the implementation schedule; and (v) adjusted the results framework.

   The result framework changes included (i) replacing the PDO indicator of "wastewater pollution reduction in
   terms of Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD)" with a new sector core indicator of "volume (mass) of BOD
   pollution removed by treatment plant", but leaving the indicator's project end target unchanged; (ii) replacing
   the intermediate indicator of "road construction completed" with two intermediate sector core indicators of
   "roads rehabilitated, non-rural" and "roads constructed, non-rural", and aligning the targets with the actual
   road length to be intervened; and (iii) adapting the project end target dates to the revised loan closing date.

   The project was restructured again on October 10, 2018, when US$70 million of the loan amount was
   disbursed. Through this restructuring, the loan closing date was extended by 11 months, to November 30,
   2019, to complete the project activities and the resettlement of affected families. The other main change
   introduced with this restructuring was to revise the targets of the three PDO indicators related to the
   project's wastewater treatment plant downwards by about two thirds of the original targets. The ICR, para 9,
   only mentions that the revision was based on actual capacity, and the restructuring paper does not provide
   any reason for the significant reduction in the targets (for details see Efficacy section).

   Because the 2018 revision of three PDO indicator targets reduced the project's level of ambition, this review
   will apply a split rating and will assess the project outcome based on the original and revised indicator
   targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal in 2012, the Gansu Province had one of the lowest gross domestic products in China and
depended heavily on a few regional cities, including Qingyang Municipality for its economic development.
Qingyang Municipality had abundant deposits of oil and coal and was selected to be developed as base for

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



               energy supply and petrochemicals. Qingyang Municipality's efforts to improve the city’s livability and
               profile to attract and retain external investments had been constrained by the shortage of essential urban
               infrastructure services in its central Xifeng District (PAD, para 9). Therefore, to improve selected urban
               infrastructure services, including urban roads and urban environmental services, was relevant.

               The PDO was in line with the FY2006-10 Country Partnership Strategy, which among its key pillars
               included (i) reducing poverty, inequality, and social exclusion; (ii) managing resource scarcity
               and environmental challenges; and (iii) improving public and market institutions. To improve the
               competitiveness of Qingyang Municipality through improved infrastructure services was also in line with
               China's 2011-2015 12th Five-Year Plan (FYP), which stressed the need to accelerate coordinated regional
               development and sound urbanization, especially in the western region, to reduce the pressure of massive
               rural migration towards the coastal cities.

               The PDO remained relevant by project close. Eight percent of the city's built up area still lacked drainage
               and sewage networks, and according to the Bank task team, the implementation of Qingyang
               Municipality's development plan, spelling out the municipality's infrastructure and development needs, was
               to be completed only by 2030. The PDO remained in line with the FY2020-25 China Country Partnership
               Framework. This includes engagement area 2: Promoting Greener Growth", objective 2.2: Reducing Air,
               Soil, Water, and Marine Plastic Pollution, and objective 2.4: Strengthening Sustainable Natural
               Resource Management and the engagement area 3: Sharing the benefits of growth. The PDO also
               remained aligned with China's 2016-2020 13th FYP. This plan puts emphasis on sustainable growth and
               development in China’s western regions through effective and efficient development of water resources,
               while simultaneously protecting the environment and improving ecological security. It also seeks to
               accelerate efforts that make access to basic public services more equitable.

               The PDO was realistic, and its level of ambition adequate for a first World Bank project in Qingyang
               Municipality. However, since environmental sustainability was a key focus in the country's strategies, a
               greater focus on public transport and non-motorized transport would have been desirable. Therefore, the
               relevance of objectives is considered substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To assist Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban roads infrastructure services

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for subobjective 1, based on the ICR (para 4) and additional information in the PAD
                             (para 2 and annex 2), was that the activities of constructing (i) the southern and northern sections of the

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



Xifeng District's West and East ring roads and (ii) three connection roads to these ring roads was to lead to
the output of new road infrastructure that improves connectivity from the city center to the ring roads and to
the city's southern and northern development areas. In terms of outcomes, this was to reduce the travel time
of through traffic, decrease through traffic, and improve traffic flows in the city center.

In addition, the activities of (i) improving three urban corridors, (ii) rehabilitating backstreets for low traffic, (iii)
preparing parking, public transport, and road safety action plans, and (iv) providing capacity strengthening
to Qingyang Municipality staff were to have the outputs of (i) improved and rehabilitated road infrastructure,
(ii) implemented action plans, and (iii) capacitated Qingyang Municipality staff. In terms of expected
intermediate outcomes, this was to lead to better urban transport infrastructure in the city center and greater
capacity to manage it. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead, among others, to better public transport
services (e.g. higher bus speeds, more buses), an enhanced environment for non-motorized transport, and
better managed parking and traffic. It was also expected to increase public transport user satisfaction and
ridership. Together with the reduced through traffic in the city center, it was expected to decrease road
fatalities and injuries in the three urban corridors intervened.

Overall, the outcomes of (i) reduced travel time for freight through traffic, (ii) greater use of the new road
infrastructure, thus less through traffic in the city center, (iii) higher bus speeds, (iv) greater public transport
ridership, and (v) less road fatalities and injuries are all indications of the PDO of improved urban roads
infrastructure services. In terms of long terms outcomes, improved urban roads infrastructure services were to
(i) reduce poverty, inequality, and social exclusion, (ii) manage resource scarcity and environmental
challenges, and (iii) improve public and market institutions.

Outputs

The following outputs were achieved during the life of the project to meet subobjective 1 (ICR, paras 19 to 21
and annex 1):

      16.11 km of non-rural roads rehabilitated, compared to a target of 16.06 km set with the 2016
       restructuring (the PAD does not indicate the km of non-rural roads to be rehabilitated), hence
       achieving the target. This includes the following:
            o Anding Dong Xi and Nan Bei roads (according to the ICR, para 31, the latter was financed with
               counterpart funds to accelerate its implementation) with improved mid-block crossing, bus
               stops, traffic lights, and traffic channelization (ICR, para 20). The PAD (annex 2, para 8) lists a
               third corridor to be upgraded, West Ring road, which is not mentioned in the ICR.
            o Three upgraded slow traffic roads in the old city center with drainage, pedestrian
               facilities, traffic management improvements, lighting, public toilets, and trash containers (ICR,
               para 20).
      5.74 km non-rural roads constructed, compared to an original target of 6.75 km (PAD, annex 2), and a
       revised target of 5.76 km. The original target was not achieved whereas the revised target was
       practically achieved. This included the following:
            o One section on the West and three sections on the East ring roads (2016 RP).
            o Guxiang road connecting the East ring road and Anding Xi road connecting the West ring road
               (ICR, annex 1). The PAD (annex 2, para 7), mentions three connecting roads to be
               constructed, but the ICR only refers to two.
      47 reconstructed or upgraded bus stops, compared to a target of 33. This exceeds the target by 45.5
       percent.


                                                                                                            Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)




      194 unsignalized pedestrian crossings converted to signalized mid-block crossings on three corridors
         (# of crossings), compared to a baseline of 15 and a target of 103. This exceeds the target by 88.3
         percent.
        28 intersections with traffic channelizing, compared to a baseline of 12 and a target of 27. This slightly
         exceeds the target.
        189 staff trained, compared to a target of 120. This exceeds the target 71.8 percent. This refers to
         staff trained on transport and wastewater related issues.
        5 studies completed, in line with the target. This included the parking, public transport, and traffic
         safety, education and enforcement actions plans related to the transport sector.
        Nine technical training events in Qingyang Municipality and several in more advanced Chinese cities
         like Shenzhen, Shanghai and Kunming.
        Two study tours to Washington, New York, Vancouver, London and Moscow.

Outcomes

The construction of the new sections of the West and East ring roads enhanced the connectivity to the
northern and southern development areas of the city (ICR, para 19). According to the 2016 restructuring
paper (pages 6 and 7), the fact that the planned one-kilometer section of the West ring road was not
completed only marginally affected connectivity and travel times because a nearby existing road provided
similar connectivity between the ring road and the provincial highway S202. In addition, the construction of
the Guxiang road connecting the East ring road and the Anding Xi road connecting the West ring road
improved the connectivity from the city center to these ring roads.

These connectivity improvements reduced the travel times for freight through traffic from a baseline of
28.4 minutes to 15.8 minutes, exceeding the project end target of 18.2 minutes by 13.2 percent. On the West
corridor (West Ring road) the freight through traffic increased from 66.2 to 82.5 trucks in 24 hours, which
corresponds to 24.6 percent increase. This exceeds the project end targets of 72.0 trucks or an 8.8 percent
increase by 14.6 percent and 181.0 percent, respectively. On the East corridor (East Ring road), the freight
through traffic increased from 9.1 to 23.9 trucks in 24 hours. This exceeds the project end targets of 22 trucks
or a 141.8 percent increase by 8.6 percent and 162.6 percent, respectively. However, it is not clear from the
ICR if the increase in through traffic is mostly due to the project's connectivity enhancement or driven
by normal traffic increases.

Upgrading the Nan Bei road improved traffic flows, increased bus speeds. The bus service speed during rush
hour on the Nan Bei road corridor increased from a baseline 10.30 km/hour to 26.90 km/hour, which exceeds
the target 15.50 km/hour by 73.5 percent. However, 26.90 km/hour is a very high speed for buses in mixed
traffic, and the ICR, para 51, points out that without dedicated lanes and priority system this speed is not
realistic.

Rush hour bus ridership on the same corridor more than doubled from a baseline of 5,845 to 12,700 in 2019,
exceeding the target of 12,000 passengers by 5.8 percent. Bus users' satisfaction increased from 27 percent
at appraisal to 72 percent by project close. This exceeds the target of 65 percent by 10.8 percent. However,
the ICR does not sufficiently explain how much of these achievements are attributable to the project.

The project interventions, such as traffic channeling, traffic lights, signalized mid-block crossings, and
pedestrian facilities enhanced road safety. The annual number of fatalities and severely injured people in the


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



project corridors, measured over a three-year period, went down from a baseline of 14 to 6 by project end.
This exceeds the target of 9 fatalities and severely injured people by 33.3 percent.

Although the project exceeded all its outcome targets, for several of them substantially, the ICR does not
provide sufficient evidence on the project’s contribution for some of them. In addition, the result in terms of
bus speed increase does not seem realistic. Therefore, the improvement of selected urban roads
infrastructure services is considered as achieved with moderate shortcomings, and the efficacy of this
subobjective 1 is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
No change - To assist Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban roads infrastructure services

Revised Rationale
There were no changes to the original outcome indicator targets.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To assist Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban environmental services

Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 2 under the original outcome targets, based on the ICR (para 4) and
additional information in the PAD (para 2 and annex 2), was that the activities of (i) constructing drainage and
sewage pipes along major roads, (ii) constructing drainage and sewer mains on the West ring road and the
Anding East and West roads, (iii) rehabilitating sewage and pipes in the Xinfeng districts, (iv) constructing a
wastewater treatment plant, wastewater pumping station, and related wastewater trunk mains and collectors,
(v) carrying out a water resource study, (vi) integrating the drainage network into the city's geographic
information system (GIS), and (vii) training and capacity strengthening of staff in the water supply and sewage
sector were expected to provide as outputs (i) more kilometers of new or reconstructed drainage and sewage
pipes, (ii) a wastewater treatment plant, including the associated pipes and pumping station, and (iii) more
staff trained in efficiently managing water supply and sewage services. In terms of outcomes, this was to
increase the built up areas serviced by storm and wastewater networks and reduce pollutants in wastewater,
which are both indications of improved urban environmental infrastructure services. In terms of long terms
outcomes, improved urban environmental infrastructure services were to (i) reduce poverty, inequality, and



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



social exclusion, (ii) manage resource scarcity and environmental challenges, and (iii) improve public and
market institutions.

Outputs

The following outputs were achieved during the life of the project to meet subobjective 2 (ICR, paras 22 to
25 and annex 1):

      Wastewater treatment plant and pumping station, completed in line with the target.
      Wastewater treatment plant connection pipes, 100 percent completed in line with the target.
      New drainage and sewage pipes, 107.60 percent completed and exceeding the target of 100 percent,
         and reconstructed drainage and/or sewage pipes, 100 percent completed in line with the target. In
         total, this corresponded to 18.7 km of rainwater or drainage pipes and 40.2 km of sewage pipes,
         completed either together with the road works or through innovative drilling techniques.
        14 water level sensors, installed in the main wells of the city for city-wide water level monitoring (the
         PAD had no target).
        Citywide GIS system with digitalized drainage network (the PAD had no target).
        Study tours for waste water treatment plant management to Shenzhen, Shanghai, Chengdu, and
         Hefei.
        189 staff trained, compared to a target of 120. This exceeds the target 71.8 percent. It refers to staff
         trained on transport and wastewater related issues.
        5 studies completed, in line with the target. For the water and sewage sectors, among others, this
         included the water resource management study.

Outcomes

The upgrading of Qingyang Municipality's storm and wastewater network enhanced the city's capacity in
different pipe construction techniques, including traditional trench, integrated ditch, and tunneling/drilling.
It increased the city's built-up area served by storm and wastewater networks from 50 to 92 percent, in line
with the project end target.

The water resource management study, digitalized drainage network in a citywide GIS system, the study
tours and the training also enhanced the city's capacity to manage water, sewage, and storm water. The Bank
task team pointed out the project capacity strengthening activities, among others, facilitated the development
of the sponge city concept, which focuses on the absorption of storm water by increasing green areas,
recycle the storm water, and using materials that enable water absorption.

The wastewater treatment plant, with the associated collectors and pumping station, by project end in 2019,
led to the removal of 576.50 tons/year of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), compared to an original
cumulative target of 1,168 tons/year. This is 49.4 percent of this target. It also led to the removal of 1,166
tons/year of suspended solids (SS), compared to an original cumulative target of 2,219 (52.5 percent),
and 1,631 tons/year of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), compared to an original cumulative target of 2,569
(63.5 percent). According to the ICR, para 24, the treatment plant benefited an additional 150,000 inhabitants,
and the quality of the water released in the nearby river complied with environmental standards.

The 2018 restructuring paper does not justify the need for the revision of the indicator targets related to the
wastewater treatment plant and only mentions that they were revised “as per actual capacity”. The ICR does

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



also not explain why the original targets were not achieved. In para 46, the ICR mentions “capacity issues in
the wastewater treatment plant due to a miscalculation of the volume of water to be treated, without clarifying
the nature of these capacity issues. The Bank task team initially referred to a reduction of the capacity of the
wastewater treatment plant built under the project and a second wastewater treatment plant in the Qingyang
Municipality. After confirming with the borrower, the Bank task team pointed out that the original targets will
be achieved by end-2020, and that there was no change on the capacity of the wastewater treatment plant
and the planned wastewater volume.”

In its written response to the draft ICRR, the Bank task team reiterated that the wastewater treatment plant
was designed for an average yearly volume of wastewater treated for disposal of 20,000 tons/year, this target
was not changed during project restructuring, and it remained unchanged throughout the project. The team
provided data that showed that from April 2019, when the plant started operations, to October 2020, the plant
removed 1,768.38 tons/year of BOD, exceeding the original cumulative target by 51 percent, 4,425.84
tons/year of COD, exceeding the cumulative original target by 72 percent, and 3,405.98 tons/year of SS,
exceeding the original cumulative target by 53 percent.

Because the original pollution removal targets were exceeded, albeit with delay, by October 2020, and the
efficacy of this subobjective is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To assist Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban environmental services (the subobjective
remained unchanged but the related outcome target changed)

Revised Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 2 under the revised outcome targets is the same as under the original
outcome targets.

Outputs

The outputs achieved were the same under the original and revised outcome targets.

Outcomes

The outcomes achieved under the revised targets are reported under subobjective 2 above. In terms of
pollution removal, by project end, the plant exceeded the revised targets by 57.9 percent for BOD, by 103,4
percent for COD, and by 68.3 percent for SS. By October 2020, the plant exceeded the revised targets by
384.5 percent for BOD, by 551.9 percent for COD, and by 391.5 percent for SS.

Overall, based on the revised outcome targets, the project exceeded this subobjective, and the efficacy of
the latter is rated high.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)




                              Revised Rating
                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The first subobjective under the original outcome targets was achieved with moderate shortcomings as
                            explained in the last paragraph under objective 1, section 4 and is rated substantial. The second subobjective
                            under the original outcome indicator targets was exceeded, but with delay, and is rated substantial.
                            Therefore, the overall efficacy of the PDO under the original outcome indicator targets is rated
                            substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The first subobjective under the original outcome targets was achieved with moderate shortcomings as
                            explained in the last paragraph under objective 1, section 4 and is rated substantial. There were no changes
                            to the original outcome indicator targets. The second subobjective under the revised outcome indicator
                            targets was exceeded, and its efficacy is rated as high. Therefore, the overall efficacy of the PDO under
                            the revised outcome indicator targets is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   At appraisal, the economic efficiency of the project was assessed through a cost benefit analysis and a cost
   effectiveness analysis.

   The cost benefit analysis covered the urban bypass road construction, integrated traffic management, and
   existing roads upgrading (PAD, para 25). According to the PAD, para 24, the main economic benefits included
   (i) savings in travel time and costs, (ii) productivity increases, (iii) avoided loss of life and property from traffic

                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



accidents, (iv) better access to public services, (v) energy savings and associated pollution reduction due to
improved road condition in project areas, and (vi) increases in amenity and land value increase due to
transportation and environmental improvement. The Bank task team pointed out that this was a general
description of benefits, and not all of them were actually quantified. The benefits quantified at appraisal included
savings in vehicle operating cost, passenger time cost, road accidents, and environmental benefits. The
economic costs of the project included capital investment and O&M costs, including associated resettlement and
environmental mitigation costs (PAD, para 24).

The analysis used a discount rate of 8 percent. Neither PAD nor ICR provided a reason for the use of a 8
percent discount rate at a time when the Bank generally still used a 12 percent discount rate. According the
Bank task team, the evaluation period covered the construction period from 2012 to 2015 and the operating
period from 2016 to 2035.

The economic internal rates of return (EIRR) of the three transport-related sub activities were estimated as
11.1 percent, 24.7 percent, and 11.4 percent, respectively. The Net Present Values (NPV) were estimated
as RMB164.6 million, RMB233.9 million, and RMB109.8 million, respectively (PAD, para 25). The combined
EIRR for the three subcomponents, recalculated by project closure, was 12.4 percent and the NPV was
RMB508.3 million (ICR, page 46). Sensitivity analyses under the assumptions of a 10 percent decrease in
economic benefit and a 10 percent increase in total costs showed that the road investments were economically
robust with estimated EIRRs of 9.5 percent, 9.0 percent, and 21.5 percent respectively (PAD, para 25).

By project close, the cost benefit analysis was repeated, using several reasonable adjustments presented in
annex 4, para 4 of the ICR to reflect the project reality. The analysis for the three transport-related
subcomponents (urban bypass road construction, integrated road corridor improvement, existing roads
upgrading - ICR, annex 4, table 4.2) yielded EIRRs of 10.8 percent, 27.0 percent, and 15.3 percent,
respectively. The combined EIRR for these subcomponents was 13.8 percent. The NPVs were estimated
as RMB175.3 million, RMB206.0 million, and RMB156.0 million, respectively. The combined NPV was estimated
to be RMB537.3 million (ICR, para 33). The sensitivity analysis, assuming a 10 percent cost increase and a 10
percent decrease in benefits, still yielded a robust NPV, with estimated EIRRs of 8.7 percent, 23.3 percent, and
11.3 percent, respectively.

For subcomponent 1.4: Wastewater Treatment Plant, at appraisal, a basic cost-effectiveness approach was
used to select the design alternative with the lowest unit cost to achieve the wastewater treatment outcomes.
The PAD, para 26, explains that this was due to the difficulties to quantify and monetize the health benefits of
treating wastewater. The PAD does not contain details on the calculation of the unit costs. Although a cost-
effectiveness approach is adequate for a wastewater treatment plant given its public good nature, a comparison
of the unit cost of the selected design alternative with unit costs in other Chinese cities in comparable urban
settings or elsewhere would have been desirable to assess its cost-effectiveness.

At the ICR stage, no economic assessment was carried out for the wastewater treatment plant. The ICR (para
34 and annex 4) mentions that "given that the original investment options remained unchanged, while the
selected option’s target was reached, the economic efficiency of the wastewater treatment plant is considered to
be realized."

In its written response to the draft ICRR, the Bank task team included the results of a revised cost benefit
analysis for the road subcomponents that included the cost of the wastewater treatment plant without benefits.
This showed an EIRR of 13.8 percent (exactly the same as the ex-post combined ex-post EIRR of the road



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



subcomponents without the wastewater treatment plant cost) and a NPV of US$101.5 million. This compares to
an ex-ante combined EIRR of 12.4 percent and a NPV of RMB508.3 million for the road subcomponents only.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The project suffered from a two-year implementation delay mainly because of delays in (i) setting up the project
accounting system, (ii) providing counterpart funds for contract and resettlement payments, (iii) transferring loan
proceeds to the project management office, and (iv) paying contractors. However, seven years to implement an
urban infrastructure project is not uncommon.

In US dollar terms, the project was completed at a two percent lower cost than the appraisal estimate. However,
its cost in RMB was significantly higher than estimated in the PAD (ICR annex 4 and page 43).

The US dollar cost of subcomponent 1.1: Urban Bypass Road Construction was 51 percent higher than the
appraisal estimate despite the cancellation of one small section. This is due to a significant increase in
resettlement costs (for details see section 10). The other subcomponents and the second component were
completed for less than the appraisal estimate. However, some activities under subcomponents 1.2 and 1.3
were financed with local funds and the respective amounts are not captured in the total cost. The ICR does not
indicate the total amount of local funds used.

Overall, the efficiency of project implementation is rated modest. Even though the ex-post EIRRs of the
road subcomponents with and without the wastewater treatment plant cost were slightly higher than the
appraisal estimate, the reliability of the analysis raises questions because (i) the ex-post EIRRs with and without
the wastewater treatment plant cost were exactly the same and (ii) the bus speed increase data is not realistic
(for details see subobjective 1 in the Efficacy section above). In addition, the ICR does not provide ex-post
evidence on the cost-effectiveness of the wastewater treatment plant. The project also suffered from a two-year
implementation delay, certain project activities were financed with local funds not included in the total cost
reported in the ICR, and the actual cost in RMB was higher than estimated at appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      68.30
 Appraisal                                                  12.38
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      82.40
 ICR Estimate                                               13.78
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



6. Outcome

With a substantial relevance of objectives and efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall outcome under the
original outcome indicator targets is rated moderately satisfactory (4).

With a substantial relevance of objectives and efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall outcome under the
revised outcome indicator targets is also rated moderately satisfactory (4).

Based on a disbursement share of 70 percent at the time of the restructuring on October 10, 2018, when the
outcome indicators were revised, the overall outcome rating is moderately satisfactory (0.7*4+0.3*4=4.3,
rounded down to 4, where on a 6-point scale, 4 is moderately satisfactory and 5 is satisfactory).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are risks that the development outcome of this project will not be fully achieved or maintained. This
includes the following:

      Technical capacity to operate and maintain project assets. The ICR, para 77, points out the city's
       staff has shown their technical capacity to operate and manage the project assets. Therefore, the
       capacity risk is low.
      Availability of funds to maintain the project assets. The ICR, para 78, mentions a risk that the
       city did not have the necessary resources to maintain the project assets, which for the Water
       Supply and Sewage Company is attributed to its worrisome operating ratio. For the transport related
       agencies, the Bank task team pointed out that the appetite for increasing bus fares or introducing tolls
       is limited, hence this might put in danger their financial capacity. However, the team also explained
       that Gansu Province and Qingyang Municipality receive special attention from the central
       government, including adequate funding.
      Increase in car ownership and use. There is a risk that a strong increase in car ownership and use
       might cancel out the mobility benefits achieved through the project and decrease bus ridership and
       satisfaction.
      Only partial implementation of the project studies. The Bank task team judged that the risk is low
       that the project-related studies will not be implemented because most of them were part of Qingyang
       Municipality's urban development master plan, which they are strictly abiding to.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



  The Bank task team designed the project keeping in mind the development needs of the Gansu province
  and Qingyang Municipality. The design brought together two sectors to achieve efficiencies by combining
  pipe and road construction. The design included the lessons from the Bank’s urban infrastructure project
  portfolio in China, among other, (i) capacity building for local stakeholders during project preparation, (ii)
  support for high impact infrastructure investments prioritized in the city’s development strategy and
  master plan, and (iii) focus on investments with a people-oriented approach (PAD, para 17).

  The Bank task team reviewed the draft feasibility study report for the different project components, the
  cost estimates, and the overall design preparation (ICR, para 68). The team also identified
  most implementation-related risks, mainly risks in capacity, governance, and design (ICR, para 43), and
  considered the overall project risk as substantial. Not all risk mitigation measures proposed were
  sufficiently effective. For instance, confirming the counterpart funds in the annual budget was not
  sufficient to avoid delays because of a lack of counterpart funding. While the team strongly emphasized
  the city's lack of capacity to implement Bank-financed projects, they did not envisage the possibility of
  delays in project implementation because of these capacity issues.

  The Bank task team carried out adequate safeguards and fiduciary assessments and ensured the
  preparation of the necessary safeguards documents. As mentioned below, the project had shortcomings
  in M&E (for details, see M&E section).

  The borrower appreciated "the Bank task team’s professionalism, dedication, and efficiency during
  the project preparation", including particularly "the timely guidance on fiduciary, safeguards, and the
  design review" (ICR, annex 5).

  The project’s risk identification and mitigation weaknesses are considered as minor, and the M&E related
  shortcomings are considered in the M&E rating. Therefore, Bank performance in ensuring quality at
  entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paras 70 to 72) points out that the Bank task team carried out 11 supervision mission during the
 implementation period of seven years, which is slightly less than two missions a year. According to the
 borrower, this did not negatively impact project implementation.

 The team provided safeguard and fiduciary support and training. Given the unfamiliarity of the
 implementation agencies with Bank procurement rules and procedures, the project had a lower prior review
 threshold, and the team carried out prior reviews for 81 percent of all contracts. The team also provided
 prompt guidance to solve the resettlement and procurement issues during project implementation.

 The borrower (ICR, annex 5), mentioned that "the project went through a challenging implementation with
 slow disbursement during the first three years", and that "the Bank task team conducted adequate
 implementation support missions, with intensive efforts to identify issues and come up with solutions." The


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



 borrower appreciated the solid and comprehensive capacity building support provided and the diligence in
 ensuring the compliance with fiduciary procedures.

 The Bank task team restructured the project twice to enable the completion of the project activities and the
 achievement of the PDO. Although the project restructuring included adjustments to the M&E, the Bank
 task team could have provided more guidance and exercised greater control in this area (for details, see
 M&E section).

 Despite the somewhat fewer missions than Bank standard and the shortcomings during M&E
 implementation, reflected in the M&E rating, Bank performance in supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project management office had the overall responsibility to coordinate the data collection for monitoring
 and evaluation (M&E) and report to the Bank. The different project implementing agencies, such as Xifeng
 District Housing and Construction Bureau, Qingyang Municipality Water Supply and Sewage Company,
 Xifeng District Transportation Bureau, were responsible to collect the monitoring data and information
 (PAD, para 19).

 The results framework included five PDO indicators, three for the first subobjective and two for the second
 subobjective. Several of the 13 intermediate results indicators also directly measured the achievement of
 the PDO. For instance, this is the case for the indicator on the decrease in road-related fatalities and
 injuries or the increase in bus ridership, which measure an improvement in urban roads infrastructure
 services. However, as pointed out in the Efficacy section, for the indicator on the increase in bus ridership
 the attribution is not fully clear.

 The PDO indicator on the share of through traffic on the East Ring and the West Ring corridors was not
 fully adequate because it did not isolate the normal increase in traffic. Therefore, and since the purpose of
 the ring road is reduce traffic congestion in the city center, a better indicator could have been to measure
 changes in traffic volumes through the city center.

 All indicators had baselines and targets. However, several intermediate results indicators were measured in
 percentage terms, and the physical targets were not provided. With respect to the targets, while they
 generally seem realistic, they were not ambitious. This is especially the case for the freight through traffic,
 where the average daily tracks on the new road section were only expected to increase by 5.8, and the
 revised wastewater pollution reduction targets, which were largely overachieved.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



 Results measuring strongly relied on surveys, such as traffic counts and travel time survey, but the PAD did
 not describe the survey methodologies nor mention how the baselines were obtained. The ICR (annex 1)
 briefly describes how the results for the road transport-related indicators were measured. However, this
 description gives the impression that travel times and traffic volumes were based only on a one-time
 measurement, which would not be in line with good practice. The Bank task team pointed out that (i) this
 impression is a language issue, i.e., incorrect translation, (ii) traffic counts, for instance, were not done only
 on one day, and (iii) the methodologies used by project closure were compatible with appraisal ones.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 50) points out that the project management office collected the M&E data on a regular
  basis to assess the project implementation progress. The project implementing agencies collected the
  operational data. The project management office also made the necessary refinements to the
  measurement methodologies.

  During the project's two restructurings, the Bank task team slightly revised the results framework by
  replacing two indicators with core indicators and changing the PDO indicator targets related to the
  wastewater treatment plant. The restructuring paper does not explain why it was necessary to change
  these PDO indicator targets.

  As pointed out in the Efficacy section, at least for the indicator on the bus speed, the results
  measurement raises doubt in terms of reliability because a bus speed of 26.90 km/h in mixed traffic
  seems very high and, according to the ICR, para 51, is unrealistic.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 52) explains that the project implementation office and the Bank used the M&E data to
  monitor the implementation progress. This data was the basis for the two restructurings. The M&E data
  also helped detect and analyze the slow implementation progress during the initial years. The M&E data
  was also used for the preparation of the ICR. The ICR (para 53) aIso points out the absence of absolute
  values (e.g., km of roads or drainage network constructed), which along with percentages would have
  been more meaningful for decision making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. The project was
   expected to have positive environmental benefits and contribute to the improvement of urban roads and
   urban environmental services in Xifeng District. The principal negative impacts included construction-related
   impacts as well as impacts during operation, such as soil erosion, sludge disposal, and noise from the

                                                                                                       Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



  wastewater treatment plant and the roads (PAD, para 45). The following safeguards policies were triggered:
  Environmental Assessment OP/BP4.01, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, and Involuntary
  Resettlement OP/BP4.12.

  The borrower prepared an environmental assessment, an environmental management plan, and a
  resettlement action plan. The project management office monitored the project's environmental and social
  performance. The Bank task team followed up through regular missions.

  Environmental safeguards compliance was generally satisfactory, except for temporary shortcomings in
  dust and noise monitoring at road construction sites. This was corrected. During heavy rainstorms in
  October 2019, a large volume of rainwater combined with sewage poured out from the water collection well
  and flooded the wastewater treatment plant. Xifeng District prepared an action plan to improve the
  effectiveness of the wastewater treatment plant. The Bank task team clarified that once the action plan is
  implemented, the problem will be definitively solved.

  In terms of social safeguards, according to the ICR, paras 60 to 62, the project successfully relocated
  a church and 35 household graves. No complaint was filed. The project affected 2,149 households, and 226
  households were satisfactorily relocated. The project required the temporary occupation of 324.1 mu of land
  and the acquisition of 800.66 mu of land, which were successfully completed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project's financial management performance was moderately satisfactory throughout the
  implementation. The borrower provided the external financial audit reports on time, and these reports had
  unqualified opinions. During the first years of project implementation, the project suffered from issues, such
  as the retention of Bank loan funds for late distribution to the project implementation units, delayed setting
  up of project accounting, and unavailability of counterpart funding. This delayed project implementation.
  Except for the final two years, most interim financial reports (IFRs) were submitted with delays. All IFRs
  were of acceptable quality.

  The Bank task team provided on-the-job training and implementation support to relevant project staff,
  which over time helped improve the project's financial management performance.

  Procurement was also moderately satisfactory. The project implementation units' unfamiliarity with Bank
  procurement policies and procedures caused some delays in the beginning of project implementation, but
  then improved significantly because of the regular training on procurement procedures and contract
  management. The project suffered from contract variations due to inadequate project planning and project
  activity design depth, additional local government requirements, and the speeding up of construction (ICR,
  para 66).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The following lessons have mostly been derived and summarized from the ICR, with minor additions
by IEG:

Focusing on strong project management capacity building, combined with a wide variety of
hands-on activities, and striving for innovation can lead to results beyond the project
outcomes. During the project, Qingyang Municipality and Xifeng District made considerable
progress in building their capacity through the implementation of the project activities, training, and
study tours to other Chinese cities and abroad. All this led, for instance, to the “Sponge City
Program”, which scaled the project's drainage rehabilitation program up to the citywide level. It also
led to the extension of the integrated pipe ditch approach of the project's road component to all main
arteries of the city.

Innovation can be an essential driver for new solutions and challenges the project
implementation agencies to strive for higher levels. Under this project, the construction of the
Eastern bypass using the dyke technique instead of an originally planned bridge increased the land
capacity in an environment with geographic limitations. The Beijing Dadao Huoxiangou Gully Highfill
is the largest volume backfill project in the Loess Plateau. Similarly, the GIS system was a great
success and is expected to be expanded to other utilities in the near future.

Securing adequate resettlement funds and having the necessary administrative procedures
for land acquisition in place before carrying out the resettlement survey, negotiations, and
agreement signing are important conditions for the success of a project. Under this project,
the significant resettlement cost increase was mainly due to the unavailability of resources after the
start of the negotiations with project-affected people. This happened because, while waiting for the
availability of the resettlement funds, floor areas and attachments within each house plot
considerably increased. In addition, the compensation policy changed during the project. These two
factors could have adversely affected the achievement of development objectives. Therefore, if a
project has large resettlement challenges, the timing of resettlement activities, payments, and civil
works needs to be aligned to avoid cost increases.



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



Flexibility in the use of loan proceeds for land acquisition can help overcome
an implementation impasse. As mentioned, under this project, the significant resettlement cost
increase put the project at risk. The flexibility provided for the use of loan proceeds for resettlement
payments eventually permitted the completion of the works and achievement of the outcomes. The
Bank task team also canceled an activity that did not impact the final outcome but released the
pressure on the counterpart financing. This brought the project back on track.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise but includes the required data and information. More details on project outputs, especially
on capacity building activities and studies, and their impact would have been desirable. For instance, it is not
clear which measures of the transport-related action plans were implemented and how they contributed to
enhanced public transport.

The ICR, page 6, reconstructed the theory of change based on the information in the PAD. The reconstructed
theory of change is depicted diagrammatically by arranging elements for project activities, outputs, sub-
objectives, and long-term outcomes, which correspond to the CPF priorities, in respective columns. It also lists
several key risks identified at appraisal as critical assumptions. The activities under the institutional
strengthening and capacity building component were missing. In addition, the theory of change does not refer
to the expected outcomes, such as reduction in travel time or decrease in wastewater pollution.

The quality of the efficacy analysis had shortcomings. First, despite a significant lowering of the
wastewater pollution reduction targets, the ICR does not consider the possibility of applying a split rating. The
ICR does also not explain why this reduction in the PDO indicator targets was necessary and if the original
targets are likely to be achieved in the future.

Second, in terms of results orientation, the assessment of efficacy is largely done by reporting on achievements
against indicators targets and on project outputs. A number of statements, especially related to technical
assistance and capacity strengthening activities, are not clearly supported by evidence. For instance, the ICR
points out that the pedestrian friendly streets and crossings, and the channeled crossroads equipped with traffic
lights are evidence that Qingyang Municipality’s capacity to plan, implement, and manage transport and urban
infrastructure were strengthened (ICR, para 39) and that capacity building under the project contributed to
sustaining the road infrastructure improvements (para 21).

Third, the ICR does not question the quality of the evidence in the Efficacy section even if, in the M&E section,
it points out that the increase in the bus speed, which is one of the PDO indicators, is unrealistic. The ICR does
also not discuss the adequacy of the methodologies used to assess a number of results even if the description
of these methodologies in annex 1 and the respective discussion in the M&E section (ICR, para 49) raise some
doubts.



                                                                                                      Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure (P123133)



Lastly, the ICR does not adequately explain how the project activities contributed to certain results, such as the
increase of bus ridership and user satisfaction.

With respect to efficiency, the ICR does not include an attempt to reevaluate the cost-effectiveness of the
wastewater treatment plant component, especially since its benefits seem significantly lower than expected at
appraisal (for details see Efficiency section). Because of the use of different terminologies, from the ICR, it is
not clear if the coverage of the cost-benefit analysis and the benefits taken into account were the same at
appraisal and by project close.

Some additional, but minor issues with the quality of the ICR include the following:

      The substance of the lessons is valuable, but too many different ideas are often packed into one lesson
       heading. For instance, the lesson in para 79 of the ICR is about a "balanced package of investments in
       a people-oriented approach" and "cross-sectorial activities". It this lesson, the ICR does not only
       present what the package of activities ultimately led to, but it also speaks about the importance of strong
       management capacity building and ownership.
      There are inconsistencies in reporting the project costs between the ICR datasheet and annex 3
       and project indicators (not PDO indicators) between the main text of the ICR and in annex 1 (e.g. in
       paragraph 20).
      The revised targets in annex 1 are reported as original targets, which causes confusion.
      Abbreviations, for instance, for QMG and XDG, EBP, QWSSC, are not included in the list of
       abbreviations.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 21
