     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022174

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P131965                                   MozBio Program - Phase 1

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9960                                 30-Nov-2018                                         43,050,305.91

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Nov-2014                               29-Nov-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          40,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           39,951,432.96                                               0.00

 Actual                                       36,764,815.68                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Joachim                   Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Vandercasteelen




 P132597_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132597                                   MZ CA Development Project (TFCA III) GEF ( P132597 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                  6285490.23

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



 18-Nov-2014

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                    6,319,635.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                    6,285,490.23

 Actual                                                   0.00                                    6,285,490.23




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO was “to increase the effective management of the Conservation Areas and enhance the living
   conditions of communities in and around these Conservation Areas” (PAD para 34, Legal Agreement p 5).
   The PDO formulation is identical in the two documents.

   For the purpose of this review, the PDO has been parsed into two objectives; Objective 1) to increase the
   effective management of the Conservation Areas; and Objective 2) to enhance the living conditions of
   communities in and around these Conservation Areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Institutional Strengthening for Conservation Area Management (original allocation:
   US$8.0 million IDA, US$3.2 million GEF; actual cost: US$5.2 million IDA, US$3.2 million GEF). This
   component focused on building the regulatory, legal, communication, financial, coordination, and
   management capacity of the National Administration of Conservation Areas (ANAC), the Foundation for the
   Conservation of Biodiversity (Biofund), and the Ministry for Coordination of Environmental Affairs for
   biodiversity conservation and tourism development. Capacity building was expected to be achieved through
   the provision of equipment, training, and technical assistance for the operationalization of these institutes
   and the capitalization of the endowment fund.

   Component 2: Promotion of Tourism in Conservation Areas (original allocation: US$1.9 million IDA;
   actual cost: US$2.3 million IDA). This component aimed to support the ANAC and selected public-private
   institutions in their capacity to administratively manage and generate revenues from tourism and sport
   hunting activities developed under the project. The tourism management capacity building was expected to



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



   be achieved through training, technical assistance, collection and analysis of statistics, and the
   development of business and master plans.

   Component 3: Improving Conservation Area Management (original allocation: US$16.4 million IDA;
   actual cost: US$16.0 million IDA). This component aimed to strengthen the management and monitoring
   capacity of selected key Conservation Areas (CAs). This was expected to be achieved through the provision
   of training, technical assistance, equipment, and monitoring & survey activities.

   Component 4: Piloting Sustainable Community Livelihoods around Conservation Areas (original
   allocation: US$6.8 million IDA, US$3.1 million GEF; actual cost: US$5.6 million IDA, US$3.1 million GEF).
   The fourth component aimed at improving and strengthening the natural resource-based livelihoods of
   communities in and around CAs. Improved livelihoods were expected to be achieved by providing training,
   technical assistance, and equipment to local community members, leaders, and organizations to improve
   natural resource and forestry management. The project also promoted subprojects related to tourism,
   fisheries, conservation agriculture, and sustainable forestry.

   Component 5: Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation (original allocation: US$6.9 million IDA;
   actual cost: US$7.7 million IDA). This component supported the financial management, safeguards,
   monitoring & evaluation, and overall coordination of the project through the provision of technical advisory,
   training, and resources to finance operational costs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The original amount of project funding was US$46.3 million, of which US$40 million came from IDA
   financing and US$6.3 million from a trust fund. At the end of the project, the actual disbursement totaled
   US$43.1 million as the actual disbursed funding from IDA was $36.8 million. The borrower did not contribute
   to the project financing.

   The project was approved on November 18, 2014, and became effective on May 1, 2015. The original date
   of closure was November 30, 2018; but was changed during the second project restructuring to November
   29, 2019, i.e. the project got a 12 months’ extension.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of the project’s appraisal, Mozambique had experienced decades of high and steady economic
growth. Yet, this rapid economic growth had not translated into poverty reduction in rural areas. The
livelihoods of rural households, therefore, remained highly dependent on subsistence agriculture and
natural resource extraction. At the same time, these natural resources offer great opportunities for nature-
based tourism and sustainable income generation, but their potential was undermined by severe
environmental degradation caused by illegal mining and logging, agricultural encroachment, illegal hunting,
and overfishing.



                                                                                                        Page 3 of 22
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



Mozambique’s diverse ecosystems and wild habitats are conserved under a system of CAs. The system of
CAs is important not only for tourism, but it also sustains the livelihood of 250,000 poor people living in and
around them. However, two important development challenges diluted the potential of the CAs for
biodiversity conservation and sustainable tourism income generation. First, CAs operated ineffectively
because of insufficient institutional support from the national level, weak administrative capacity, limited
equipment and infrastructure, and a lack of funding. Second, the coordination and cooperation were limited
between CAs conserving natural resources and poor households using these resources (unsustainably) for
their livelihood. CAs lacked sufficient capacity and experience with community engagement to harmonize
community needs with conservation and involve local governments in natural resource management
activities.

The PDO aligns with the Government of Mozambique’s (GoM) current strategies of biodiversity
conservation outlined by the Ministry of Land, Environment, and Rural Development (Ministério da Terra,
Ambiente e Desenvolvimento Rural, MITADER) in the National Strategy and Action Plan of Biological
Diversity Of Mozambique (2015-2035) (MITADER 2015). The strategy focusses on “ensur[ing] the
conservation of biodiversity through the integration, training, financing and the strengthening of partnerships
between the different sectors of society” aimed at improving “the quality of life of Mozambicans, derived
from its integrated management, conservation and fair and equitable use". The system of CAs is
Mozambique’s primary approach to in-situ biodiversity conservation. The project is the first phase of the
Mozambique Conservation Areas for Biodiversity and Development (MozBio) Program, initiated in 2014,
with the overarching goal to reconcile biodiversity conservation, tourism development, and poverty
reduction in and around CAs. The PDO to support CA management and the communities around them also
aligned with two national priority areas in the GoM’s 2015-2019 Five-Year-Program, i.e., to promote
sustainable natural resources management and to create employment.

The PDO is also well in line with the second objective (increasing agricultural growth) of the current Country
Partnership Framework (2017 – 2021) between the World Bank and the GoM. In specific, the Mozbio
program is part of the current Agriculture and Agribusiness Joint Implementation Plan of the International
Finance Corporation and the World Bank. The fundaments of the program were laid by the two World Bank
supported Trans-frontier Conservation Areas (TFCA) projects that strengthened the legal and institutional
framework to scale up CA management and tourism nationally. The PDO is further aligned with the long-
term engagement of the World Bank in Mozambique across the different sectors of conservation, tourism,
and rural poverty reduction.

The first part of the PDO to increase the effective management of CAs was relevant to address the
underdeveloped capacity in Mozambique for biodiversity conservation. However, the second part of the
PDO, namely “to enhance the living conditions of communities in and around these CAs”, was vaguely
formulated and the central concept of ‘living conditions’ was not defined. It is thus unclear how “living
conditions” are to be defined, what an enhancement in living conditions entails, and how the second part of
the objective links with the first part of the PDO. The ICR (para 72) also notes the “too broad and unclear
definition of the second part of the PDO. The project did not clarify what the living conditions to be
enhanced should include nor what would constitute an enhancement”, and no relevant indicator to measure
achievement of this objective was identified. The Relevance of the PDO indicator is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase the effective management of the Conservation Areas

               Rationale
               Theory of change. Theory of Change for the first objective “To increase effective management of the
               Conservation Areas”:

               Three different identified outcomes were expected to contribute to the achievement of this objective; 1) An
               effective policy, legal and institutional framework for managing CAs in place; 2) Improved financial
               sustainability of the CAs system (through endowment funds and revenues from tourism); and 3) Improved
               biodiversity conservation management within the CAs.

               The two first outcomes are logical, and it is plausible that their achievement may contribute to the
               achievement of the objective (i.e. that effective policy/legal/institutional framework and financial sustainability
               will lead to effective management of the Conservation areas).

               There is a logical breach between the third expected outcome and the objective, however, in that “improved
               biodiversity conservation management” is presented as an outcome that would lead to the objective of
               “increased effective management of the Conservation areas”, when the logical link would be the opposite.
               Namely, it would be more logical to assume that increased effective management of the CAs would have the
               potential to lead to improved management of biodiversity conservation. In fact, biodiversity protection is
               presented as a higher-level objective in the ICR’s ToC (page 8). Furthermore, the only identified indicator to
               measure the achievement of this outcome is the number of hectares under enhanced biodiversity protection,
               but there are no relevant indicators to measure the actual improvement in biodiversity conservation.

               The expected outputs that were to contribute to the achievement of the first intermediate outcome of “an
               effective policy, legal and institutional framework” were i) an operationalized Conservation Law; ii) the
               adoption of the Conservation Law’s regulations; iii) the strengthened capacity of CITES; and iv) a
               strengthened ANAC. It is not clear what “strengthened” encompasses here, but the improvement in
               institutional capacity was to be measured through the METT, which is a global standardized system for
               measuring effective management of CAs.

               The expected outputs to support the achievement of the second intermediate outcome of “improved financial
               sustainability of Conservation Areas” were i) the Biofund was to be capitalized and become operational and
               able to disburse funds; and b) revenue streams from private operators and entrance fees from tourism would
               be collected. It is plausible that these outputs would contribute to the achievement of the second outcome.

               The identified outputs that were expected to support the achievement of the third outcome of “improved
               conservation of biodiversity within CAs” were i) the establishment of a new infrastructure for conservation
               management and tourism (though it is unclear what is meant by “new infrastructure” here); ii) CAs to be
               adequately equipped and trained, and operational costs are covered; iii) Co-management agreements

                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



facilitated; and iv) that wildlife status and trends are tracked and known. There were no related indicators to
these outputs in the results framework, which made tracking and reporting results under this outcome
challenging.

In the next two subsections, we list the project outputs and outcomes that IEG considers to be relevant for the
later discussion on how the project achieved the different steps of the ToC.

Outputs Annex 1 of the ICR reports 29 outputs for the first part of the PDO. However, almost all outputs
listed are project inputs, and target values are not provided for the indicators. Moreover, for the few outputs
listed that can be correctly considered as outputs, the wording of the output is not very clear. For example,
the output ‘human resource management strategy’, does not indicate whether such a strategy was to be
developed or an existing strategy was to be improved. Therefore, IEG uses the intermediate results indicators
for the first objective reported in Annex 1 as relevant project outputs. Moreover, IEG considers the second
outcome indicator of the first objective, namely the “number of tourism concessions regularized in the
Bazaruto Archipelago National Park”, as an output of tourism development rather than an outcome.
Moreover, this indicator was only measured for one CA, which complicates the generalization of the
achievement for the other CAs supported by the project.

Below is an overview of the achievements on the first intermediate outcome:

      A score of 58 percent on the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) was used to measure
       the institutional capacity of the ANAC, meeting the revised target of 58 percent.

Below is an overview of the achievements on the second intermediate outcome:

      US$3.9 million of cumulative Biofund disbursements to the CAs, exceeding both the original target of
       US$0.75 million and the revised target of US$3.0 million. Note that the original indicator referred to the
       annual Biofund disbursement, while the number reported for the achieved output in the ICR is that of
       the cumulative disbursement at the end of the project. The Biofund initiated its first disbursement to
       CAs in 2016 and was able to use different funding sources to support 14 CAs by the end of the
       project.
      US$0.7 million of annual revenues from targeted CAs, not exceeding the original target of US$1.28
       million but exceeding the revised target of US$0.5 million. Note that this indicator was originally
       measured in US$, but the unit of measurement changed during the second restructuring of the project
       to Mozambican Metical (MZN). The reported achievement and revised target in the ICR are MZN46.1
       million and MZN36.8 million, respectively. As the ICR review uses one currency to report
       achievements, the values in local currency are converted to USD using the exchange rates for the
       achievement (US$1 = MZN67.9 at the time of the ICR) and revised target (US$1 = MZN63.6 on
       November 2019) documented in the ICR. Thus, the large fluctuations in the exchange rate (US$1 =
       MZN40.3 at the start of the project in November 2014) over the course of the project complicate the
       comparison of the baseline, target, and outcome value and dilute the project’s achievement. When the
       output indicator is measured in local currency, the project’s achievement on the output indicator is 326
       percent. The large surpassing of the target is explained by the ICR as “the revenue collection systems
       introduced in [two CAs], together with a potential increase in tourism and higher fees, led to higher
       tourism revenues than expected”. However, in footnote 19, the ICR mentions that “the exact increase
       in revenues from the new [collection] system cannot be quantified because there is no adequate
       baseline data and because the impacts from potential increases in tourism, the higher fees, and the
       increase in fee collection cannot be reliably separated”. Moreover, given that the indicator refers to

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



       annual revenues, the ICR could have been more explicit that this indicator was not achieved for the
       first three years of the project but somehow doubled between 2017 and 2018 and remained at the
       same level in 2019 (based on the data shared by the ICR team afterward). Hence, all in all, the ICR
       could have been more clear on how the report arrived at the final value when the exact revenue
       increases from the newly introduced revenue system are unknown and when it cannot be separated
       from the increased tourism fees (of which the value is also unknown).
      5 submitted and/or signed Co-Management Agreements for Conservation Areas, exceeding the
       original target of 2 (no revised target). This indicator was added during the second restructuring.
      1,781 jobs available in tourism and conservation in targeted CAs, exceeding both the original target of
       1,136 and the revised target of 1,299 jobs created. Note that there are differences in the target value
       for 2019 (1,237), the end target (1,299), and the target reported by the PIU (1,500) for unclear reasons
       (ICR para 77). More importantly, this indicator does not measure the number of jobs created (as it is
       labeled in the results framework), but the number of jobs available. The ICR reports that 700 tourism
       and conservation jobs in targeted CAs were created. Hence, this is substantially smaller than the
       number of jobs that are reported to be available by the project.
      8 tourism concessions regularized in the Bazaruto Archipelago National Park, exceeding the original
       target of 7.

Below is an overview of the achievements on the third intermediate outcome:

      10,786 patrols of Law Enforcement in targeted CAs, exceeding both the original target of 5,523 patrols
       and the revised target of 7,075 patrols. Law enforcement is an important aspect of biodiversity
       conservation. Note that the indicator of the number of patrols was changed in the second
       restructuring, where the initial indicator was labeled “Law enforcement zones regularly patrolled in
       targeted CAs”. It is unclear what activities were conducted as part of the patrol, and who was
       conducting the patrol. The ICR notes problems with the measurement of this indicator: “some CAs
       reported the number of patrols realized as the number of patrol days while others reported them as
       the number of patrol walks or the number of staff sent on patrol.” Note further that the ICR mentions
       that the original target was 5,523, while in Annex 2 the target is reported to be 30 (and the baseline
       value is reported to be 5,523).
      100 percent completion of planned priority infrastructure (for example 17 management buildings,
       bridges, and entrance gates) for the efficient operation of the CAs, achieving the original target of 100
       percent.
      131,113 million tons of annual CO2 emissions from deforestation in selected CAs, achieving the
       original target. The ICR (Annex 1 p55) states that the target was substantially surpassed because
       activities in one of the two CA (Gilé) supported with deforestation activities “far exceeded
       expectations, particularly due to strong community ownership with regards to sustainable cashew and
       efficient charcoal production”. The ICR could have elaborated on this important finding. Moreover, it is
       important to note that there is a general declining trend in deforestation in Mozambique (ICR p55),
       questioning how much of the change can be attributed to the project. The latter is reinforced by the
       inability of the project to reduce deforestation rate in the other supported CA (Chimanimani), which,
       according to the ICR (para 72) indicates “that the value added by the project might have been limited
       there”. Note that this indicator was originally listed for the second objective, but the indicator is more
       related to biodiversity conservation, and reduced CO2 emissions have little relevance as evidence that
       the livelihoods of local communities increased.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



Outcome. The outcome indicator reported in Annex 1 of the ICR related to the first objective to increase the
effective management of CAs is:

      2.1 million hectares (ha) brought under enhanced biodiversity protection, exceeding the original target
       of 1.9 million ha. It is however unclear what ‘enhanced’ biodiversity protection implies and how this
       has been measured. The baseline value for this indicator is zero, but currently, 22.9 million ha of the
       terrestrial area is protected in Mozambique.[1] Hence, it is unclear whether this indicator refers to the
       aggregated terrestrial area covered by CAs supported by the project, or whether the ‘enhanced’
       protection refers to the anticipated improved management by the CAs supported by the project. If the
       indicator refers to the former, then the baseline value is not zero, as other terrestrial area in
       Mozambique has been protected under the CA system. If the indicator refers to the latter, it is unclear
       how an indicator of land coverage can illustrate enhanced biodiversity protection and what the
       counterfactual is.

Discussion. Strengthening the institutional capacity to create effective policy, legal, and the institutional
framework for CA management was the first approach supported by the project to achieve effective
management. While no evidence is available on whether the institutional capacity of the CITES increased, the
METT score of the ANAC went up from 38 percent to 58 percent. While this outcome certainly indicates that
institutional capacity improved, this achievement became largely irrelevant to the PDO of effective
management when the implementation responsibility of the project was transferred to another institute, the
National Sustainable Development Fund (FNDS). This decision was made because, at the time of the second
restructuring, it became clear that the ANAC could not deliver due to its low capacity and complex funding
mechanism. While the project continued to support ANAC’s capacity, the agency had to focus on higher-level
strategy, policy, and legislation. This reorganization of the PIU decreased ANAC’s relevance on the ground,
thus undermining its (envisioned) central role in supporting the effective management of Mozambique’s CA
system. Other shortcomings mentioned in the ICR are that the planned activities to develop the human
resource management strategy of the ANAC and the installation of a performance-based human resource
management system were not achieved. Also, note that there are no relevant output indicators to measure
the achievement of the project regarding the outputs of the operationalization and adoption of the
Conservation Law’s.

The project has been more successful in ensuring the financial sustainability of the CA system through the
Biofund and tourism revenues. The project achieved the targets for all outputs listed above regarding the
amount of Biofund disbursement to the CAs, the revenues collected from targeted CAs, the employment
generation in tourism and conservation, and attracting private investments (i.e., the signing of eight public-
private partnership co-management agreements. Attribution of these effects to the efforts of the project
seems very likely, given that the project directly supported the Biofund.

The final short-term outcome to achieve effective management of CAs was the improved management of
biodiversity conservation within CAs. The achievements for the indicators on law enforcement patrols and the
completion of priority infrastructure, however, illustrate achievement in the delivery of services and do not
present direct evidence that the capacity of biodiversity management improved. The PDO indicator on the
“areas brought under enhanced biodiversity protection” does not specify what the project considers as
improvements in biodiversity protection. Moreover, the indicator is measured by the total area of the CAs
targeted by the project, which is an indicator of coverage but is not a relevant indicator for improved
management effectiveness. It is not sufficient to presume that just because the land surface is classified to be
part of a CA that the biodiversity on this land is better protected. The ICR (para 33), notes that “ [there is] little
correlation between the scale of improvement and the amount of project financing received by a specific CA

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



[… but there is] evidence that co-managed CAs performed better than others”. It is, however, unclear to which
evidence is referred to. Hence, the lack of a proper indicator to measure CA management provides
insufficient evidence that management improved and that the improvement can be attributed to the project.

Conclusion. The project achieved all the (revised) targets for the indicators in the results framework
presented in the ICR. The evidence is credible to conclude that the project improved the financial
sustainability of the CA system during the project implementation. However, the presented evidence is much
less conclusive to demonstrate the improvement of the institutional framework and management of
biodiversity within CAs. Hence, there is insufficient evidence that the first objective has been fully achieved.
The rating for the Efficacy of objective 1 is therefore Modest.

[1] https://www.protectedplanet.net/country/MZ




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the living conditions of communities in and around these Conservation Areas

Rationale
Theory of change.

Theory of Change for the second objective “to enhanced living conditions in communities in and around the
Conservation Areas”:

The term “living conditions” is vague and was not defined in the PAD or the ICR. It could refer to anything
from sanitation and housing to health services.

The two identified outcomes that were to contribute to the achievement of the second objective, however,
were: 1) improved productivity; and 2) improved livelihood diversification. While it is plausible to assume that
improved productivity and improved livelihood diversification could contribute to enhanced living conditions,
there are no indicators in the results framework to measure changes in productivity or livelihood
diversification.

The identified outputs that were to support the achievement of the outcomes were: i) improved and
sustainable access to natural resources; ii) access to rural income-generating activities; and increased
awareness of the importance of conservation. No relevant indicators to measure these outputs were found.

The ToC for the living conditions aspect has some important gaps in the logical flow from the promotion of
livelihood subprojects to the enhancement of beneficiaries’ living conditions (as PDO). The outputs related to
the subprojects were framed in terms of access to income-generating activities. The expected outcomes (in
the ToC) resulting from this improved access are improved productivity and diversification of livelihoods. The

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



assumption is that by providing local communities access to project activities that support their livelihood
(agriculture or ecotourism), they have the opportunity to actually improve their livelihoods. However, the
logical steps in the causal chain to go from improved access to improved living conditions are absent. Do
local communities with access to subprojects effectively participate in the project? Which type of individuals
participate in the subprojects (intrahousehold allocation)? If individuals participate, how is participation
expected to increase their productivity? How is participation in subprojects expected to diversify livelihoods?
All of these important steps (or assumptions about them) are crucial to understanding how project activities
contributed to the achievement of the objective, but these steps are absent from the ToC. Moreover, there is
a lack of relevant indicators – and thus evidence – to measure achievements on improved productivity or
livelihoods diversification.

Similarly, there is also a disconnect in the ToC on how capacity building in sustainable resource management
and conservation awareness activities is expected to improve productivity and livelihood diversification. While
capacity supporting activities are a relevant first step, they are not sufficient to directly improve human
wellbeing. Did training on sustainable resource management result in effective sustainable use of resources?
Did awareness programs outside the CAs reduce pressure (e.g. reduced deforestation) in these
communities? How can attribution be made to the project? There are many incremental steps in the change
of human behavior that need to occur for capacity building to improve likelihoods, and the ToC does not
discuss these critical steps. And again, the results framework does not include any relevant indicator to
measure the project’s achievement regarding effective sustainable use of resources.

Finally, the assumption made in the ToC is that “improved living conditions incentivize effective natural
resource management” but the causality in the ToC runs in the opposite direction, i.e., effective natural
resource management is a driver for improved living conditions. This is yet another indicator that there are
important gaps in (the discussion of) the logical chain of the ToC before one can logically assume that the
promotion of subprojects, resource management capacity building, and awareness lead to the
aforementioned improvements.

Outputs Annex 1 of the ICR reports 10 output indicators, but similar to the first objectives, almost all of these
outputs are project inputs. IEG considers the following intermediate results indicators as project outputs:

Below is an overview of the achievements on the first intermediate outcome of improved productivity:

      An index of 52 on local communities’ perception of benefits from targeted CAs, exceeding the original
       target of 35. However, the ICR does not explain how perceptions were incurred and how the index
       was measured. The data to measure this indicator was collected from a beneficiary satisfaction
       survey, but the baseline data were collected a year after the project was implemented, and hence the
       data do not constitute a true baseline of what the situation was before the project. Moreover, the ICR
       mentions some ‘implausible results [as] the questions on beneficiary satisfaction were phrased too
       generally and the responses may have been biased by a tendency […] to answer in a manner viewed
       as favorable” (Annex I p55). Given these issues with the quality of the data, and that perceptions do
       not equate actual livelihood improvements, the achievement on this indicator is insufficient to measure
       and attribute project achievement.
      16,200 beneficiaries of subprojects supported by the project, exceeding the original target of 8,400
       beneficiaries. The beneficiaries benefited from the promotion of conservation and small-scale
       commercial agricultural activities and subprojects on ecotourism. The ICR explains that the target on
       project beneficiaries was largely surpassed because the project supported more (additional)
       subprojects than planned (especially on agroforestry and conservation agriculture). However, the

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



       caveat is that this increase in subprojects was only possible because other project activities for
       supporting the community governance were not implemented.
      US$0.1 million of income derived from tourism and wildlife utilization in targeted CAs and returned to
       communities, not exceeding the original target of US$0.25 million but exceeding the revised target of
       US$0.06 million. Note that this indicator was originally measured in US$, but the unit of measurement
       changed during the second restructuring of the project to MZN. The ICR reports the actual
       achievement as MZN6.1 million and the revised target as MZN3.8 million. As such, given the large
       devaluation of the local currency, the project achieved the revised target but it is difficult to compare
       achievement with the original target. The achievement is linked to the increased annual collection of
       revenues from targeted CAs by ANAC (see output indicator for objective 1). This indicator is included
       here as it indicates how much of the increased “annual revenues from targeted CAs” under the first
       objectives were shared with local communities.

There is no relevant output indicator to measure achievements on the second intermediate outcome of
improved livelihood diversification.

Finally, IEG considers the two outcome indicators used by the project as outputs (see below):

      69,136 direct project beneficiaries, exceeding the original target of 56,000. The total number of
       beneficiaries is the sum of (i) the number of beneficiaries of subprojects supported by the project, (ii)
       the number of jobs available in tourism and conservation areas in targeted CAs, and (iii) the number of
       beneficiaries from the 20 percent of CA revenue sharing with communities. However, the combined
       baseline value for the latter two numbers was 11,743 people, reducing the total of actual project
       beneficiaries to 57,393. Moreover, the number of tourism employment is the number of jobs available
       and not created, so it is unclear how many households in the community actually participated.
       Moreover, the ICR (para 75) also mentions double-counting of beneficiaries that received project
       support through one of the three sources, thus inflating the numbers. Finally, while the numbers (i)
       and (ii) can be inferred from other output indicators, it is unclear how many beneficiaries were
       assumed to benefit from (iii).
      34 percent of female beneficiaries, achieving the original target of 30 percent.

Outcome. As mentioned above, the project’s effectiveness to improve livelihoods was assessed by the
number of direct project beneficiaries and the share of female beneficiaries which were both achieved.
However, none of these indicators provide relevant information as to how and to what degree the project
achieved the improved productivity or diversification of livelihood of local communities (the fourth short-term
outcome). As a consequence, no outcome indicator allows to assess whether the second objective of
enhanced living conditions was achieved.

Discussion. The PDO to enhance the living conditions of local communities was assessed by the number of
direct project beneficiaries and the share of female beneficiaries, which does not provide sufficient evidence
to demonstrate that living conditions effectively improved. This lack of relevant indicators results in the lack of
evidence to show the achievement of the project’s second objective.

The ICR does refer to the results of a beneficiary satisfaction survey and the assessment of changes in the
simple poverty scorecards of households collected in three CAs (ICR para 35). Both assessments, however,
suffer from significant methodological issues in their data collection and the ability to attribute observed
changes to the project, as explained in Section 9b and above. Finally, the ICR mentions that the project
support to a community-owned eco-lodge was an important project contributor to enhance living conditions

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



                            (ICR para 36). However, at the time of writing the ICR and this review, the ecolodge was not yet operational,
                            so the potential benefits for the local communities are only to be materialized in the future.

                            The authors of the ICR moreover express concerns about the sustainability of the livelihood activities and
                            whether the activities have been meeting the community needs. As an example, the ICR (para 37) states that
                            “five of the six water systems in BANP were not fully functional at project closing, with three of them not
                            having water at all”. Another example is the Bazaruto’s solar-powered fish market, where issues with
                            technical maintenance are expected once the 1-year warranty expires. Some activities have been reduced in
                            scope (e.g., the enabling conditions activities), while others were not executed or postponed to the next
                            phase of the project. More problematic is the sustainability of promoting (agricultural-based) livelihood
                            activities when the communities have limited access to markets to sell their produce or buy inputs.

                            The project output indicators reported mainly on the delivery of subprojects, infrastructure, and training of new
                            practices. Evidence on delivery does not provide evidence that increased access to these activities led to
                            effective improvements in livelihoods. Participation in project activities (measured by the number of
                            beneficiaries in the project) does not provide evidence that the living condition of participants increased, and
                            there is no discussion on how this improvement manifested, and whether the improvement is likely to be
                            sustainable over time. Even if the indicator on beneficiaries’ perception of benefits was accurately measured,
                            it only provides information on perceptions, and the ICR (para 76) rightfully questions “whether this
                            [beneficiary satisfaction] reflected beneficiaries’ reality”.

                            Conclusion. As discussed in detail above, there are several issues in the assessment of the project efficacy
                            for the second objective. First, the second objective is vaguely formulated without a proper definition. Second,
                            there is a disconnect on how the project support of subprojects, resource management capacity building and
                            awareness-raising was expected to logically improve productivity and livelihood diversification. Third, the
                            reported PDO and outcome indicators do not allow to assess the achievement of the project to improve the
                            living conditions of project beneficiaries. Finally, as will be discussed later, there are serious concerns about
                            the design and implementation of the livelihood component activities.

                            Because of the lack of relevant indicators and conclusive evidence to demonstrate project achievement, the
                            Efficacy rating for the second objective is Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The above discussion highlighted weaknesses in the ToC for both objectives. The evidence to demonstrate
                            the achievement of the first objective is weak, and insufficient for the second objective. No outcome indicator
                            precisely measures effective management or improved livelihoods. The rating of overall Efficacy is therefore
                            Modest.



                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. Both the PAD and ICR provide a detailed economic analysis which was based on
quantifying measurable benefits of the project. The economic analysis relies entirely on the net present value
(NPV) of the project. The measurable benefits considered in the ex-ante analysis were the: (i) total annual
revenues generated from touristic activities in and around targeted CAs (63 percent of benefits), (ii) annual
revenues generated by invested endowment capital of the Biofund (8 percent of benefits), and (iii) additional
revenue accruing to communities living in and around the CAs through enhanced livelihoods (29 percent of
benefits).

Due to a lack of credible data to quantify these benefits at the design stage, the project collected secondary and
qualitative data for the financial analysis in the PAD. Using a 10 percent discount rate, the ex-ante net benefits
of the project were estimated to be US$39 million over 10 years. This translates into a NPV of US$6.7 million
and an economic rate of return (ERR) of 14.4 percent.

However, the ICR noted that the ex-ante economic analysis was flawed. First, some of the assumptions on the
economic benefits were optimistic or relied on secondary research in a different context (as discussed in
footnotes 46 and 47 of the ICR). Second, and most worrying, footnote 33 of the ICR alludes to a calculation
error in measuring the ERR, and states that “[it] remains unclear how the analysis at appraisal reached the
conclusion that the ERR was 14.39 percent at a 10 percent discount rate”. When the ICR recalculated the ex-
ante ERR at the time of the PAD, using the same data and assumptions of the PAD methodology, the ERR is
recalculated to be 4 percent which would have made the project not viable at appraisal.

The ICR provides a solid and detailed reassessment of the ex-ante and ex-post ERR of the project. The ex-post
economic analysis in the ICR used actual project costs and benefits reported by the project’s (revised) results
framework and updated the critical assumptions in the methodology. The ICR also updated the assumptions and
data used to extrapolate the benefits accruing in the 5 years after the project ended. It further expanded the
economic benefits with the private sector investments mobilized by the project and the reduced carbon
emissions. It also performed sensitivity analyses using different values of exchange rates, inflation rates, and
delays caused by economic shocks (which are identified as the most severe project risks). Finally, it also
discussed some of the difficult-to-measure benefits, that were therefore omitted from the analysis in the PAD.
Hence, the ICR team did an admirable effort to improve the financial analysis. However, the ICR could have
considered other sources of benefits (e.g. hydrological), and more importantly, could have taken into account
the costs of restricting the access of local communities to resource extraction in CAs.

When the ex-post economic analysis does not take into account the benefits of reduced carbon emissions
(scenario 1), the ICR finds the ERR to be 13 percent, but the sensitivity analysis shows that the project is not
viable for a discount rate above 11 percent. With the updated and refined analysis (scenario 2), the NPV
amounts to US$70 million and an ERR of 25 percent, and robust to discount rates from 5-20 percent.

This substantially improved ERR recalculated by the ICR is driven by the higher number of beneficiaries
reached and the higher benefits realized by the project. In a follow-up conversation, the ICR team shared the
detailed methodology of the financial analysis, which illustrated that the realized benefits from the revenue

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



collection by the ANAC (indicator 7) and the social cost of avoided annual CO₂ emissions from deforestation
(indicator 15) were much larger than anticipated or not taken into account in the PAD assessment. These
changes are driven by a particularly large jump in revenues between 2017 and 2018. For indicator 7, the follow-
up communication of the ICR team clarified that “The reason for the high performance on this indicator is that
the revenue collection systems introduced in two Conservation Areas (MSR and BANP), together with a
potential increase in tourism and higher fees, led to higher tourism revenues than expected.” For indicator 8, the
ICR team clarified that because the on-the-ground implementation of most activities was delayed until 2017, the
incremental reduction in C02 emissions would be reflected in the data from 2017 onwards.

Implementation efficiency. There were some inefficiencies with the implementation of the project. The weak
implementation capacity of the ANAC caused project implementation to be delayed until 2017. The project’s
steering committee only convened in the last year of the project and hence did not guide during implementation.
Service providers underperformed because of miscommunication, unclear expectations, late capacity
assessment, weak monitoring systems, and an unclear vision (of CAs). Furthermore, the tropical cyclone Ida
and political conflicts affected the implementation of some project activities. Finally, the activities designed to
create enabling conditions for sustainable resource management by local communities with implemented in half
of the 12 targeted CAs because during the MTR it was decided to reduce the number of targeted areas to six.

Despite these implementation issues (noted in the ICR), the ICR (para 48) argues that “the project displayed a
considerable degree of efficiency in its implementation”. When the project moved the PIU to the FNDS and
started using the Biofund for disbursing funds to CAs, the project’s implementation progress (and its rating)
improved. A notable achievement of the project is that it strongly encouraged and facilitated the establishment of
public-private partnerships for the effective management of CAs through co-management agreements.

Discussion. Based on the hypothesized measurable benefits in the PAD, the ex-ante measurement of
economic efficiency in the ICR shows that the project would not have been financially viable. The reassessment
of the economic benefits in the ICR, using actual benefits reported by the project and taking into account the
social benefits of reduced carbon emissions, arrives at a higher ERR and thus concludes that the project was
viable. Both the omission of the substantial carbon benefit and the calculation errors in the ex-ante ERR in the
PAD suggest weaknesses in the design of the project (see section 10). Moreover, the significant administrative
inefficiencies of the project outlined above would merit a Modest rating

However, the updated assessment in the ICR shows that the financial efficiency of the project was robust to
different scenarios and sensitivity analysis cases. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                  4.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                              25.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of the project’s PDO to simultaneously improve the effective management of CAs and the living
conditions of local communities around CAs is rated Substantial as the second part of the PDO is vaguely
defined. The Efficacy of the project is rated Modest because of the weak evidence that the project achieved the
first objective and insufficient evidence that it achieved the second objective. The ToC and results framework do
not provide enough granularity and useful indicators in the different steps of the logical chain from project
activities over outcomes to objectives. Because of the favorable recalculated ERR, Efficiency is rated
substantial.

According to the guidelines of IEG, a Substantial rating for Relevance, a Modest rating for Efficacy, and a
Substantial rating of Efficiency results in an Outcome rating Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discusses several risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes supported by the project.:

      Technical risk: the weak capacity of the ANAC – to create a conducive higher-level policy
       environment – is a continuous risk to the effectiveness of biodiversity conservation in Mozambique,
       even though the ANAC is no longer the implementing agency of Mozbio. For example, the ICR (para
       93) notes that while part of its responsibilities were delegated to other agencies, “the division of
       responsibilities between the three institutions has not always been clear and widely accepted, which
       has led to partly competitive rather than collaborative relationships with ANAC”.
      Financial risk: the financial sustainability of the CA network is questionable. For example, the Biofund
       is not yet self-sufficient as it highly depends on external sources. This is a significant risk to the
       development outcome, as donor funding for biodiversity conservation and tourist revenues are
       uncertain (for example, reduced financial resources as the result of the COVID-19 crisis).
      Political and Environmental risk: Mozambique is susceptible to political violence (in Cabo Delgado)
       and climatological shocks (e.g., the Idai cyclone) that could reduce the number of tourists or damage
       tourist infrastructure.
      Social risk: encroachment and population pressure from urbanization could lead to more
       environmental degradation and deforestation. Similarly to the financial risk, the COVID-19 crisis is
       likely to negatively affect the livelihood of households surrounding CAs, thus increasing the likelihood
       (or necessity) of unsustainable natural resource use.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



Some of these risks are likely to have been mitigated once similar activities were undertaken during the
second phase of the MozBio project. In this regard, it is important to note that funds of the MozBio 1 were
used for the preparation of MozBio 2 to smooth the transition. However, this smooth transition and similarity
of activities do not guarantee that the above risks are minimized.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Although the project design, according to the ICR, was based on an extensive analytical assessment of
  the development challenges and the design did incorporate lessons learned from other projects; IEG
  found significant shortcomings in the design of the project. These design shortcomings are the result of a
  too ambitious design of the project, as acknowledged by the ICR. When the overall budget was reduced
  after design, the scale of the project was not reduced accordingly. This resulted in two major design
  flaws.

  Firstly, the scope and coverage of the CAs to be supported by the project were too large given the limited
  financial resources. Moreover, the underestimation of the capacity and institutional risks of the initial
  implementing agency (ANAC) caused delayed and partial implementation of project activities. Weak
  implementation capacity and resources spread-out thinly over different CAs and activities are likely to
  have undermined the effective management of PAs.

  Secondly, and more importantly, the livelihood component did not have the resources allocated nor the
  intended scope to introduce substantial improvements in the livelihoods of beneficiaries. The project
  design allocated US$6.8 million to sustainably support the livelihoods of communities within and around
  CAs by creating enabling conditions and implementing different types of subprojects under component 4.
  This amounts to 17 percent of the total IDA commitment and was envisioned to support 56,000
  households. With an estimated population of poor people living within and around CAs of 267,449 (PAD
  para 60), component 4 of the project could support at best 21 percent of the persons affected by the
  project. The ICR (para 50) acknowledges that “activities were too specific to impact many of the factors
  that influence living conditions (for example, education, health, and energy access)”.

  Besides the lack of resources, the project did not clearly explain how the activities under the livelihood
  component would affect poor households, and how the effectiveness of such activities were to be
  assessed. As discussed in section 3, the project design did not define “enhanced livelihoods” nor
  specified what would constitute an enhancement. The results framework also lacked indicators to
  measure achievements of the objective “enhanced livelihoods”. Finally, as discussed in sections 4 and 5,
  the unrealistic target values for project indicators at the design stage, the calculation error in measuring
  the ERR, and the omission of reduced carbon emissions in the economic analysis of the PAD illustrate
  important methodological flaws.

  These are significant shortcomings that could compromise the project’s efficacy, efficiency, and
  sustainability. This complex design also illustrates that the lessons learned from the previous projects
  were not fully taken into account. For example, the reviews of both the ICRs of TFCATDP and TFCA I
  projects stated that the project objectives were overambitious given the time it takes for biodiversity to


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



  recover, the institutional challenges in the country, and the limited capacity of the GoM for the
  implementation of community-based natural resource management programs.

  Because of the complex design, the underappreciation of the livelihood component, and the issues in the
  economic analysis; the quality at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR’s satisfactory rating of overall Bank Performance is further justified by its proactive, solution-
 oriented implementation support (ICR para 92). The project team provided timely and close implementation
 support, and there was close collaboration between the project team and the GoM. The decision to transfer
 the responsibilities for project implementation from ANAC to FNDS is reported to have improved overall
 project implementation, M&E activities, and safeguard adherence. The project benefited from the presence
 of the Task Team Leader in the country. The significant improvement in the project implementation after
 the two restructurings indicates the active (and necessary) involvement of the project team to address
 some of the design issues and the initial underestimation of the capacity of the implementing agency.

 There are, however, two significant shortcomings in the Bank’s supervision. Firstly, while the two
 restructurings provided the much-needed restructuring of the implementation of the project activities, little
 progress was made regarding the quality of the results framework and M&E implementation. Moreover,
 and most importantly, the Bank failed to address the lack of useful indicators to measure the achievement
 of the second objective, which resulted in the project’s inability to measure and report on relevant
 achievements under the second objective. Secondly, activities that provided community-level support were
 not adequately implemented or postponed to the second phase of the program. For example, key activities
 to improve community governance structures and the sustainable forest management practices in one CA
 were not completed under the project (ICR para 39 and 40). To avoid that resources were spread out too
 thinly over CAs, the MTR decided that activities promoting sustainable livelihoods were implemented in six
 of the twelve initially targeted CAs. The underappreciation of the livelihood component contrasts with the
 lessons from the TFCATDP project (although included in the original design) that illustrated the necessity
 of strong attention on building community-based institutions.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



a. M&E Design
 The M&E design is considered weak for several reasons highlighted when discussing the efficacy of the
 project. The unclear and vague definitions of livelihood aspects resulted in PDO indicators with limited
 relevance and a focus on service delivery. As discussed in section 4, the lack of appropriate and relevant
 livelihood indicators does not allow to properly assess the project’s achievement to enhancing the
 livelihood of project beneficiaries. Moreover, the original target of almost all intermediate results indicators
 had to be substantially revised upwards (and sometimes the unit of measurement was changed) following
 the MTR in the fall of 2017. Most of the original targets were substantially below the baseline value. This
 illustrates that there were considerable issues with the methodology applied for setting baseline and target
 values at the design of the project. For example, the initial indicator “Law enforcement zones regularly
 patrolled in targeted CAs” was relabeled to “Law Enforcement patrols in targeted CAs” because of the
 “technical limitations within CAs in applying the previous approach” (ICR Annex 1, p65). It is not clear what
 limitation is referred to. Moreover, the original target was increased from 30 to 7,7075 patrols, which is an
 increase of 235.8 times. Also, the PAD did not differentiate the value of carbon stock by the type of forest,
 leading to an underestimation of the carbon emission reduction potential at design. While these are just two
 examples highlighted, such issues highlight the weak design of the results framework. Also, the ICR
 considered the M&E design to be weak (para 72).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank provided timely and sufficient support to strengthen the PIU’s capacity for M&E. Monitoring
  staff was recruited to collect field-level data and coordinated M&E training and documentation. The weak
  capacity of the PIU resulted in inefficient implementation of data collection and completion of the results
  framework for the M&E. As a consequence, the M&E rating of the ISR in June 2016 was downgraded to
  Moderately Unsatisfactory.

  The quality of the M&E system improved somewhat after the transferal of the PIU responsibilities to
  FNDS, but data quality issues remained. For example, there was an inconsistent definition of the
  patrolling indicator and multiple counting of beneficiaries of the tourism and conservation employment
  opportunities. Panel data was planned to be collected to incur beneficiary satisfaction of the livelihood
  activities, but the poor timing of the baseline survey (i.e., a year after the project started) and imprecisely
  formulated questions (ICR para 76) allowed the possibility for respondent confirmation biases. Similar
  arguments can be made for the assessment of the simple poverty scorecard scores in three CAs. The
  baseline data was collected in 2016, and there is no discussion on what the counterfactual is. Therefore,
  it is hard to attribute the reported increases in poverty score to the project activities.

   Finally, some of the changes implemented during the restructuring were not properly explained and
  some of the indicator labels remained unclear or inconsistent. For example, the indicator ‘annual Biofund
  disbursement to the CAs’ did not report annual disbursements but cumulative disbursements after the
  second restructuring. Similarly, the unit of measurement of the indicator “ANAC’s annual revenues
  collected from targeted CAs” changed from USD to MNZ, but this was not updated in the results
  framework. Finally, the indicator ‘Number of jobs created in tourism and conservation in targeted CAs’ did
  not measure the number of jobs created, but the number of jobs available in CAs (ICR p52).




                                                                                                       Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data on the institutional performance guided the two project restructurings, illustrating that the
  M&E was used to inform decision making, improve project management, and set-up proper incentives
  design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B and triggered 6 safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Forests OP/BP 4.36, Pest Management OP 4.09,
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The GoM prepared all
   necessary safeguards instruments.

   The ICR does not discuss the compliance of the project to each of these safeguards separately. Hence, the
   ICR review is not able to assess project compliance for each individual safeguarded.

   However, the ICR does report a positive evolution of the safeguards quality. When the PIU was under the
   responsibility of the ANAC, communication with the World Bank was limited, the production of safeguards
   reports was inadequate, and the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was not functional. With the
   transfer of the PIU to the FNDS, the World Bank harmonized the safeguards approach of different projects,
   and the implementation of the safeguards policies improved notably for the MozBio. While compliance with
   the safeguards instruments was recorded, occasional issues remained. Most notably was the delayed
   functionality of the GRM until 2018 and the delayed processing of complaints.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   The MozBio complied with financial management procedures during the entire project duration. The
   complex financing and low institutional capacity of ANAC initially delayed the implementation progress. For
   example, some auditing reports of the PIU funds did not fully clarify issues raised by the auditors, and
   qualified opinions were issued until 2018. These fiduciary issues were addressed during the second project
   restructuring when the sinking fund in the Biofund was established and the PIU was transferred to the
   FNDS. The activities of the Biofund were audited by private auditors and received unqualified opinions.

   Procurement:

   The project experienced issues with the timely and cost-effective procurement of service providers, for
   example, to implement the livelihood subproject and conduct the beneficiary satisfaction survey. On top of
   this, the complex funding and low capacity of the ANAC resulted in procurement delays and low quality

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



   and progress of procurement approval of project activities submitted to the Bank. Such procurement issues
   delayed project implementation until the second year of the project and lead to a reduction of the efficiency
   rating in the initial phase of the project (ICR para 49). The ICR (para 85) further notices that “CA
   management teams complained about the centralized procurement approach, bureaucratic procedures,
   and delays in delivery.” After the transfer in PIU responsibility and changes in procurements staffing, there
   was sufficient progress in procurement (ICR para 85).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reported no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   -



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The second part of the PDO to
                                                                                  enhance the living conditions of
                                                                                  local communities around CAs
                                                      Moderately
Outcome                         Satisfactory                                      was unclear and vaguely defined
                                                      Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  and there was limited evidence
                                                                                  of achievement on the first
                                                                                  objective.
                                                                                  The overly complex and
                                                                                  ambitious project design
                                                                                  underappreciated the
                                                                                  importance of improving
                                                                                  livelihoods in the integrated
                                                                                  approach to biodiversity
                                                                                  conservation: the PDO objective
                                                                                  on livelihoods was vaguely
                                                      Moderately
Bank Performance                Satisfactory                                      formulated and the livelihood
                                                      Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  activities were underfunded and
                                                                                  poorly defined. There were no
                                                                                  relevant PDO indicators included
                                                                                  in the results framework to
                                                                                  assess the project’s
                                                                                  achievement to improve
                                                                                  beneficiaries’ living conditions
                                                                                  and the bank team did not


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



                                                                                 address the weak results
                                                                                 framework during the course of
                                                                                 the project.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provides 5 detailed lessons, which are stated to be incorporated in the design of the second
MozBio project. Three of the lessons are summarized here (with language adapted).

Lesson 1: Landscape Approaches are key for making conservation and livelihood
development compatible. The project’s support to livelihoods through subprojects was too small in
scale and not always sufficiently connected to conservation efforts and community needs. This
underlines the need for conservation projects to collaborate closely with other initiatives in the
targeted CA landscapes. Particularly activities in the agriculture and forestry sector should be
streamlined with conservation as a conservation project by itself will not be able to transform rural
livelihoods and impact the many different dimensions of rural living conditions.

Lesson 2: It is important for livelihood activities to carefully balance short-term economic
needs and capacity building when engaging local communities in natural resource
management. Long-term capacity building allows communities to become active partners in
conservation-based tourism rather than merely recipients of revenues generated by investors. Key
elements to achieve this include adequate zoning with clear boundaries for community land and
strengthening community governance capacity for managing and developing natural resources
under their jurisdiction.

Lesson 3: The implementation of livelihood activities by service providers requires clear
guidelines, close collaboration with CA administrations, and strong community ownership.
Service providers are central in community engagement, but many lacked the flexibility and capacity
to effectively engage communities. In addition, some livelihood activities were detached from the
conservation work of the CA administrations, which not only risks undermining conservation but also
constitutes a missed opportunity for the visibility of CA administrations in communities. Collaborating
with other initiatives under a landscape approach may provide opportunities for using alternative
institutional settings for service provision.

Based on the discussion in the previous sections and the above lessons, the additional lesson
drawn by the ICR review is that an integrated approach to biodiversity conservation and human
development should pay equal attention to both conservation and livelihood efforts. They are
equal tools to achieve the common goal of biodiversity conservation in remote areas characterized
by high rates of environmental degradation and poverty. It is not sufficient to allocate a minor part of
the budget to subprojects to compensate poor people’s restricted access to natural resources in CAs
and hopefully improve their livelihood to reduce environmental pressure. Local communities need to
be consulted, actively engaged, and given ownership; while the implementation of activities requires
capacity building and sufficient funds. If resources are too limited, projects need to make decisions


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MozBio Program - Phase 1 (P131965)



on which aspect to focus on (conservation or development) and coordinate the other activities in an
integrated landscape management approach.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a candid and critical discussion of the project’s design, efficacy, and efficiency. The
arguments made in the different sections are to-the-point, yet with sufficient detail and some concrete
examples. The achievements of the outcomes are discussed with great detail using the project indicators, with
a critical assessment of the (intermediate) outcomes or indicator measurement when needed. The ICR did a
recommendable effort to refine the methodology used in the economic analysis, by reassessing both the ex-
ante calculation of the ERR as well as updating and expanding the methodology to calculate the ex-post ERR.

However, the ICR is not always concise, and it is more than double the OPCS recommended. Furthermore,
most of the ‘outputs’ listed in Annex 1 are inputs and the discussion of the safeguards is superficial.

The most important shortcoming of the ICR is that while there is a candid and detailed discussion of some of
the project’s weaknesses and shortcomings, this is not reflected in the ICR ratings of the project. The
satisfactory rating for both (i) the overall outcome despite the lack of evidence to demonstrate project
achievement concerning the second objective and (ii) the design of the project despite the complex design
issues and underappreciation of the livelihood component are two important cases in point.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
