     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022298

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147740                                    Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                              Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55570,IDA-D0030                       31-Jan-2020                                          64,193,280.13

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Nov-2014                               31-Jan-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         64,378,458.92                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg               Joy Behrens                    IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to strengthen the health system and improve the utilization and quality of
   health and nutrition services in selected regions (Financing Agreement, 12/17/2014, p. 5). The statements of
   objectives were identical in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Performance-based financing (Appraisal US$38.5 million; Actual US$36.5 million).

   (a) Provision of health service packages through the use of performance-based financing (PBF) approach in
   selected regions, with an emphasis on maternal and child health and nutrition interventions.

   (b) Building capacities to support the implementation of PBF through technical assistance, training
   programs on PBF concepts and procedures, provision of goods, and monitoring and evaluation of activities
   carried out under PBF, including through the services of community-based and independent verifiers.



   2. Strengthening the health system for improved performance (Appraisal US$38.5 million; Actual
   US38.5 million).

   (a) Health insurance: improving health insurance coverage (Universal Health Insurance), including through
   (i) development of criteria targeting the poor; (ii) study of service costs; (iii) analysis of sustainability of
   Universal Health Insurance and PBF activities; (iv) supporting information system linkages needed for
   Universal Health Insurance; and (v) engaging long-term technical assistance to support the ongoing
   development and operation of Universal Health Insurance.

   (b) Essential infrastructure: Carrying out a program of activities aimed at: (i) rehabilitating selected health
   facilities; (ii) acquiring essential equipment to supply newly rehabilitated facilities; (iii) monitoring the
   availability and use of equipment; and (iv) conducting surveys to ensure that the rehabilitated health
   facilities are fully operating.

   (c) Health management information systems: The project would support (i) the development of a facility-
   based information system to be linked to Universal Health Insurance, including for the purposes of reporting
   on PBF; (ii) training of a cadre of staff on the utilization and further development of information systems; and
   (iii) development of electronic patient records.

   (d) Improving the management of the health system, including (i) capacity strengthening to manage
   Universal Health Insurance and PBF; (ii) supporting hospital reforms; and (iii) developing a community
   health strategy in coordination with other development partners.

   (e) Ebola preparedness through acquiring essential equipment, supplies, drugs and vehicles in preparation
   for a potential emergence of Ebola virus and other communicable disease outbreaks, in coordination with
   UNICEF.

   Additional information on planned project support to Ebola preparedness (PAD, p. 37): US$10 million were
   allocated at appraisal and were fully disbursed. Project support to Ebola preparedness was part of an
   overall Ebola Plan of US$27.5 million. The subcomponent planned to provide 26 ambulances; 24 4x4
   vehicles; 100 motorcycles; 4 infrared body scanners; 400 portable infrared thermometers; laboratory


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



   reagents; hand washing equipment and supplies for health facilities, schools, universities, the military and
   police; medications; disinfection material; personal protective equipment; and gloves and masks. Related
   expenses were to be pre-financed by UNICEF, and would be eligible for retro-active financing. Key
   development partners, including the French Development Agency (AFD), African Development Bank, and
   European Union (EU), were planning to support the Ebola response, but corresponding amounts were not
   known.

   (f) Establishing the Project Implementation Unit and the Technical Committee for PBF, and providing
   technical assistance, training, operating costs, goods, and services.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost and financing. At appraisal, project costs were estimated at US$77 million, including US$70 million
   in Bank financing (an IDA Credit of US$35 million and a Grant of US$35 million), and government financing
   of US$7 million that were earmarked for PBF. The total actual cost aggregated at US$71.2 million,
   consisting of actual Bank financing of US$64.4 million, and actual government financing of US$6.8 million.



   Development partners support. The Global Fund (GFATM) co-financed PBF subsidies on a parallel basis
   in five additional project districts. The extent of support from various donors to the health sector was
   extensive. In this context, the ICR stated that the project complemented the work of the country and other
   donors (ICR, p. 7). Main donor involvement included the AFD and EU, both focusing on health system
   strengthening; the GFATM; the Vaccine Alliance -- GAVI; the United States President's Emergency Plan
   For AIDS Relief -- PEPFAR, United States Agency for International Development -- USAID; United Nations
   Population Fund -- UNFPA; the World Health Organization -- WHO; and the United Nations Children's Fund
   – UNICEF, including the provision of Vitamin A supplements.



   Dates. The Project appraisal document was finalized on 11/04/2014 and the operation was approved on
   11/25/2014. The project became effective on 03/16/2015. A Midterm Review was carried out on
   02/12/2018. A level 2 restructuring on 10/04/2019 adjusted the results framework and reallocated project
   proceeds between disbursement categories. The project closed on 01/31/2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Prior to the project, during the period between 2002 and 2012, the country experienced political and social
disruptions, civil war, and a post-electoral crisis, all of which have taken a heavy toll on the health system,
including from the closure and looting of hospitals and health centers (PAD, p. 2). At appraisal, the
objectives were responsive to country priorities and needs, including for improving health
infrastructure. Health indicators were among the weakest in the region (PAD, p. 6), and there were barriers
to health services utilization encompassing access, availability, affordability, and acceptability (PAD, p.

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



               2). The objectives were in line with sector policies, such as the National Health Policy and National Health
               Development Plan for 2012-2015. The government also intended to improve the level of preparedness to
               respond effectively to an Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in the region, given uncontrollable border crossings
               near the country’s western border (PAD, p. 1).

               At project closing, the objectives remained relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY16-
               19, that was extended until FY21. The CPF has three Focus Areas: accelerating sustainable private sector-
               led growth; building human capital for economic development and social cohesion; and strengthening public
               financial management and accountability. Focus Area 2 on building human capital encompasses three
               objectives: improve education service delivery and youth employability; expand affordable social protection;
               and improve the delivery of quality health and water services, under which the “number of people with
               access to a basic package of health, nutrition or reproductive health services” constitutes a CPF indicator.
               Hence, there was a considerable degree of alignment between project objectives and the CPF at closing.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve utilization of health and nutrition services in selected regions.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             Under objectives 1 and 2 (utilization and quality of services), it was reasonably expected that the provision of
                             health services and financial resources based on performance; improved staff skills in technical aspects and
                             management; monitoring of quality scores for health facilities; improved physical infrastructure; improved
                             information systems and quality of data; and communication activities for demand generation would plausibly
                             result in improved utilization and quality of health and nutrition services in selected regions.

                             There was a moderate gap in the results chain at entry, where the treatment of severely malnourished
                             children was an expected PDO outcome even though there were no specific activities for intensive support to
                             treat malnourished children (ICR, p. 15). This issue was subsequently rectified in 2018.

                             Note on the selection of districts for PBF piloting: According to the PAD (p. 28), the district selection process
                             used two sets of information: (i) the number of health-related projects being undertaken by other development
                             partners in each district, and (ii) the performance of each district with respect to four important indicators:
                             assisted delivery, pre-natal visits; immunization with DPT3, and malnutrition. At entry, 14 out of 83 districts
                             were selected, and the ICR (p. 24) stated that the project was explicitly designed as a pilot.


                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)




Outputs

Main outputs consisted of signed performance contracts with districts; provision of health and nutrition
services; development of manuals and guides for the preparation of business plans; training and technical
assistance; infrastructure rehabilitation; capacity development in management and accountability;
development of health information processes originating at the level of health centers; and implementation of
information, education and communication interventions to stimulate demand for health and nutrition
services.

The project phased its PBF implementation. In 2016, PBF operations were applied to a first group of four
districts, followed in 2017 by a second group of 10 districts. The sequencing allowed additional preparatory
time and learning opportunities for the second group of districts.

The GFATM partnered with the government in 2017 to support PBF in five additional districts, beyond the
originally envisaged 14 districts, resulting in an aggregate total of 19 PBF districts out of 83 districts in the
country (the TTL clarified on 09/11/2020 that the total number of districts continues to rise through
the administrative division of existing districts, thus leading to 21 PBF project districts out of 103 total districts
at present, i.e., in 2020). In the five additional districts, the GFATM financed only PBF subsidies, while the
Bank-supported project provided technical assistance, supervision, and verification activities (ICR, p. 15).



Intermediate results

The number of people with access to a basic package of health, nutrition, or reproductive health services
reached 7.8 million, exceeding the target 7.4 million people. Direct project beneficiaries were 7.6 million, and
the percentage of female beneficiaries was 62.1%, exceeding the target of 60%.

The percentage of women using modern family planning methods increased from a baseline of 13.8% in 2015
to 15.8% in 2020, attaining the target of 15.6%.

Children under 5 who received Vitamin A supplementation reached 361,042 children in 2010, short of the
original target of 706,350 children, but exceeding the revised target of 300,000 children. The target was
appropriately revised at the Mid-Term Review in 2018 (with a formal revision under the restructuring of
10/4/2019), as the national supplementation strategy changed from a campaign mode to a facility-based
supplementation, where supplementation needs were clearly less than the amounts required for campaigns.

The number of pregnant women receiving antenatal care during a visit to a health provider was 411,246
women in 2020, exceeding the target of 368,048 pregnant women.

The number of health facilities “constructed or renovated” was 138 facilities in 2020, exceeding the revised
target of 97 facilities. The achievement was short of the original target of 526 facilities under the original
indicator “facilities constructed, renovated, and/or equipped” (the original indicator pooled civil works and
equipment without explicit targets for each). After project approval, several development partners came
forward with resources to equip health facilities and to finance some rehabilitation. Hence, the project shifted
its focus exclusively toward construction and rehabilitation (ICR, p. 14). Development partners provided

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



medical equipment and financed the rehabilitation of several facilities among 200 facilities that were
previously targeted for rehabilitation (ICR, p. 46). At the same time, 265 health facilities dedicated resources
to improve their physical infrastructure using PBF resources (ICR, p. 19).

The number of health personnel receiving training reached 4,893 persons in 2020, exceeding the target of
4,720 persons.

The project established nutrition units in 269 health centers among 14 PBF districts in 2018.

The availability of equipment and supplies at the National Institute for Public Hygiene attained 88%,
exceeding the target of 75%.



Outcomes

Overall, utilization of integrated health and nutrition services under primary care was enhanced by the project,
as the number of consultations increased across the board for urban and rural facilities. PBF resources
allowed health facilities to reach out to surrounding communities and to remote areas through mobile health
services, thus further increasing access to services. PBF provided resources to attract patients to health
centers, including by hiring transportation to bring pregnant women who were close to labor to health
facilities, construction of toilets in maternity areas, and offering baby kits to mothers delivering in health
facilities.

The per capita utilization of services in PBF districts increased from a baseline of 34% in 2015 to 58.6% in
2020, exceeding the target of 56%.

The rate of utilization of health services in the first group of PBF districts increased from a range of 20-25% in
2016 to a range of 40-59% in 2019; and in the second group of districts, from a range of 10-20% in 2017 to a
range of 43-82% in 2019.

Vaccination coverage (DPT-HepB-HiB3) in PBF districts increased from a baseline of 97% in 2015 to 100% in
2020, exceeding the target of 99%.

The number of in-facility deliveries that were attended by trained health personnel increased from a 2015
baseline of zero (under the Corporate Results Indicators, a zero baseline means that a newly approved
project has not yet started contributing to the provision of essential HNP services) to 217,818 deliveries under
the project in 2020, exceeding the target of 191,209 deliveries. A percentage comparing in-facility attended
deliveries among all deliveries would have been informative.

The number of severely malnourished children detected and treated increased from a baseline of zero in
2015 to 19,941 children in 2020, exceeding the target of 16,220 children (the TTL noted on 9/11/2020 that
most of the detected children who were moderately or severely malnourished were treated upon the
establishment of the nutrition units).



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of health and nutrition services in selected regions.

Rationale
Theory of change: the same as under Objective 1, above.



Outputs: the same as under Objective 1, above.



Outcomes

The technical quality score for all the PBF districts increased from 47.8% in 2016 to 82.9% in 2019, and the
average quality score improvement for facilities covered by PBF reached 35%, exceeding the target of
30%. The score included criteria that were specific to both health and nutrition services, as explained below.

Explanation of the technical quality score: The score was measured by a set of indicators defined in the PBF
Manual (ICR, p. 21), and further explained by the TTL ( 9/11/2020). The score was included in the
WHO/UNICEF standard survey on Service Availability and Readiness Assessment. Indicators included
readiness and availability of services reflected by (a) general indicators such as registries, business plans and
financial management; and (b) service indicators such as vaccinations, prenatal care, nutrition, diarrhea,
malaria, acute respiratory infections, pharmacy, hygiene, security, and environment. For nutrition, criteria
included availability of necessary inputs such as scales and therapeutic feeding supplies; and service criteria
such as growth monitoring and treatment of malnourished children.

In addition, the ICR mission made several observations based on its field findings. During mission interviews,
the improvement in the quality of validated health data was consistently considered one of the main
achievements supported by the project. By project completion, registries at health facilities were properly
completed, as they were key to show performance and to receive financial resources. The ICR mission noted
a sustained results-orientation mentality in Regional and District Health Directorates and health
centers. Another observation was the acknowledgement of greater transparency in the use of funds (ICR, p.
19).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen the health system.

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)




Rationale
Theory of change

As stated previously in Section 2e, the project complemented the work of the country and other donors in the
health sector (ICR, p. 7) and, according to the ICR, the project focused on the following areas:

(i) providing technical assistance to develop a national health insurance system;

(ii) piloting the PBF approach to increase the volume and quality of services, while addressing linkages to
universal health care;

(iii) rehabilitating health facilities and providing equipment to PBF facilities; and

(iv) supporting the development of a health management information system and improving health
system management.

Although the objective to strengthen the health system for improved performance would normally have a
broader scope and assessment levels, it is plausible that project activities would contribute to strengthen the
health system and its building blocks, including because there are synergies and linkages between PBF and
health system strengthening.



Main outputs and intermediate results

In addition to outputs noted above under Objective 1, main outputs included the establishment of a Health
Insurance Agency; creation of a beneficiary registry that included a registry of indigents (who were the main
target group for Universal Health Insurance, according to the PAD, p. 9); and piloting of Universal Health
Insurance in three PBF districts (ICR, p. 17). Universal Health Insurance coverage started with the formal
sector (civil servants and university students) and the poor (ICR, p. 18). Among the latter, 201,354 poor
individuals were enrolled by project completion in three PBF districts, exceeding the target of 150,000
persons.

The project developed a facility-based information system; carried out a 2016 survey on service availability
and readiness; piloted the integration of data from university health centers and semi-public institutions into
the national health information data; and supported the production of an Annual Health Statistics Report
during the period 2016-2019.

The project supported the provision of technical assistance on health financing; the development of the
National Health Development Plan 2016-2020 and a community health strategy; and the revision and
updating of the National Plan for Medical Waste Management 2016-2020.

For Ebola preparedness, project support was input-oriented and consisted of the following:

      26 ambulances; 52 4x4 vehicles; 200 motorcycles; 4 infrared body scanners; 400 portable infrared
        thermometers; laboratory reagents; 55 computers; hand washing equipment and supplies for health



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



                                      facilities, schools and universities, the military and the police; medicines and disinfection products;
                                      personal protective equipment; and gloves and masks.
                                     Rehabilitation of two warehouses for the National Institute of Public Hygiene, for the storage of
                                      equipment and medicines.
                                     Construction of 51 latrines, 57 points of access to drinking water, and 17 wells and connections to
                                      existing water systems in 86 health centers and three border posts in the western part of the country.
                                     Provision of two photocopiers and 32 video projectors.
                                     On-site coaching on the use of tablet technology for epidemiological surveillance to support district
                                      and regional health directorates in case reporting.



                            Outcomes

                            Apart from outcomes described above under objectives 1 and 2, this ICR Review considers the above outputs
                            as early substantive results demonstrating the contributions of the project to health system strengthening. The
                            project established a Health Insurance Agency; created a registry of beneficiaries that included a registry of
                            indigents; and piloted Universal Health Insurance. It strengthened capacities to deliver health and nutrition
                            services and built up planning and management capacities at the decentralized level in PBF districts while
                            also strengthening stewardship at the central level, and financial management skills at all levels. The project
                            improved the quality of data, including through validation, and strengthened the health information system in
                            the districts. It also contributed to heightened readiness and surveillance capacity for Ebola, by providing the
                            necessary inputs within a larger national plan for Ebola preparedness.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project almost fully achieved its objectives to improve utilization and quality of health and nutrition
                            services in selected regions, and to contribute to strengthening the health system. The aggregation of
                            achievements under the three objectives is consistent with a substantial rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



The project team carried out a cost-benefit analysis at appraisal. The analysis included components related to
PBF and infrastructure, both amounting to 69% of the total project budget. Direct benefits referred to total gains
generated from the use of health services delivered to beneficiaries. Only direct costs and benefits of PBF and
infrastructure were considered, as other costs were difficult to assess and monetize. The analysis used a social
discount rate of 5% over a 5-year period. The analysis estimated a net present value of US$9.4 million, with a
rate of return of 25.9%, indicating a potential positive economic performance of the PBF approach intended by
the project. A sensitivity analysis was not applied.

The ICR did not undertake a cost-benefit analysis at project completion, even though the ICR (p. 62) stated that
several changes during implementation might have affected the net present value and the rate of return that
were estimated at appraisal, including delays in launching PBF activities; delayed rehabilitation of health centers
and realization of related benefits since the situation analysis was carried out only in mid-2017; a lower-than-
anticipated number of health centers targeted for infrastructure strengthening; and 265 health facilities using
PBF resources to carry out upgrades.

The ICR suggested that the PBF pilot had positive efficiency aspects, as the investment per capita per year
amounted to US$0.70 compared to global benchmarks suggesting that PBF investment needs were roughly
US$3 per capita per year (per TTL clarifications on 9/11/2020, benchmark sources used by the project were
from World Bank studies and PADs of similar projects in Rwanda and Burundi, indicating a minimum cost of
US$3-4 per capita per year). However, the project incurred high operating costs, where, on average, almost 40
percent of PBF resources constituted operating costs (ICR, p. 25), although administrative costs incurred by the
project in five additional districts were a contributing factor.

There were institutional challenges that generated shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. The
functioning of the National Technical Cell for PBF was less than optimal (Borrower comments, ICR, p. 71). The
role of the National Technical Cell was constrained upon its placement under the General Directorate of
Planning and Forecasting, and, according to the Borrower comments (ICR, p. 68), institutional changes did not
allow the cell’s ownership of its roles and responsibilities. This undermined its adequate involvement in project
implementation and coordination and limited its role. During most of the project period, the roles of the Project
Implementation Unit and the National Technical Cell were not coordinated and were a source of tension,
causing delays in hiring and deployment of Contracting and Verification Agencies, payments of subsidies,
overcoming arising issues, and reporting (ICR, p. 30). There were weak collaborative synergies between
different actors to ensure constructive complementarity during project implementation (ICR, p. 68).

The project witnessed frequent turnover of leadership at various levels. The National Technical Cell had five
coordinators in four years. The short tenure of coordinators and interim character of their appointment were
limiting factors that weakened the cell’s leadership role for implementing the PBF strategy. There was high
turnover of district and regional directors, and this undermined their effectiveness as regulators, supervisors,
and supporters of health facilities, and caused disruptions in the districts (ICR, p. 30).

Significant delays in counterpart funding negatively impacted PBF subsidies since these were partly funded by
the government. Mobilizing counterpart funds was a constant challenge that was not resolved by project
completion (ICR, p. 33). Budgetary practices impeded carrying out project activities in a timely manner (ICR, p.
29).

Infrastructure development was affected by higher unit costs of civil works than those estimated at appraisal
(ICR, p. 14). The number of rehabilitated health centers was smaller than anticipated, and infrastructure



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



activities were delayed till the second half of 2017, thus delaying the realization of benefits related to
infrastructure strengthening (ICR, p. 62).

The project exhibited inefficiencies in PBF operations and in the use of PBF resources. According to the ICR,
the main difficulties in using PBF funds were related to the internal organization of health facilities, the lack of
functionality of Health Management Committees, skill gaps, and insufficient support from regulators at District
and Regional Health Directorates. A major challenge was the difficulty in preparing realistic business
plans. Delays in disbursement to the accounts of health facilities created confusion (ICR, p. 29). Delays in the
payment of subsidies were alleviated over time, but not fully overcome. There were no data on community
verification. The indicator on the proportion of indigents among total direct RBF beneficiaries was dropped at the
October 2019 restructuring because it could not be measured (ICR, p. 45), as the implementation of the
electronic records system for patients was delayed.

The effects of initial implementation difficulties and the delayed use of the Project Preparation Advance also
contributed to overall implementation shortcomings. During the initial project period, shortcomings included
delays in completing the project's operational manual and PBF manual, hiring specialists for financial
management and M&E, opening bank accounts, meeting disbursement conditions, and setting up committees to
manage and supervise the project (committee for project piloting, project technical committee, PBF piloting
committee, project implementation unit, and national technical cell for PBF). The ICR (p. 28) stated that
resources for project take-off activities were not available. This translated in delays for launching several
studies, including on costing of services and technical specifications for rehabilitation and equipment of health
centers.

In conclusion, given the lack of an ex-post cost-benefit analysis, and given significant shortcomings in the
efficiency of implementation, overall efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        69.00
 Appraisal                                                   25.90
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high in view of considerable alignment with the CPF at project closing and
consistency with national plans. Efficacy is rated substantial as the objectives were almost fully

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



achieved. Efficiency is rated modest because of the lack of an ex-post cost-benefit analysis and significant
shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. These ratings are consistent with moderate overall
shortcomings, and therefore a moderately satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Main risks are related to financial constraints that are likely to increase in the near and intermediate
future. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected the country’s macroeconomic situation, and is likely
to constrain government capacity to increase the health budget as it has done in the past with a budget
increase of 16.6% between 2019 and 2020. The pandemic has understandably compelled the government to
enhance hospital capacity that was necessary to manage patients, but once the pandemic runs its course, it
is likely that the additional hospital capacity would not be needed, and would require recurrent maintenance
expenses. While commitment to PBF was high, it remains susceptible to future determinants in the political
economy.

Nevertheless, the project has brought substantial capacity building to the sector. Health providers, regions,
and districts have embraced the PBF approach and orientation. The government is currently expanding PBF
to all districts in the country, supported by the follow-on project “Strategic Purchasing and Alignment of
Resources & Knowledge in Health” Project (SPARK, P167959) that became effective in July 2019 (ICR, p.
36).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation benefited from extensive consultations with key stakeholders, several ministries,
  development partners, and non-governmental organizations. Bank and government teams organized
  workshops and meetings to explain the PBF approach. International experience and PBF lessons were
  considered, including those related to the importance of empowering front-line managers and providers,
  improving working conditions, increasing motivation and accountability, availability of resources for
  adequate functioning of facilities, and improving data collection and reliability.

  Overall fiduciary aspects and financial management arrangements were designed with due consideration
  of the country’s post-conflict situation of fragility and OP/BP 10.0 (PAD, p. 18). Bank assessment
  concluded that the Directorate of Financial Affairs would be in a position to manage project funds upon
  completion of recommended measures to strengthen its financial system. Procurement assessment
  included an action plan that was agreed with the Ministry of Health and Fight Against AIDS
  (MSLS). Strengthening measures were undertaken. Risks were adequately identified. Environmental
  aspects were well prepared.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



  Institutional arrangements for implementation were centered on MSLS. Two steering committees were
  constituted, one for the project, and another to guide the overall development of PBF in the country. A
  Project Implementation Unit and a National Technical Unit for PBF were established (PAD, p. 15).
  However, their roles and responsibilities were not adequately elucidated, subsequently contributing to
  tension, weak collaboration, and implementation delays. Health Management Committees did not have
  the capacity or incentives to carry out their functions, and their composition represented government
  administration, rather than the community. They did not have independent status, and that was another
  limiting factor for performance. The ICR (p. 38) stated that this lesson was considered when the follow-on
  project was designed, with due consideration to the roles and cooperation of local actors.

  For infrastructure planning, the assessment of needs and cost estimates was inadequate at appraisal.
  According to the Borrower comments, the underestimation of the budget for the rehabilitation of essential
  infrastructure did not allow the project to achieve expected results (ICR, p. 68). The 2019 Restructuring
  Paper (Report No. RES38120, p. 8) stated that the above issues led to an overestimation of the end
  target. The original indicator pooled civil works and equipment without explicit targets for each (ICR, p.
  14). For the larger M&E design, the project did not set sufficient outcome indicators beyond utilization and
  quality of services in the pilot districts to reflect a strengthened health system. The project's Operational
  Manual and the PBF Manual were not ready. Training needs were underestimated (ICR, p. 38). Also,
  preparation underestimated the time required to train and coach service providers and to master PBF
  operational procedures (ICR, p. 34).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Although the project had three Task Team Leaders during the 5-year implementation period, transition
 arrangements were smoothly undertaken, and close collaboration with the Project Implementation Unit was
 maintained. The Bank team carried out regular supervision and implementation support
 missions. Supervision of fiduciary aspects and safeguards was adequate, and the Bank provided further
 training on fiduciary matters. The Bank team was pro-active and worked effectively with the government to
 introduce additional valuable activities in nutrition and water & sanitation that were relevant to project
 objectives and further strengthened the project directions to improve utilization and quality of services,
 seeking to achieve related results. The project team rectified the results framework and filled the gap of the
 initial results chain for under-nutrition treatment. Reporting was candid and of good quality. The team
 worked effectively with development partners in the health sector. The team organized a productive Mid-
 Term Review with a thorough and independent assessment of the project (ICR, p. 35) and opted for a
 follow-on project rather than additional financing to pursue country-wide scaling up of PBF. Performance
 shortcomings of implementing agencies were beyond the control of the Bank team.

 The efforts extended by the Bank team in facilitating the preparation of and transition to the follow-on
 project were noteworthy, including for supporting training workshops and studies for the new project.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated. The theory of change was clear overall and illustrated a logical pathway
 from activities and outputs to intermediate results and outcomes, although the expected results for
 strengthening the health system were output-oriented. Indicators were measurable. Baselines for routine
 services were available, as related data were regularly collected (e.g. vaccination coverage, family
 planning) by the existing system, and some others were to be collected after project launching. M&E design
 was based on two elements: (a) routine M&E under the existing Health Management Information System,
 where further strengthening was intended under the project with a focus on health centers; and (b) an
 impact evaluation of the pilot PBF that was intended to assess how the pilot had contributed to the overall
 objectives and to guide the scaling up of the PBF scheme. The impact evaluation appropriately planned to
 include a control group of districts that did not have a PBF scheme.



b. M&E Implementation
  While the routine information system included only quantitative data, the project created a PBF portal that
  provided information on both quantitative and qualitative indicators, although the incorporation of the
  module capturing community-based organization verification activities remained pending. Monitoring
  activities and results framework updates were carried out regularly, and data were of good quality (ICR,
  p. 31).

  The Mid-Term Review of February 2018 revised targets for two Intermediate Results Indicators
  downward, and the revision was formalized in 2019. The reduction in vitamin A supplementation was
  appropriately explained by a shift in the national strategy from a campaign mode, twice a year, to facility-
  based supplementation. As noted in Section 4, the target for infrastructure (previously encompassing
  facilities constructed, rehabilitated, and/or equipped) was reduced from 526 to 97 facilities, and the
  project reformulated the indicator as facilities constructed or renovated.

  In 2016, baseline studies for the impact evaluation were undertaken for the first batch of districts
  participating in PBF, and in 2017 for the second group of districts. Although the project gathered data in
  2019 for the final evaluation, the latter was not completed before project closing. According to the ICR (p.
  32), the impact evaluation was expected to be completed by the end of 2020, given understandable
  delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



  M&E findings were used for regular monitoring and evaluation purposes. Verified PBF data contributed
  to quality improvements in the routine information system. According to the ICR, regions and districts
  became more involved in the validation of health data (ICR, p. 31). Data were also used by health
  providers and for research. M&E has facilitated the preparation of the Annual Health Statistics Report
  since 2016. M&E findings were used to support policy dialogue with the government on the next steps to
  support sectoral priorities, namely the decision to expand the PBF program to the rest of the country,
  and for the planning and design of the follow-on project (see Section 7).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category B. Potential adverse impacts were
   moderate and associated with the handling and disposal of health care waste and from civil works. The
   project had an Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Health Care Waste Management
   Plan. The ICR (p. 32) stated that environmental and social screening of project activities was systematized,
   that environmental and social monitoring reports were produced regularly, and that project activities were
   implemented in compliance with national laws and Bank safeguards policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The Project Implementation Unit, within MSLS, was the focal point for all the fiduciary aspects of the
   project (PAD, p. 18). Financial management performance was adequate overall, but faced some
   challenges in fund flows, timely availability of counterpart funds, and in transitioning between financial
   management systems. The ICR stated that overall procurement performance was satisfactory, and that the
   Bank regularly carried out ex-post reviews of procurement activities while providing training. The TTL
   confirmed on 9/11/2020 that procurement was carried out according to Bank guidelines. There were no
   outstanding issues in fiduciary compliance, and audit reports were unqualified (ICR, p. 33).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)




11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                This ICR Review rated efficiency
                                                                                as modest because of the lack
                                                                                of an ex-post cost-benefit
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                analysis and significant
                                                                                shortcomings in the efficiency of
                                                                                implementation.
                                                                                The ICR rated both Quality-at -
                                                                                Entry and Supervision as
                                                                                satisfactory. This ICR Review
                                                                                rated Quality-at-Entry as
                                                                                moderately satisfactory because
                                                                                of moderate shortcomings in
                                                                                infrastructure planning,
                                                                                institutional roles and
                                                                                arrangements, gaps in
                                                                                readiness, and underestimation
                                                                                of training needs and time
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                required; and rated Quality of
                                                                                Supervision as highly
                                                                                satisfactory because there were
                                                                                no shortcomings in the proactive
                                                                                identification and management
                                                                                of threats facing the project’s
                                                                                development impact. The
                                                                                aggregation of the two sub-
                                                                                ratings is consistent with a
                                                                                moderately satisfactory rating for
                                                                                overall Bank Performance.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 36-39) offered several lessons, including the following lessons restated by IEG:

Pursuing a sequenced implementation strategy for performance-based financing among
regions can help in facilitating implementation. District sequencing allowed additional time for
setting up institutional arrangements, introduction of procedures, and training while learning from
challenges faced by the initial group of districts. Staff movements and collaboration among districts
contributed to the dissemination of PBF processes and results orientation.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)



Defining roles and responsibilities of institutional actors facilitates effective
collaboration. Under the project, collaboration between the National Technical Committee for PBF
and the Project Implementation Unit was deficient and could have been more effective if their roles
and responsibilities were adequately detailed with a clear description of functions.

Mastering operational PBF procedures takes time. Under the project, there was a steep learning
curve, as PBF required a change in mentality in health service delivery along with administrative and
operational transformations. Time was required to set up the necessary arrangements at the central
and decentralized levels, including at the provider level.

In addition, IEG identified the following lesson:

PBF can contribute to decentralization efforts. Under the project, capacity enhancements in
planning, general management, and financial management contributed to the transformation of
health facilities and districts into more proactive actors with a degree of autonomy, including for
receiving and managing financial resources and budgets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was candid and provided a detailed critique of the project's experience. The report articulated the
theory of change underlying the project's trajectory toward intended outcomes for service utilization and quality,
and the contributions of the project to strengthen the health system. The quality of both evidence and analysis
was adequate overall. The ICR was internally consistent, logically linked various parts of the report, and
followed guidelines. The ICR offered specific lessons derived from project experience. The ICR did not
undertake a cost-benefit analysis at project completion, as was done at entry. The report was not tightly written,
and its detailed implementation narrative was lengthy. Nevertheless, when these weaknesses are considered in
the larger context of other favorable criteria, the overall quality of the ICR is deemed to be substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Health Systems Strengthen. & Ebola Prep. (P147740)




                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
