     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022234

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P117394                                   VN-Science & Technology Innovation

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52570                                 30-Jun-2019                                        50,573,920.81

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2013                               31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            57,974,358.75                                             0.00

 Actual                                        50,573,920.81                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Behrens                   IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3), the
   project objective was as follows:

           To support science, technology, and innovation (STI) in Vietnam by designing and piloting of
           STI policies, enhancing the effectiveness of project-aided research and development (R&D)
           institutions, and encouraging the development of innovative-technology enterprises.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Knowledge and Policy Development (Appraisal: US$ 13.0 million; Actual: US$ 7.8 million): This
   component aimed to attract talented experts living abroad, including Vietnamese overseas, in order to
   conduct scientific research and foster innovation in Vietnam; as well as to upgrade and modernize the
   collection, dissemination, and use of STI statistics in order to better inform policy. Activities included:
   developing networks abroad with government research institutions and innovative enterprises in Vietnam;
   providing Foreign Talent grants to scientific researchers or institutions; conducting STI surveys; publishing
   annual STI statistics; developing a monitoring and evaluation framework to measure effectiveness of R&D
   institutions; and technology mapping.

   2. Supporting Government Research Institute (GRI) Reform and Enterprises Innovation (Appraisal: US$
   82.0 million; Actual: US$ 39.5 million): This component aimed to support the conversion of government
   research institutions (GRI) into more autonomous and market-driven entities and to promote innovative
   linkages between enterprises and the scientific community. Activities included: providing grants to
   approximately 15 GRIs to implement their conversion plans; providing New Enterprise grants for innovative
   technology enterprises; providing Research and Innovative Consortium grants for development of consortia;
   and establishing a National Core Technology Laboratory for Mechanical Manufacturing Automation and
   Embedded Technology, with the intent of pioneering a public-private partnership arrangement.

   3. Project Management (Appraisal: US$ 5.0 million; Actual: US$ 3.9 million): This component aimed to
   strengthen institutional capacity of the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), in order to effectively
   implement the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The appraised project cost was US$ 110.0 million, subsequently revised to US$ 58.0 million. The
          actual project cost was US$ 50.6 million.

   Financing

         The appraised project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 100.0 million, subsequently revised to
          US$ 58.0 million, of which US$ 51.2 million disbursed.
         US$38.5 million of the Credit was cancelled.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



   Borrower contribution

         The Borrower was expected to contribute US$10.0 million to the project. The project team confirmed
           that the actual government contribution was US$ 9.3 million.

   Dates

         April 2017: US$22.0 million of the Credit was cancelled following simplification of the project
           design (cancellation of New Enterprise grants and the lab construction activities).
         January 2019: The project closing date was extended from June 2019 to December 2019, to allow
          time for completion of activities, particularly the sub-project grants. The wording of key project
          indicators was also revised to clarify measurement.
         August 2019: US$ 13.0 million of the Credit was cancelled due to unutilized funds. According to the
          Project Paper, these unutilized funds were due to the cost savings from the following sources:
          savings from competitive procurement processes, reduced "recurrent expenditures" on training and
          operating costs per government regulations, and dropping of seven Consortia sub-project grants,
          which were terminated due to changes in enterprise priority focus, funding secured from alternate
          sources, and unforeseen financial difficulties.
         December 2019: US$ 3.5 million of the Credit was cancelled to the unutilized funds, for the same
          reasons as stated above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Vietnam has transformed from an inward-looking agricultural economy to a middle-income export-oriented
country. To continue economic growth and increase productivity, further transformation is needed in the
science and technology sector, spurred by a focus on innovation to increase competitiveness in the global
economy. As described in the PAD (page 1), global benchmarking indicators point to weak innovation
performance of the country. Vietnam ranks 115 out of 146 countries according to the Knowledge
Assessment Methodology Innovation Index and 51 out of 125 countries according to the INSEAD Global
Innovation Index. Although manufacturing and service industries have grown and human capacity has
improved through increased coverage of secondary education, along with government-initiated reforms in
the STI sector, there remain low levels of private sector innovation, low investment in R&D, and low
institutional capacity to support STI sector. Weak links between public and private sectors with regards to
R&D have been identified as a specific barrier.

The government has initiated reforms in the STI support to spur its growth, including several laws and
decrees to define legal frameworks, clarify the role of the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), and
support the transformation of government research institutions (GRIs) into more financially autonomous (i.e.
less reliant on state budget) and market-driven entities. This project is highly consistent with these
government actions, as well as the government's Science and Technology Development Strategy (2011-
2020).




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



               The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY18-22) also identified relevant Focus Areas/
               Objectives including enhancing competitiveness, promoting private sector and agribusiness sectors, and
               developing stronger and more competitive labor force by working in the tertiary education sector. The CPF
               Objective Indicators included "increase in innovative activity by beneficiary organization."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support science, technology, and innovation (STI) in Vietnam by designing and piloting STI policies

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was overall sound, although the articulation of the compound project objective
                             statement was broad and vague (to support science, technology, and innovation). The intended outcomes,
                             inferred from the project description and results framework, led to three specific objectives discussed in this
                             ICR Review. Outcomes included the following: advancing of STI policies, increased knowledge transfer;
                             increased capacity and effectiveness of STI institutions; and increased innovation. Project activities -
                             including provision of grants to attract foreign STI talent and support research and innovative technology
                             enterprises, and upgrading of the STI data collection system - were likely to contribute to one or more of
                             these intended outcomes, with some overlap, and all likely to contribute to the overall stated objective to
                             "support science, technology and innovation in Vietnam."



                             Outputs

                                        Provision of 38 Foreign Talent STI grants to 23 universities and research institutions for collaborative
                                         R&D projects, in order to attract foreign talent including overseas Vietnamese (target:50). These
                                         grants intended to connect existing global and local STI networks with Vietnamese GRIs and local
                                         enterprises, thereby removing informational and institutional bottlenecks that were hindering full
                                         exploitation of overseas talent. Online surveys administered through these networks matched foreign
                                         talent with Vietnamese organizations. Grants to the beneficiary institutions enabled foreign talent to
                                         visit Vietnam and to collaborate, teach, mentor, and conduct joint research.
                                        Modernization, collection, dissemination, and use of STI statistics through implementing R&D and
                                         Innovation Surveys (with participation from over 8,000 medium and small enterprises). The STI
                                         survey results were published, an M&E framework was developed to assess effective functioning of
                                         GRIs, and a STI database was developed and operationalized. However, technology mapping was
                                         not implemented as planned, as MOST used its own funds to finance this activity.


                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)




Outcomes

      Policy development: The ICR (page 15) reported that MOST was "active in creating an environment
       conducive to attracting talented overseas experts and facilitating knowledge and technology transfer."
       This was evidenced by two draft decrees (appreciation of individuals engaged in S&T activities and
       attracting of overseas Vietnamese and foreign talents engaged in S&T activities) and an annual
       international forum for talented overseas Vietnamese.
      Strengthen capacity for STI policy implementation and assessment: Three Ministerial circulars were
       issued by MOST on STI indicators and surveys, which were intended to serve as guides for the
       implementation of STI policy in Vietnam. Also, STI survey data was used to as background data for
       the Bank’s analytic work informing the government’s national STI strategy (2021-30).



However, the PPP model was not tested as planned. The ICR (page 23) noted that “there still appears to
exist the mindset within the government that downplays the role of private sector enterprises as the central
force for innovation. Even after the MOST’s adoption of the streamlined approval process, the current
administrative system still does not appear to fully accommodate a rapid shift to a private-sector driven
innovation process through PPP.”



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support science, technology, and innovation (STI) in Vietnam by enhancing the effectiveness of project-
aided research and development (R&D) institutions

Rationale
The theory of change is discussed under Objective 1.



Outputs

      Provision of 38 Foreign Talent STI grants to 23 universities and research institutions for collaborative
       R&D projects, in order to attract foreign talent including overseas Vietnamese (target:50). These
       grants intended to connect existing global and local STI networks with Vietnamese GRIs and local
       enterprises, thereby removing informational and institutional bottlenecks that were hindering full
       exploitation of overseas talent. Online surveys administered through these networks matched foreign
       talent with Vietnamese organizations. Grants to the beneficiary institutions enabled foreign talent to
       visit Vietnam and to collaborate, teach, mentor, and conduct joint research.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)




      Provision of grants to 16 government research institutes (GRIs) in four priority sectors (10 in
       Agriculture/ Biotechnology, others in Mechanics and Automation, New Materials, ICT and Public
       Goods) to implement strategic plans (already approved by government) to support ongoing conversion
       from traditionally managed organizations towards becoming more autonomous market-driven
       institutions (original target: 6 GRIs). Grants were used, for example, to upgrade laboratories and
       equipment, train researchers, strengthen linkages with enterprises, and accelerate process for
       becoming financially autonomous.



Outcomes

      Increased knowledge transfer: 102 foreign experts participated in the Foreign Talent STI grants,
       surpassing the original target of 50. Through the participation of these foreign experts, 76 advanced
       technologies were shared with the research institutions.
      Improved effectiveness of the R&D sector: 105 journal articles were published (target: not comparable
       due to differing units of measure from original baseline figure). According to the grant holder survey
       conducted as part of the project's impact evaluation, the respondents also reported the development
       of new research skills (80 percent), improved research facilities (60 percent), and new skills in working
       with research institutes (60 percent). Also, the ICR (page 17) reported that the 16 GRIs successfully
       completed the sub-projects and transitioned into "financially autonomous market-driven institutions in
       accordance with their GRI conversion plans." According to the project team, GRI sub-project grant
       agreements included signing of contracts with enterprises on commercialized products or on payment
       of royalty fees on technology/knowledge transfer, with verification of revenue generation and reduced
       dependency on government for recurrent expenditures. Examples of verified revenue generation
       included: i) The Cuu Long Delta Rice Research Institute produced new varieties of rice with high-
       yields, developed new technology for rice breeding, and upgraded laboratory facilities for R&D,
       resulting in revenue increases from US$0.8 million in 2015 (pre-project) to US$1.3 million in 2017 and
       US$1.7 million; ii) The Research Institute for Aquaculture produced fish products, through modern
       technology on marine fish farming, resulting in revenue increases from US$1.14 million in 2017 (pre-
       project) to US$2.9 million in 2019 and expected to increase to US$3.8 million by 2021; and iii)
       The Maize Research Institute produced high-yielding maize varieties, upgraded 2 ISO certified labs,
       and increased capacity of its research staff, resulting in revenue increases from US$2.0 million in
       2018 to US$2.3 million in 2019 (14% growth) and expected to increase to US$ 2.8 million in 2021.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support science, technology, and innovation (STI) in Vietnam by encouraging the development of
innovative-technology enterprises.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)




                            Rationale
                            The theory of change is discussed under Objective 1.



                            Outputs

                                  Provision of 27 innovation grants to strengthen partnerships among enterprises, research institutions,
                                   and universities, including through the formation of research-innovation consortia (target: 32). These
                                   included 3 new start-up enterprises (Education technology, HR technology and medicinal
                                   supplements) and 11 consortia between enterprises and research institutes (agriculture/
                                   biotechnology, new materials, mechanics and automation, ICT).
                                  However, the construction of a National Core Technology Lab was not completed as planned.



                            Outcomes

                                  Increased innovative activity: 108 activities (original target: not comparable due to differing units of
                                    measure from original baseline figure) were implemented by grantee organizations. These
                                    included 46 patents, 10 trademarks and 5 registered industrial designs, 42 copyrights. Examples of
                                    activities included: high-yielding plant or seed varieties, high-quality lab testing, sale of innovative
                                    products in domestic and international markets.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The specific objectives of designing and piloting of STI policies, enhancing the effectiveness of project-aided
                            research and development (R&D) institutions, and encouraging the development of innovative-technology
                            enterprises were all rated Substantial due to evidence of increased knowledge transfer, capacity of key
                            institutions in the STI sector, and innovation among STI enterprises. Therefore, overall Efficacy is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD economic analysis referred to global literature on productivity gains from innovative activity in the
discussion of economic benefits, while also pointing out the lack of readily available data linking R&D and
innovation in Vietnam. Therefore, no quantitative analysis was conducted during project appraisal.

The ICR carried out a cost-benefit analysis (with reasonable assumptions and sensitivity analysis) and also
relied on economic research literature to attempt to estimate social rates of return to investment in STI, taking
the low range value of a 200 percent return after a four-year lag. Calculating project investment in STI (in the
form of STI grants) as US$47.8 million, with an additional US$ 5.8 million invested in strengthening M&E
systems and project management, the gross benefits (private returns in the form of incremental productivity and
knowledge transfer) are thus calculated as $128.0 million. This resulted in estimated net present
value of US$87.68 million and an IRR of 112 percent.

Successful leveraging of private sector financing through matching grants. As reported in the ICR (page 20),
research consortia that won the Consortia STI grants financed the sub-projects with their own funds (US$ 11.2
million) in collaboration with universities and/or research institutions, with the Bank project providing funds (US$
8.5 million) as matching grants that were disbursed in the form of reimbursement under the project.

There were significant implementation delays and low disbursement levels for the first three years of the project
period, due to low borrower capacity (lack of familiarity with Bank processes) and highly centralized approval
processes. These likely resulted in some opportunity costs for beneficiaries, due to delayed disbursement of
grants. However, overall Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable returns on investment and the
generation of significant savings in certain project interventions.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       89.00
 ICR Estimate                                               112.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)




The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory due to High Relevance, Substantial Efficacy, and Substantial
Efficiency, with minor shortcomings in the achievement of objectives and efficiency of project implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The increased capacity of MOST, research institutions and universities, and other subproject beneficiary
organizations is likely to be sustained, particularly through the institutional arrangements developed by the
project such as formal collaborations, partnerships, and networks formed. The M&E framework for the STI
sector was also institutionalized to support policy decision making. Policy directions will also continue to be
supported through forthcoming analytic work from the Bank, which will be used to inform the government's
new STI strategy and economic development plan. Research institutions have also increased financial
sustainability by becoming more autonomous.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design drew upon analytic work, namely the joint study by the Organisation for Economic Co-
  operation and Development (OECD) and the World Bank ("Science, Technology and Innovation in
  Vietnam"), which informed the project’s specific areas of focus. These areas of project support were
  selected according to the Bank's comparative advantage, namely attracting foreign talent and
  strengthening results measurement for the STI sector. There was, however, duplication with ongoing
  donor and government programs that led to eventual dropping of some activities and partial cancellation
  of the Credit. Implementation capacity risk was appropriately assessed as Substantial due
  to MOST's limited prior experience with Bank projects (this was the first Bank project implemented by
  MOST) and the inherent complexity of science and technology interventions. Risk mitigation measures
  focused on providing additional training from Bank specialists on fiduciary functions; however, the ICR
  (page 22) noted insufficient implementation readiness and reported that the originally approved Project
  Implementation Manual was “not sufficiently detailed and specific to enable the CPMU and the
  beneficiaries to carry out the project activities as intended.” Although the borrower utilized the Project
  Preparation Technical Assistance Facility project (P118610) to operationalize the project management
  unit ahead of project implementation, there was still a lengthy delay (27 months) between project concept
  and decision review, followed by implementation delays in the initial project period.

  Also, as discussed in the ICR (page 24), the statement of the PDO precluded a meaningful outcome
  evaluation because both "STI" and "support" are broad concepts, and therefore inference of specific
  objectives/expected outcomes was necessary. Measurement of the key project indicators also had



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



  shortcomings, as there was lack of clarity in the establishment of the original baselines and targets of the
  key project indicators.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided intensive implementation support to the borrower, given significant capacity
 constraints in fiduciary areas. The transition from HQ-based to Vietnam-based TTL along with other key
 staff based in country, further helped improve project implementation, particularly following project
 restructuring. The project team utilized multiple project restructuring to simplify project design to support
 achievement of objective and to improve disbursement levels. Fiduciary arrangements were simplified by
 decentralizing procurement and financial management to the grant beneficiaries, resulting in a revised PIM
 (prepared with support and guidance of the Bank team) that helped create less cumbersome processes for
 enterprises and research communities, as well as enhance ownership and capacity of beneficiary
 organizations. Several activities were dropped along with partial Credit cancellations. The New Enterprise
 grant activities were dropped for the additional reason of avoiding duplication of similar interventions that
 had been implemented in parallel with the project (a national government-supported program and the
 second phase of the Viet Nam-Finland Innovation Partnership Programme, both of which were designed to
 foster entrepreneurship and innovation).

 Wording of key project indicators was also revised for more clarity and measurability, while also adding
 intermediate indicators to clarify the results chain and intended outcomes. However, baseline figures were
 not updated accordingly.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As noted in the ICR, the statement of project objective was too broad, which is a significant shortcoming in
 the design of M&E. The original results framework also had shortcomings, particularly the two key project
 indicators ("increase in the number of international scientific publications made by beneficiary
 organizations" and "increase in innovative activity by beneficiary organizations") both measured by
 percentage increases from a baseline of 0. The intermediate results indicators were more clear and



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



 measurable, with clear linkages to project activities and intended outcomes, albeit still largely measuring
 outputs.



b. M&E Implementation
  A project M&E team was appointed by the borrower and developed an M&E system to closely monitor
  sub-project grant activities and identify issues such as procurement delays and misalignment with sub-
  project objectives. According to the ICR (page 24-25), project M&E was effectively carried out as planned
  throughout the project period, with the CPMU preparing detailed implementation progress reports
  biannually, including data from sub-project beneficiaries, that contributed to improved project
  implementation. For evaluation, a beneficiary survey was carried out as part of MOST's impact
  evaluation, undertaken by an independent firm, which indicated MOST's commitment to learning from
  project experience. The results framework was also revised to improve project monitoring.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 25) noted that project M&E was used by the Bank team for constant follow-up and close
  monitoring to identify delays and provide timely solutions. The impact evaluation identified beneficiary
  reporting issues, and the ICR noted that interim and final reports used by sub-project grant beneficiaries
  had shortcomings: the report format could have been improved with clarification of each sub-project's
  objectives and linkages to the overall project objective (thus also presenting a challenge in assessing
  achievement level), large amounts of scientific and technical results reported which presented a
  challenge, including for CPMU staff, to comprehend and link the impact to the overall project objective
  and synthesize results for project management purposes. At the same time, the ICR (p. 25) stated that
  in spite of these beneficiary reporting challenges, the CPMU and the Bank team’s regular supervision
  through site visits and phone calls to grant holders to assess the performance and progress of their sub-
  projects, as well as to provide hands-on advice, allowed for course correction.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project. The safeguard policy on
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered due to planned construction of the technology lab
   and other potential minor rehabilitation and civil works by enterprises or GRIs. An Environmental and Social
   Management Framework was prepared to support compliance with Bank safeguard policies and national
   regulations. No other safeguard policies were triggered.

   According to the ICR (page 26), safeguards performance was satisfactory throughout the project period,
   with no significant social or environmental problems. The construction of the technology lab was dropped


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



   as a project activity. Sub-projects underwent environmental screening and were required to comply with
   safeguard requirements before receiving funds.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   As noted earlier, the initial project period was marked by significant fiduciary challenges and project
   implementation delays due to lack of counterpart experience with Bank procedures as well as cumbersome
   and highly centralized fiduciary decision-making processes. However, subsequent revisions, including
   streamlining fiduciary arrangements and delegating decision-making authority to sub-project beneficiaries,
   resulted in improved implementation progress and fiduciary performance.

   Financial management: Despite initial challenges, the project was in compliance with all fiduciary
   requirements. According to the ICR (page 26-27), interim financial reports were submitted in a timely and
   satisfactory manner, and audited financial statements were of satisfactory quality without any qualified
   opinions.

   Procurement: According to the ICR (page 26-27), procurement activities were carried out satisfactorily with
   no major shortcomings or misprocurement cases and there were no ineligible expenditures identified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 29-30), adapted by IEG:




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)



        Given the nature of the STI sector and the emphasis on fast-paced innovation, a
         cumbersome grant process for private sector beneficiaries (including start-ups) can be a
         hindrance to effective and timely responses. In the case of this project, highly centralized
         and slow approval processes from the public sector led to extensive delays in grant project
         start-up. Streamlined fiduciary processes (including delegation of responsibilities to the
         grantee organizations, with clearance required for only major changes) resolved the
         implementation bottlenecks.
        Strong collaboration between the public and private sectors, facilitated by effective
         partnership mechanisms, is critical to developing the STI sector. In the case of this project,
         public research institutions were able to provide resources (financial and knowledge) with
         private enterprises providing innovative ideas and market relationships. The various grant-
         making schemes helped to establish and institutionalize partnerships and processes
         between the sectors.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-organized, candid and results-oriented. The theory of change was explained clearly by
unpacking the broad project objective statement. The evidence was generally of good quality and allowed
assessment of project achievements. The efficiency discussion would have been strengthened with project-
specific evidence of expected benefits. The ICR followed guidelines.

IEG concurs with the project team's view that the PDO statement was broad, thus presenting a challenge
in enabling meaningful evaluation. However, the project team was able to present more specific findings in a
clear format, in order to verify achievement of outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
VN-Science & Technology Innovation (P117394)




                                                                            Page 14 of 14
