     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022197

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P119077                                   VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                   Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86210,IDA-49480,IDA-58170,TF-        30-Dec-2016                                       266,451,940.87
 56904

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-May-2011                               31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                          295,371,577.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                      266,452,159.93                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 12),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to increase access to sustainable water services and
   environmental sanitation in selected urban areas in the Project Provinces.

   This review assesses the achievement of the following objectives:


                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



         to increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas in the project provinces.
         to increase access to sustainable environmental sanitation in selected urban areas in the project
          provinces.

   Although the PDO outcome indicators were revised during restructuring, the level of ambition increased at
   significant levels that were commensurate with the approved Additional Financing (AF, see below). As a
   result, a split rating was not applied to the outcome.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Investments and Project Implementation (At appraisal: Cost: US$232.4 million, of which
   IDA - US$ 197.0 million and counterpart financing - US$35.4 million; At Completion: Cost: US$345.68
   million, of which IDA - US$ 310.28 million and counterpart financing - US$35.4 million)

   Subcomponent 1A: Water Supply (US$109.5 million at appraisal, revised to US$106.6 million during the
   restructuring, and US$108.13 million actual). This component would finance an expansion of the water
   networks, increase house connections for water, and increase in the water treatment and storage
   capacity in seven cities and towns across seven provinces. These were Uong Bi town in Quang Ninh
   province, Ninh Binh city in Ninh Binh province, Tam Ky city in Quang Nam province, Da Lat city in Lam
   Dong province, My Phuoc in Binh Duong province, Duong Xoai town in Binh Phuoc province and Phu Quoc
   in Kien Giang province. In addition, this component would finance technical assistance to design and
   prepare bidding documents, supervise construction, ensure compliance with environmental and social
   safeguards, and perform fiduciary functions of financial management and procurement. This component
   would also finance consulting services to generate an Operational Improvement Plan for each water sub-
   project designed to strengthen each utility's management capacity and improve operations. This component
   would also finance two surveys—one at the start of the project and another at project closing--to rate
   gender disaggregated consumer satisfaction on services delivered.

   Subcomponent 1B: Environmental Sanitation (US$122.9 million at appraisal, revised to US$233.5
   million during the restructuring, and US$237.55 million at completion). This component included activities to
   increase wastewater collection and treatment capacity, expand drainage in flood prone areas, and increase
   the number of house connections to the sewer networks as contained in Strategic Sanitation Plans (SSPs)
   to be prepared for each participating city or town. The cities and towns included were Ninh Binh city in Ninh
   Binh province, Tam Ky city in Quang Nam province, Da Lat city in Lam Dong province, Duong Xoai town in
   Binh Phuoc province, Bim Son town in Thanh Hoa province, Dong Ha city in Quang Tri province, and Thai
   Hoa town in Nghe An province. The city of Di An town in Binh Duong province was added at the Additional
   Financing (AF) in May 2016. In addition, this component would finance consulting services to prepare the
   SSPs and detailed design and bidding documents, supervise investments activities, ensure compliance with

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



  environmental and social safeguards, and perform fiduciary functions such as financial management and
  procurement. Similar to the water sub-projects supported under the first component, this component would
  also finance the preparation of an Operational Improvement Plan for each sub-project to strengthen
  management capacity, improve operations and conduct two customer satisfaction surveys—at the start and
  closing of the project.

  Component 2: Technical Assistance (cost at appraisal: US$3.8 million, of which IDA - US$3.0 million and
  counterpart financing - US$0.8 million; at completion: US$11.10 million, of which IDA - US$10.0 million and
  counterpart financing - US$1.1 million).

  Subcomponent 2A. Institutional Strengthening and Project Monitoring (US$2.30 million at appraisal
  and at completion).This component would finance the Ministry of Construction's (MOC's) efforts to
  develop a sector database with associated regulations that would monitor the performance of
  companies; guide provinces in developing their respective SSPs; and help these provinces identify least-
  cost options in collecting and treating wastewater and establishing investment priorities for water and
  sanitation sector accompanied by financing plans. This component would also finance a study tour to learn
  about best practices in water and sanitation service delivery and project monitoring to be conducted by the
  MOC.

  Subcomponent 2B. Improving the Efficiency of Investments and Operations (US$1.5 million at
  appraisal and at completion). This component would finance consulting services delivered to the Ministry of
  Planning and Investment (MPI) to develop two circulars. The first circular on wastewater tariff would help
  increase the financial viability of sanitation companies by applying cost recovery principles to their
  operations. A second circular on Operational Improvement and Investments Needs would outline the role of
  the private sector to improve operational efficiency in the sector. In addition, consulting services would
  facilitate the issuance of an MPI ministerial decision for private sector participation in project areas. This
  ministerial decision would review options, identify a pilot province where a private sector transaction would
  be implemented, and prepare a “Private Sector Participation Tool Kit.”

  Subcomponent 2C. Water Sector Priority Investment Plan (US$7.30 million added at restructuring;
  US$7.30 million at completion). This component was added to the project scope at the Additional Financing
  in May 2016 for the preparation of investment studies related to water supply sources in six Mekong Delta
  provinces of An Giang, Soc Trang, Bac Lieu, Ca Mau, and Kien Giang, as well as the city of Can Tho.
  These studies would identify options to improve water supply schemes that were vulnerable to climate
  change variability, sea level rise, and salinity intrusion to those that would address subsidence risk in the
  Mekong Delta.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost and Financing: The project cost at appraisal was US$236.2 million with IDA credit of
  US$197.0 million and US$35.4 million as borrower contribution. Additional financing in May 2016 added
  US$119 million comprising IDA credit of US$50 million and an IBRD loan of US$69 million. At completion
  the cost was US$356.68 million, comprising US$310.2 million from IDA, US$10 million from IBRD, and
  US$36.5 million from counterpart funding.

  Dates and restructurings: The project was approved on May 24, 2011 and became effective on October 7,
  2011. A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on January 12, 2015. The original IDA loan was closed

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



on December 31, 2017; one year after the original closing date of December 31,2016. The IDA credit and
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan approved at the Additional Financing
(AF) in May 2016 closed on December 31, 2019. In addition to the AF, there were two more Level 2
restructurings (ICR, paragraphs 20 and 34):

      Additional Financing and First Restructuring (Level 1 - May 26, 2016): The first restructuring
       provided an e(US$50 million of IDA credit and US$69 million from IBRD loan) to finance (i) the cost
       overruns of US$20 million due to the appreciation of the US$ against the SDR; (ii) a new wastewater
       drainage project (US$92 million) in the town of Di An in Binh Duong Province; and (iii) the
       preparation of the Mekong Delta Water Supply Investment Plan (US$7 million). The project closing
       date for the AF was December 31, 2019. Because of the increase in the project scope, the Results
       Framework was amended as follows:
            o Target values of three outcome-level indicators were revised: (i) number of new piped
               household connections from 42,628 to 65,872; (ii) number of people who have improved
               sanitation from 263,051 to 312,051; and (iii) the increase in the satisfaction rate of
               beneficiaries from a baseline of 72 percent to 80 percent, both of which were specified at the
               AF.
            o Three new outcome-level indicators were added: (i) number of direct beneficiaries with a
               target value of 450,382; (ii) number of female beneficiaries with a target value of 51 percent
               of the total direct beneficiaries; and (iii) increase in the satisfaction rate of beneficiaries of
               wastewater and drainage services in Di An town from 25.21 percent of baseline to 80
               percent. (This was an indicator specific to Di An town added to the project scope at the AF.)
            o Two intermediate outcome indicators were revised: (i) the baseline of volume of water sold
               annually was defined as “zero” without a change in the target value of 21.7 million cubic
               meter; and (ii) the target value of areas benefiting from increased drainage coverage and
               flood protection measures was increased from 12,564 hectare (ha) to 12,618 ha.
            o Two new intermediate outcome indicators were added: (i) preparation of the Mekong Delta
               water supply investment plan; and (ii) volume of Biologic Oxygen Demand (BOD) mass—
               BOD is a water quality parameter measuring the amount of organic matter, or “food,”
               available in wastewater for oxygen-consuming bacteria; a lower BOD ratio means
               wastewater is less harmful to the environment—removed by the wastewater treatment plant
               in Di An town.

      Second Restructuring (Level 2 - December 26, 2016): The closing date of the original IDA credit
       loan was extended from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2017. The closing date of the AF
       remained at December 31, 2019. According to the Task Team (email to IEG dated August 13, 2020),
       the legal agreement for the AF above indicated that the entire project would close on December
       2019. However, the Prime Minister's Office instructed that activities prior to the AF should maintain
       their original closing date of December 31, 2016. Finally, due to delays in approving the AF financing
       agreement, and delays in accessing AF resources to complete the original activities, the original
       closing date was extended as requested.
      Third Restructuring (Level 2 - November 29, 2019): An unused credit of US$24.42 million was
       cancelled, and some proceeds were reallocated among disbursement categories. Funds were
       underutilized “because of delays in allocating Official Development Assistance (ODA) to provinces
       caused by the fiscal situation at the time as well as lengthy processing time for approval of additional
       project activities” (ICR, p.15).



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project development objectives (PDOs) were relevant to the country's development priorities as stated
in “Vietnam 2035 Vision” and the country's Social Economic Development Plan (SEDP) for 2016-2020. The
PDO would contribute to the SEDP goals for 2020, where 95% of the urban population and 90% of rural
population would have access to clean, sanitary water (Section III, Goals, Targets, and Breakthroughs).
The PDO was also relevant to the Government's plan to construct improved infrastructure systems in urban
areas (Section V, Tasks and Major Solutions, p. 93) and respond to risks from climate change and natural
disasters through enhanced natural resource management and environmental protection (p.105).

The PDOs were relevant to the country’s goal of achieving water security by contributing to sustainable
management of its water resources. A 2019 World Bank study, “Towards a Safe, Clean, and Resilient
Water System” pointed out that by 2030, urban development, an increase in competing demand for water,
and discharge of untreated wastewater would pose stresses to 11 of the 16 river basins in Vietnam. For
example, the country’s Ministry of Construction confirmed that only 46 percent of urban households were
connected to the drainage system and only 12.5 percent of domestic wastewater was treated. If unchecked,
these challenges to water quality and productivity, including the impact from climate change on water-
related disaster risks such as subsidence and flooding could cost the country up to 3.5 percent per year of
its Gross Domestic Product by 2035. The study suggested policy actions and roles for the public and
private sectors in effective and sustainable water management. The PDOs were relevant in addressing the
development problem of achieving water security. In addition, this project included a private sector
participation (PSP) toolkit and a pilot PSP for the Binh Duong Water Supply, Sewerage, and Environmental
Company (BIWASE) (see Section 4, Efficacy below).

The PDO also remained relevant to the World Bank Group's (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for FY18-FY22. The CPF focused on the gains offered by urbanization, and aimed to increase productivity
growth, competitiveness, and inclusiveness. The WBG supported the Government’s efforts to strengthen
urban planning, management, and governance. The CPF looked to boost capacity to deliver high-priority
infrastructure and strengthen the system of cities. In particular, the engagement would strengthen
institutional governance in the water sector, clarify roles and responsibilities, and promote integrated
management of water resources. In addition, the WBG support would strengthen private sector participation
in the sector—both as a provider of water services and as an investor. The PDO would contribute to
achieving objectives under Focus Area 1 (enable inclusive growth and private sector participation), such as
objective 1 (strengthened economic governance); objective 2 (promote private sector development); and
objective 4 (improve planning, management, and delivery of infrastructure and land in cities). The PDO
would also contribute to achieving goals under Focus Area 3 - Ensure Environmental Sustainability and
Resilience through objective 9 (to promote low carbon energy generation, and reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions (by way of the pollution management aspect of the PDO) and objective 11 (to strengthen
natural resource management and improve water security (CPF, paragraph 83).

At appraisal, the World Bank was already engaged in the water supply and sanitation sector in the country
through the Vietnam Water Supply Development Project (P073763), which was a similar project with the
objective to improve water and household sanitation services in selected district towns and large urban
centers. This current project benefited from the experience gained in the first project and targeted medium-


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



               size towns with potential to grow in terms of population because of rapid urbanization. Therefore, given the
               World Bank’s experience in the sector and the country, the project objectives were adequately challenging.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas in the project provinces.

                             Rationale
                             The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) did not present a theory of change (ICR, paragraph 6). However, the
                             main causality chains leading to achievement of the PDO were provided in the Results Framework (PAD,
                             Annex 1) and the description of the project components (PAD, paragraphs 22-33) as follows: First, the new
                             piped water connections, the improved service availability, and the increase in treatment plants and storage
                             capacity together were expected to lead to an increase in the volume of water sold to a number of urban
                             households in the targeted project area. This first causal chain represented the technical sustainability of
                             delivering sustainable water services. The second causal chain indicated that the piloting of a toolkit for
                             private sector participation, and the functional roll-out of a sector database would be expected to result in the
                             implementation of a Private Sector Participation sub-project and thereby also add new connections. This
                             second causal chain represented the institutional sustainability of delivering sustainable water services. The
                             third causal chain related to setting adequate tariffs that would cover operation & maintenance (O&M) and
                             depreciation costs for water utilities, effect improvements in revenue collection, or reductions in non-revenue
                             losses that would lead to financial sustainability of water utilities and water service delivery. These activities,
                             outputs, and intermediate outcomes would lead to two main final outcomes that signal the achievement of the
                             PDO: (i) an increase in the number of direct beneficiaries with access to safe water and improved health and
                             well-being; and (ii) lower costs of water access and sustainable water services. The project’s Theory of
                             Change (TOC) was premised on assumptions tested during implementation: (i) the government would expand
                             the capacity of the water treatment plant and expand its distribution network; and (ii) at the central level, a
                             ministerial level decision would be made for private sector participation. The TOC was valid, with logical
                             causality chains that included activities that were based on reasonable assumptions, and were
                             comprehensive, adequately scaled and properly sequenced.

                             OUTPUTS:

                             The following output targets were met or exceeded:

                             New piped household water connections and direct beneficiaries: As a result of the completion of the water
                             supply sub-projects in seven towns, i.e., water treatment facilities and distribution networks, 80,173
                             households (covering 358,324 direct beneficiaries) were provided with new piped household water

                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



connections (baseline 4,366 households, original target 42,628 households, revised target 65,872
households/263,488 direct beneficiaries). The revised target was significantly exceeded despite the
depreciation of the SDR against the US$, which was compensated by the AF and by utilities combining their
funds from other sources (ICR, footnote 13). Early completion (by February 2016) of infrastructure
construction and higher than expected availability of water enabled the utilities to shift focus to increasing
household water connections that resulted in a higher number of connections (ICR, paragraph 45).

Additionally, female beneficiaries constituted 40 to 52 percent of direct beneficiaries (target 51 percent, target
achieved by one province (Tam Ky) and almost achieved in four provinces (Ninh Binh, Phu Quo, Da Lat, and
Dong Xoal) while not achieved in two (Uong Binh and My Phuoc). According to the ICR (paragraph 93), the
percentage of females living in the project service area was overestimated. Females constituted 48 percent of
beneficiaries according to the July 2017 survey and 44 percent in the March 2000 survey.

Private sector participation

      The Ministry of Investment and Planning (MIP) adopted criteria for selecting Private Sector
       Participation (PSP) projects.
      A PSP toolkit was developed as targeted but a circular on the use of PSP in operating and managing
       water supply services was not yet issued at closing (ICR, paragraph 68).

Planning and investment studies

      The Ministry of Construction (MOC) developed a functional sector database.
      The Mekong Delta Water Supply Investment studies, which were added under additional financing
       covering the six Mekong Delta provinces of An Giang, Soc Trang, Bac Lieu, Ca Mau, Kien Giang, and
       the city of Can Tho, were not completed, but design options are available.
      Water security priority investments studies were prepared but not finalized at closing. They are likely
       to be completed after closing.

OUTCOMES:

Infrastructure service delivery targets were achieved or exceeded:

      The water treatment capacity increased from 2,089,000 cubic meters per year (cu m/year) in 2011 to
       27,605,000 cu m/year in 2017 (ICR, paragraph 45). There was no target set related to increase in
       water treatment capacity.
      Volume of water sold by the utilities: This increased to 27,605,000 cu m/year against a target of
       21,731,000 cu m/year at AF, and a baseline of 2,089,000 cu m/year.
      97.80 percent of water supply service beneficiaries expressed satisfaction with the water supply
       services received (baseline 86.3 percent, target 90 percent, target exceeded). Satisfaction with
       service delivery was expressed in terms of improved water pressure, continuity of service, water
       quality (no chlorine smell and no turbidity) and customer service (ICR, paragraph 46).

Sustainability and efficiency indicator targets were achieved:




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)




        All utilities achieved the target of less than 0.9 financial working ratio (operating costs (excluding
         depreciation and amortization) divided by revenue collected), except Uong Bi, which was marginally
         higher at 0.92.

Private sector participation

        Based on the PSP criteria, the Ministry of Planning and Investments (MPI) selected the Binh Duong
         water supply sub-project to increase its water treatment capacity using a pilot private sector
         participation (PSP) arrangement with the Binh Duong Water Supply, Sewerage, and Environmental
         Company (BIWASE), a public company and a private firm from Binh Duong. However, BIWASE was
         converted from a state-owned enterprise into a public corporation (or “equitized” in Vietnam's terms).
         Because the AF had limited resources for water sub-projects, BIWASE secured commercial funds for
         increasing water treatment capacity. Tariffs collected from water sales were used to repay the private
         loan. The Bin Duong water utility was the only water utility listed on the Vietnamese Stock Exchange
         (ICR, paragraph 68).

Mekong Delta water supply investment:

        At closing, following the completion of the water security priority investment studies for the six Mekong
         Delta provinces and the city of Can Tho, the Ministry of Construction (MOC) was still considering
         which option to implement – a regional or a provincial infrastructure. The investment options have
         been submitted to the Prime Minister's Office for approval (project task team’s email to IEG dated
         August 13, 2020.) The technical assistance would identify options to improve the present water
         supply schemes in the provinces of the region that relied primarily on systems vulnerable to climate
         change variability, sea level rise, salinity intrusion, and declining ground water levels. These factors
         accelerated the subsidence risk of the Mekong Delta.

The efficacy of the achievement of Objective 1 was rated high; the project fully achieved or exceeded its
intended outcome of increasing access to water services, while achieving financial sustainability parameters,
and the PSP pilot resulted in Bin Duong water utility being listed in the stock exchange.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to sustainable environmental sanitation in selected urban areas in the project provinces.

Rationale
Theory of Change: Capacity of wastewater treatment plants would be increased, sewer networks and
drainage systems would be built, extended, and households connected to the sewer network. The drainage
system would be expanded, and urban residents in the target area were to be connected to improved
sanitation. A target area (expressed in hectares) would be provided with drainage and flood protection
measures. The AF financed the construction of the Di An Town Wastewater Treatment Plant, and a target
volume of biological oxygen demand (BOD) would be removed from wastewater. For sanitation sub-projects,

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



tariffs would be collected to recover at least O&M costs (ICR, paragraph 9). The project would develop two
policy support circulars regarding cost recovery tariffs and financial management. These factors would
address the financial sustainability of delivering sanitation services in the target urban areas. These activities
would lead to the following outputs: increase in the capacity of wastewater treatment, increase in the capacity
of the sewer network and drainage in flood prone areas, and increase in the number of households connected
to the system. These outputs would lead to intermediate outcomes such as increase in the volume of
wastewater collected, increase in the volume of BOD removed from collected wastewater, increase in the
number of residents benefiting from wastewater services, increase in the area covered by drainage and flood
protection, and in Di An town only, an increase in the rate that beneficiaries were satisfied with the services.
The following assumptions were made in the wastewater sector: wastewater treatment plants and sewerage
networks and drainage systems would be completed, and at the central level, circulars on wastewater tariffs,
operation improvements, and investments needs would be developed. Sustainability of the wastewater sub-
projects was not part of the results framework nor were these added at restructuring but were discussed in
the ICR (paragraphs 58-68; see also below under Outcomes).

However, the theory of change did not include an intervention to facilitate household connections to the
sewage system by supporting households to “change internal plumbing, move or build manholes, and repair
interior floors” (ICR, paragraph 56). Additionally, the project did not include an information and education
campaign to raise awareness about the benefits of household connections to sewage system.

OUTPUTS:

The following targets for infrastructure provision were exceeded:

      In Di An town, 6,268 new household connections were achieved (baseline, 0, target, 6,000)
      The volume of Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) mass removed at the WWTP reached at 1,600
       kg/day (baseline 0, target 1,020 kg/day).

The following targets for infrastructure provision were fully or partially achieved:

      152,928 urban residents benefited from improved sanitation (baseline 0, original target 263,051
       residents, revised to 312,051 residents). The lower number of household connections were due to the
       following: (i) In some areas, constructing the treatment plants and sewer network was prioritized over
       establishing household connections – for instance, in Da Lat, the construction of the WWTP and
       sewer network was prioritized over establishing household connections, and the volume of wastewater
       collected and treated remains at about 45 percent of the total installed capacity; (ii) In others,
       wastewater would need to be pumped because houses were located below the sewer
       lines. Therefore, households opted to continue to use their septic tanks instead; (iii) Although
       connecting to the sewer lines was free-of-charge, households would have to bear the cost of a change
       in internal plumbing, move or build new manholes, or repair floors; and (iv) In households with
       combined systems (drainage and sewer) that discharged wastewater to the public drains, they were
       reluctant to connect anew (ICR, paragraph 56).
      In Di An Town, 25,072 residents directly benefited from the sub-project (baseline,0, target, 49,000)
      Flood protection measures (with no targets provided) included raising river embankments, building
       drainage canals, pumping stations, and hardened embankments around storm water detention water
       bodies. In Dong Ha, three large storm water detention ponds were created to capture a combined
       140,000 cubic meter of storage. This capacity addressed flooding across 369 hectares of urban land.

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



       Flooding occurred during the rainy season (September to December). Floods could be as high as 1.5
       meters. This flooding level was reduced but no figure was reported.

Planned investment plans and studies were completed:

      Strategic Sanitation Plans (SSPs) were completed for each sanitation sub-project to inform sub-
       project feasibility studies for proposed new connections.
      Sustainability of wastewater and drainage sub-projects (technical, financial, and institutional) were not
       included in the Results Framework. However, the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system
       established by the project helped central and local agencies monitor sector development to inform the
       sustainability aspects of the sanitation sub-project investments.
      The Ministry of Planning and Investments (MPI) prepared a circular on methods for estimating and
       implementing wastewater tariff. The Ministry of Construction (MOC) issued this circular at the national
       level. Seven of the eight Provincial People's Committees (PPCs) have agreed to charge all customers
       wastewater tariff.

OUTCOMES:

Environmental services delivered exceeded targets:

      72 percent of customers expressed satisfaction with services received (baseline 60.4 percent, target
       70 percent).
      70 percent of Di An wastewater treatment plant customers expressed satisfaction with the drainage
       and wastewater services received (baseline 25.21 percent, target 50 percent)

Targets for environmental services were fully or partly achieved:

      8,582 hectares (or 68 percent of the revised target area) benefited from drainage coverage and flood
       protection measures (baseline 0, original target 12,564 hectares, revised target 12,618 hectares).
       According to the ICR (paragraph 57), the target was not achieved because even after being informed
       by the SSPs and discovering that the target area for drainage sub-projects was lower than determined
       at appraisal, the AF did not reduce the target. However, the evidence supported the argument that the
       groundwork has been laid and therefore there is a likelihood that the target would be achieved after
       the project closed (ICR, Box 2),
      The flood protection measures mentioned above were anecdotally reported to have reduced the risk
       of flood related damage, improved the drainage of storm water, and assumed an increase in property
       values in the project area. In Dong Ha, the improved capacity from the storm water detention ponds
       addressed flooding during the rainy season (September to December) across 369 hectares of urban
       land. The ICR did not provide the figure for the reduced flooding level. In Dong Ha, polluted and
       visually unappealing marshlands were transformed by deepening the lake to improve the water
       storage function of the area and shoring up the sides. The lake perimeter was developed with walking
       paths, roads, and parks resulting in 20 hectares of new public space, with handrails, landscaping and
       lighting around the lake. Many of the amenities were financed by the city. Land value surrounding the
       area were anecdotally reported to have increased by about 500 percent for plots around the lake and
       10 percent for adjacent ones. The public spaces were used for recreational activities (ICR, Box 2).
      (i) Operations and maintenance (O&M) activities of the treatment plants: Two technological systems
       were implemented. One was the simpler biological pond treatment technology, which removed BOD

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



                         load from domestic wastewater to comply with discharge standards. Another was the more complex
                         one, which required an anaerobic filtration system and activated sludge in sequencing batch reactors
                         (SBRs). In this technology, wastewater was added to a single batch reactor, treated to remove
                         undesirable components, then discharged. Periodic activities were conducted, such as monitoring the
                         components, measuring water quality at discharge points, and comparing volumes of inflows/outflows.
                         (ii) The quality of effluents from the wastewater treatment plants: All wastewater sub-projects met
                         Category B discharge water quality standards defined by the Ministry of Natural Resources and
                         Environment (MONRE). All were given permits to discharge effluents into the environment.

                  Results for financial and institutional sustainability were inconclusive:

                        Financial sustainability of wastewater and drainage sub-projects were to be supported
                         by wastewater tariffs and available government subsidies. The Da Lat sub-project had been charging
                         wastewater tariffs since 2013 under a donor-funded project. The remaining six wastewater
                         utilities approved wastewater tariffs but have not collected these because wastewater treatment
                         facilities commissioned these facilities only in 2018. The Provincial People's Committee (PPC) first
                         needed to revoke the 10 percent environmental surcharge to water supply customers. This 10 percent
                         surcharge represented cost recovery payment for wastewater treatment and drainage. These fees
                         were not collected by the wastewater provider; instead they were collected by the government and
                         transferred to the provincial treasurer, which did not necessarily mandate its use for O&M needs. The
                         PPCs and City People's Committees (CPCs) committed to financing O&M of wastewater treatment
                         plants and drainage systems. Provinces allocated funds as part of their annual budget planning (ICR,
                         paragraph 63). Financial sustainability could not be claimed at project closing.
                        Institutional sustainability of wastewater and drainage sub-projects was supposed to have been
                         provided through efforts to strengthen existing Urban Environmental Companies (URENCOs). These
                         entities were originally assigned asset ownership and O&M of wastewater and drainage system. With
                         institutional changes introduced in 2016, PPCs and CPCs assigned asset ownership to a separate
                         internal entity who then signed O&M service contracts with URENCOs. In Di An and Thai Hoa,
                         however, the water supply and sewerage utility, retained O&M functions for wastewater and drainage.
                         Most wastewater companies reported to or operated under a contract with a PPC and were
                         responsible for O&M of the drainage system. Institutional sustainability could not be claimed at project
                         closing.

                  The outcome for this objective was rated modest because, although the targets for increasing access to
                  environmental services—flood protection, drainage, and wastewater treatment—were partially achieved by
                  project closing, results for financial and institutional sustainability were inconclusive. The sustainability of
                  wastewater and drainage services, although not defined at appraisal or AF (ICR, paragraph 58) were
                  assessed using available information, including from the sector database that was last updated in 2015 (ICR,
                  paragraph 53).



                  Rating
                  Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           The project's efficacy in achieving the first objective was high, having met or exceeded the targets for the
           outcome indicators. The project's efficacy in achieving the second objective was modest, based on important
           shortcomings in meetings targets as well as other weaknesses in performance. The overall efficacy was rated
           substantial taking into account government commitments to address the shortcomings in relevant targets
           (e.g., the decision regarding the Mekong Delta water supply investment was in the Office of the Prime
           Minister, an agreement had been reached with the Provincial People's Committees regarding the
           implementation of the wastewater tariff, the provincial and city level People's Committees have allocated
           funds to finance O&M of wastewater treatment plants and drainage systems). Also, the capacity was
           established to support future water and sanitation connections, and foundations were put in place for the
           institutional, technical, and financial sustainability of the services. These factors point to the shortfalls being
           addressed in the near term to justify the substantial overall efficacy.



           Overall Efficacy Rating
           Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, cost effectiveness, economic, and financial analyses were
conducted to the water sub-projects while economic analyses were undertaken for the wastewater sub-projects.
Cost effectiveness was based on costs per beneficiary. This measure was commonly used for assessing the
economic and financial efficiencies of wastewater and drainage projects.

At appraisal, the project committed to a maximum of US$200 per capita. For water sub-projects, the per capita
cost effectiveness ranged from a low of US$72 (Da Lat) to US$196 (My Phuoc) while for wastewater sub-
projects, the per capita cost effectiveness ranged from US$88 (Da Lat) to US$201 (Bim Son).

At appraisal, benefits from the water sub-projects were reflected in the value of the incremental volume of water
sold against the corresponding costs. Tariffs paid were used as proxy for the value of water (PAD, paragraph
46). The economic rate of return (ERR) for water sub-projects ranged from 6.3 percent (Dong Xoai) and 9.4
percent (Phu Quoc) to 15.3 percent (My Phuoc). Two of the 5 sub-projects had lower than 10 percent in ERRs
because the cost of investments included a change in the water source and the building of a new transmission
system (Dong Xoai) and upgrading the transmission system Phu Quoc (PAD, paragraph 47).

At appraisal, benefits came from improved sanitation valued at a rate based on a 2008 World Bank/World
Sanitation Program study called Environmental Impacts of Sanitation in Vietnam and was assumed to increase
at 2 percent a year as the level of income increased. The ERR for wastewater sub-projects ranged from 9.5
percent (Dong Ha, Tam Ky) to 13.7 percent (Ninh Binh). The ERR for wastewater sub-projects assumed: (i)
US$0.10 per cubic meter of wastewater treated to indicate the costs of investing and operating wastewater
treatment plants, and (ii) US$28 as the annual per capita benefits of improved sanitation based on the earlier
mentioned 2008 study.



                                                                                                               Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



At closing, the average ERR for water sub-projects was at 17.8 percent, ranging from 6.2 percent (Tam Ky) to
26.3 percent (My Phuoc). The average ERR for wastewater sub-projects stood at 22.8 percent, ranging from
18.2 (Tam Ky) to 31 percent (Dong Xoai). The ERR for wastewater assumed that by 2018 the per capita value
of the benefits from improved health and water resource degradation would reach US$44 per capita.

At closing, cost effectiveness improved because of population growth and gains from project management. For
water sub-projects, cost effectiveness ranged from a low of US$52 per capita (Da Lat) to a high of US$112 (Tam
Ky). For wastewater sub-projects, the per capita cost effectiveness ranged from US$39 (Da Lat) to US$196 (Di
An). These figures were well within the US$200 cost effectiveness maximum that was committed at appraisal.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: Delays during the early stages of implementation resulted in low
disbursements. This was due to a change in project design. Target urban areas were changed from two large
cities (Ho Chi Minh and Hanoi) to ten mid-size cities. Implementing agencies lacked experience in managing
wastewater treatment investments. Each city was required to prepare a Strategic Sanitary Plan (SSPs) before
implementing its wastewater and drainage sub-projects. Additional steps such as establishing or updating
master plans and conducting feasibility studies prior to undertaking detailed designs and bidding documents
for sanitation sub-projects contributed to this delay and resulted in the modest outcome in
household wastewater connections. In 2016, the government restricted the use of Official Development
Assistance (ODA) to reduce its public debt because the country has reached its borrowing ceiling from multiple
multinational development institutions. Sub-projects with limited funds could not pay their contractors on time,
leading to a delay in project completion. At closing, US$24.42 million was cancelled due to delays introduced by
internal government procedures requiring the inclusion of project funds in the Midterm Investment Plan.

Even with the operational and administrative shortcomings, overall efficiency was rated substantial because of
the high ERRs for both the water and wastewater sub-projects, representing 96.9 percent of total project cost at
closing. The figure used below refer to the average ERR of the wastewater sub-projects (reaching 22.8 percent),
covering US$237.55 million of the total project cost of US$356.78 million at closing. There was no comparable
average ERR for wastewater sub-projects at appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    66.60
 ICR Estimate                                             22.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was rated high. The efficacy of the project in achieving first objective was rated
high. The project's efficacy for the second objective was rated modest. The overall efficacy was rated
substantial. Efficiency was rated substantial. The outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcome:

      Financial risk with regard to adequacy of financial flows and financial viability of wastewater
       utilities. Only one of the eight wastewater utility was experienced in collecting established
       tariffs. Tariffs for the remaining wastewater utilities, some of which were state-owned at the city level
       and some a subsidiary of a water utility, were approved by their respective PPCs before project
       closing. These fees were earmarked for O&M needs of the wastewater utility assets. Actual
       implementation may be delayed because current water user fees include environmental
       surcharges. These need to be revoked first and then a separate wastewater tariff introduced. The
       government anticipated continuing its subsidies to all wastewater companies.
      Stakeholder risk in connecting to wastewater services. The slow progress in wastewater
       connections during implementation may continue. Households that use septic tanks or public drains
       and appeared to be unaffected by wastewater discharge are not connected to the wastewater
       collection network. In most sub-projects, project funds were used to connect households. After
       closing, cities may not have funds to assist those households that are connected to the system. To
       mitigate this risk, provincial and central governments would need to subsidize wastewater companies
       to expand wastewater connections, in addition to providing subsidies for O&M needs.
      Institutional support risk from a lack of instruments and regulatory oversight to accompany
       recently equitized water supply utilities. Urban water utilities were equitized during project
       implementation. The water utilities became public corporations that owned assets and could
       decide on investments, such as expanding its service. However, there were no institutional
       arrangements or instruments established to accompany how these public corporations would meet
       the water utilities' obligations to deliver water services. To mitigate this risk, the government may
       need to assign a government entity to supervise these water utilities, provide guidance regarding
       expansion plans for optimal and equitable water service delivery, and require them to report on their
       performance (see below).
      Technical risk in the use of the M&E database. According to the ICR, the database developed
       under the project was not regularly updated (ICR, paragraph 127). The last known update was made
       in 2015 (ICR, paragraph 53). When the water utilities were equitized, they were not provided
       incentives nor were they mandated to report on their performance. This database was designed to
       link these capital projects to sector wide long-term planning. With the information from this database,
       the government could determine appropriate investments and design actionable policies that promote
       accountability and transparency in the sector (ICR, paragraph 8). To keep the database useful, the


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



      government could consider using its continuing subsidies as incentive for the water and wastewater
      utilities to regularly report on their performance or include the obligation in new policy directives.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank's project design responded to the government's request and was relevant to achieving the
  country's objectives for the urban water and wastewater sectors. Project design included relevant lessons
  from six similar projects implemented in Vietnam. Among the lessons that influenced the design were: (i)
  a lack of prepared sub-projects could lead to implementation delays; (ii) signing subsidiary legal
  agreements for sub-projects could face time lags; (iii) connecting households to services could take time;
  and (iv) decentralized implementation works well for providing water and wastewater services. To avoid
  implementation delays, design included the following: (i) Provincial People's Committees (PPCs)
  approved sub-project feasibility studies prior to appraisal; (ii) subsidiary agreements for sub-projects were
  to be signed within 90 days after the signing of the Financing Agreement for inclusion in the project;
  (iii) the project would finance household connections for water and wastewater services; and (iv)
  implementation would be decentralized. (PAD, paragraph 36). However, the project area was changed
  from two major cities (Ho Chi Minh and Hanoi) at concept to ten smaller cities (with populations between
  58,000 and 212,000 residents) at approval. All the new ten cities required Strategic Sanitation Plans
  (SSPs) for wastewater and drainage before approving these sub-projects. Design did not include
  information and education campaign activities that could have been useful for persuading more
  households to connect to wastewater services. Project components were reasonable to achieve the
  objectives stated. Counterpart funds were committed. At appraisal, a high risk was noted because
  provinces were unfamiliar with World Bank processes, the wide geographical spread of sub-
  projects, expected delays from land acquisition, and uncertainty in implementing tariffs for the services.
  The risk that households would not connect to the wastewater services, the possibility that technical
  design may pose problems, or that the country would reach its borrowing ceiling and that the government
  would impose limitations in the use of Official Development Assistance (ODA) funds from all sources,
  were unforeseen risks that nevertheless became evident during implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank project team conducted 17 semi-annual supervision missions over the eight-year implementation
 period, Supervision inputs were adequate. For example, in the case of environmental safeguards, the Bank
 team worked closely with the implementing entities to ensure that the clearance of Unidentified Ordinances
 (UXO) or explosive weapons that did not explode and posed risks of detonation, were completed before
 the sites were handed over to contractors (ICR, paragraph 109). The project components specified
 technical assistance directed at building the capacity of the implementing entities that were not familiar with
 Bank processes (see component 3 in Section 2 Project Objective and Components above). The Mid Term

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



 Review (MTR) was carried out in January 2015, following delayed disbursements. The MTR identified
 a US$20 million deficit due to exchange rate losses (from SDR to US$). A restructuring and additional
 financing (AF) covered the deficit and added a new wastewater treatment plant sub-project in Di An
 town. Candor in reporting the quality of performance reporting was evident in the project team's efforts to
 avoid leaving funds unused because the provincial implementing entities could not meet the complex
 process, introduced by the government, of including approved funds for ongoing sub-projects in the Mid
 Term Investment Plan. Nevertheless, at closing, the government requested the cancellation of US$24.42
 million (see Section 5, Efficiency above).

 Overall, while taking note of the minor shortcomings that were within the Bank team's control to resolve, the
 quality of supervision was rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly specified. The Results Framework showed valid links along a causal chain
 between inputs and outputs, leading to intermediate and final outcomes that can be attributed to the
 project's interventions. The indicators were adequate to capture the achievement of the project outcomes.
 However, there was a lack of indicators to address the sustainable delivery of services, particularly for
 sanitation services. There were no specific indicators measuring the quality and the reliability of the water
 supply, but this was covered by the outcome indicator of “increase in the satisfaction rate of beneficiaries”;
 the customer satisfaction survey included questions related to water pressure, service continuity, and water
 quality, such as level of chlorine smell and turbidity (ICR, paragraph 46). There were no indicators, either,
 capturing the completion of project outputs of water supply systems and wastewater collection network and
 treatment plants in terms of kilometer or capacity, respectively. Baselines for the outcome indicators were
 established as defined in the Results Framework; these indicators were specific, measurable, time-bound,
 achievable, and relevant. The data collection arrangements were adequate; each project implementation
 unit would be responsible for data collection from each subproject, and the MOC would consolidate and
 report the data (ICR, paragraph 99). An M&E consultant was to be hired to support data verification and
 consolidation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Administration of Technical Infrastructure (ATI), an agency of the MOC, implemented the M&E
  system. Each PMU contributed to the implementation of the M&E system. Planned
  baselines were carried out. Indicators provided in the Results Framework were measured and reported.
  For the water sub-projects, the number of connections installed was monitored and verified through

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



  indicators such as volumes of water sold, revenues, and costs. For wastewater, new connections
  were the indicator of choice. Outcomes in drainage improvement were monitored based on areas that
  benefited from improved drainage and reduced flood risk. An M&E consultant regularly updated the
  Results Framework, but the water utilities and wastewater companies were not directly involved in the
  process, resulting in a missed opportunity for building capacity and institutionalizing the function (ICR,
  paragraph 104). Therefore, at project closing, utilities could not provide the task team consistent
  information on results achieved. The AF resulted in new sub-projects and new indicators were introduced
  (e.g., volume of BOD removed from the wastewater plant in Di An, the number of direct beneficiaries, and
  level of customer satisfaction, disaggregated by gender) while some were revised upwards based on
  additional resources (e.g., increase in the number of new piped household water connections).
  The method used to calculate direct beneficiaries—the indicator added at the AF—was not clearly
  defined (ICR, paragraph 87). Reports did not show whether beneficiaries were involved in defining target
  indicators and assessing achievement of indicators. The weakness in the M&E design measuring the
  progress in investment activities was not corrected.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used the M&E results to inform the implementing entities and the Bank's task team on the
  project's progress and informed the requirements of the Additional Financing (AF). M&E data was used
  to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes, and instances of sustainability of operations. However,
  since the M&E function was carried out by a consultant rather than by the implementing entities, the
  M&E system introduced by the project may not be sustained.

  The M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievement of the project
  objectives and test the links in the result chain. However, M&E quality was rated modest because of the
  missed opportunity in institutionalizing the M&E function at the level of the water and wastewater
  utilities, inconsistent information on results achieved provided at project closing (ICR, paragraph 104),
  linkages among some indicators were not strengthened at the AF stage (ICR, paragraph 93), and the
  lack of incentives for water supply utilities to regularly update the ATI so it could monitor sector
  performance.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was determined to require a partial assessment
   (environmental category B). The project triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.12
   Involuntary Resettlement, and OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams. At AF, two additional safeguards were triggered
   - OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources and OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways. The latter
   was triggered because treated water from the Di An WWTP was to be discharged to a local canal that
   flowed into the Dong Nai River of which Cambodia was a riparian state.


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



  An Environmental Management Plan was prepared for each sub-project identified at appraisal and
  disclosed on December 6, 2010. Overall, there were no major environmental, health or safety issues. The
  World Bank team and the Project Management Unit (PMU) closely monitored the implementation of UXO
  clearance prior to turning cleared sites over to contractors. An independent consultant supervised the
  implementation of environmental safeguards on behalf of the MOC and its performance has been reported
  as acceptable (ICR, paragraph 109). The project did not finance construction of dams but triggered this
  safeguard because raw water would be supplied by reservoirs that have formed an existing dam. At the
  2015 MTR, an independent consultant carried out dam safety review and concluded that all dams were
  operational and safe with remedial actions for (i) Duong Dong Dam for seepage treatment; (ii) Phu Ninh
  dam for gate repair; and (iii) Dong Xoai dam for installation of monitoring instruments. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 110), all remedial actions were completed. World Bank management granted an exception to
  the riparian notification allowed under paragraph 7(c) of OP/BP 7.50 since Vietnam was the lowest
  downstream riparian of the Dong Nai River, hence this river ran only in Vietnam and did not cause harm to
  other riparian states.

  OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources was triggered because the project activities financed under AF
  would result in considerable amounts of earthworks. Public consultations were carried out. A Resettlement
  Policy Framework and 15 Resettlement Action Plans were prepared and disclosed. Documentation of land
  acquisition was not adequately prepared by some sub-projects. The World Bank team provided intensified
  guidance and shared templates to record land acquisition. Land acquisition encountered some delays due
  to lengthy processes, weak project management capacity, timing constraints resulting from required
  approvals of lands appraised, and differences between resettlement policies of the government and the
  World Bank. Compensation levels and assistance to project affected households were completed and
  issues resolved by project closing except in Thai Hoa and Ninh Binh sub-projects. There were no
  outstanding unresolved grievances reported at project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The Ministry of Construction (MOC) and the implementing agencies complied with
  World Bank financial management policies and procedures. All unaudited interim financial reports were
  submitted on time and met World Bank requirements. The MOC submitted Independently audited financial
  reports on time, with the final one expected on June 30, 2020. Privately operated water supply utilities
  submitted annual audited financial statements according to Vietnamese Accounting Standards. The audits
  were unqualified (ICR, paragraph 116).

  Procurement: All project procurement activities complied with the World Bank's guidelines. Contract
  management in some sub-projects were observed to be weak, leading to implementation delays and
  quality concerns. These were addressed to the satisfaction of the World Bank. There was one complaint
  related to a local company. That bidder was sanctioned in accordance with national procurement laws and
  regulations, satisfactory to the World Bank requirements.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



   None



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                     IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                                                                There were moderate
                                                                                shortcomings in Quality at Entry
                                                                                such as absence information
                                                                                and education campaign
Bank Performance              Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory   activities to raise awareness
                                                                                about the benefits of connection
                                                                                to the wastewater collection
                                                                                system, and insufficient risk
                                                                                analysis.
Quality of M&E                Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

      Inexperienced implementing entities may require periodic, customized, technical
       assistance to build their capacity to achieve project objectives. In this project,
       constructing wastewater systems was delayed because of the introduction of new processes
       for which the implementation entities were not prepared, such as the preparation of
       sanitation strategy plans before implementing the environment sanitation sub-projects. In
       addition to the capacity building components of the project itself, additional technical
       assistance efforts were included in consulting packages to address capacity gaps of
       implementing agencies, particularly those unfamiliar with World Bank processes.
      Information and educational campaigns may influence behavioral change in
       households to address their reluctance to connect to wastewater systems. In this
       project, the outcome indicator called for increasing the number of households connected to
       the wastewater system. Households who used septic tanks or public drains and who did not
       appear to be negatively affected by wastewater discharge were disinclined to connect to the
       system without the incentives that other households received. The project financed
       household connections to the wastewater systems and technical engineering solutions but
       did not devise educational campaigns or behavior change strategies to increase the level of
       household connections.

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)



        Engaging beneficiaries may improve the data productivity and utilization of a project's
         M&E system. In this project, the quality of beneficiary information under the M&E system
         was inadequate. The implementing agencies could not monitor performance of the utilities
         and outcome of the project interventions using beneficiary information. Data disaggregated
         by relevant factors. could not be collected. Engaging beneficiaries through periodic customer
         surveys could strengthen the usefulness of an M&E system, refine beneficiary selection for
         outcome attribution, facilitate decision making, and bring transparency in sector service
         delivery.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive overview of the project. The narrative was internally consistent and highly
evaluative. The ICR was adequately focused on the results of the project; it provided sufficient evidence to
support the outcome of the project’s intervention, including the factors behind not meeting wastewater
household connections. The interrogation of evidence was adequate, and the analysis clearly linked evidence
to findings. The lessons were informed by the operation, particularly with regard to the benefit of adopting
information and educational campaigns to boost household connections for wastewater services. The annexes
provided additional information to expound on the cost effectiveness of the project (see Annex 4 Efficiency
Analysis). Boxes in the main text and footnotes were helpful in understanding technical concepts. The ICR was
also consistent with the Bank guidance.

In the section on Quality at Entry, paragraph 119 of the ICR stated that the number of household sanitation
connections could have been used as an intermediate indicator. Lastly, the ICR was substantially longer (39
pages) than recommended in the Bank guidance (15 or 20 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
VN-Urban Water Supply and Wastewater (P119077)




                                                                              Page 21 of 21
