     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022177

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P120211                                    Norte Grande Water Infrastructure

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79920                                 30-Apr-2017                                       195,141,764.59

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2010                                26-Apr-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            195,141,764.59                                             0.00

 Actual                                        195,141,764.59                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Fernando Manibog            Peter Nigel Freeman          Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was "to increase sustainable access to water supply and urban
   drainage services in the Borrower’s Norte Grande region, by providing investments in infrastructure and
   supporting institutional development." (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, page 5)

   For the purposes of the Efficacy section of this ICR Review, the PDO above will be assessed in terms of four
   distinct objectives:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



   Objective 1: To increase access to water supply in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

   Objective 2: To increase access to urban drainage services in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

   Objective 3: To increase the sustainability of water supply in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

   Objective 4: To increase the sustainability of urban drainage services in the Norte Grande Region of
   Argentina

   There was no change in the PDO during the entire project period. There were changes in the outcome
   indicators and targets as the specific infrastructure needs and investments were identified during project
   implementation. The changes did not lower the project's ambition, as discussed below and as verified with
   the Bank project team. Hence, a split rating will not be carried out for this ICR Review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was designed as a "framework project", which the ICR (page 12) defines as
   follows: “Framework Project” refers to a project where all activities or subprojects have not been firmly
   identified at appraisal, though the objectives and types of activities are clearly outlined in the PAD, often
   because additional information garnered through implementation will influence the identification or definition
   of these activities.

   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), the project components included the following (original
   cost estimates and actual costs are indicated; modifications to the components during restructurings are
   also briefly delineated):

   Component 1: Water Supply and Urban Drainage Infrastructure (Appraisal cost estimate,
   US$165 million; actual cost, US$132.4 million)

   This component was intended to finance the rehabilitation, upgrading and reconstruction of water supply
   and urban drainage systems that are declared eligible during implementation.

   Component 2: Institutional Development and Technical Assistance(Appraisal cost estimate,
   US$26 million; actual cost, US$0.67 million)

   This component was intended finance: (i) institutional and/or operational strengthening programs for
   participating water and sanitation service providers; (ii) technical assistance to service providers and
   regional entities with responsibilities to provide water and sanitation and urban drainage services and

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



  carry out studies; (iii) institutional strengthening activities aimed at promoting water supply and sanitation
  (WSS) sector knowledge and capacity building within relevant sector institutions; and (iv) strengthening of
  the operational, social, environmental, fiduciary and supervision management capacity of the Executing Unit
  within the Coordinating Unit for Programs and Projects with External Financing (UCPyPFE) and
  Participating Provinces.

  During the the December 10, 2015 restructuring, the institutional strengthening component became better
  defined. Since other information systems already existed in the region or were supported by other donors,
  the 2015 restructuring shifted the project's focus away from the development of a Regional Water Supply
  and Sanitation (WSS) Information system toward the development of dashboards of key indicators for water
  supply utilities to use as a decision-making tool. During the June 27, 2018 restructuring, resources were
  reallocated between expenditure categories (US$26 million from “Category 2 – Assets, consulting services,
  non-consulting services, training and operating costs” to “Category 1 – Works under Sub-Projects”) due to
  the savings generated under the institutional component in the 2015 restructuring. (ICR, paragraphs 15 and
  56).

  Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (Appraisal cost estimate, US$15 million; actual cost,
  US$14 million)

  This component was to finance project management and supervision activities, including specialized
  independent technical supervision
  and Project audits.

  The project implemented four main investments: two in the water sector in the Chaco Province and two in
  the drainage sector in the Tucuman Province.

  In Chaco, the interventions included:

  (a) water supply system for Pampa del Indio, Presidente Roca and five other towns; and

  (b) water supply system for Wichi, El Sauzal, Fuerte Esperanza, and Nueva Pompeya communities.

  In Tucuman, the interventions included:

  (a) a drainage channel in Boulevard 9 de Julio in Yerbabuena; and

  (b) a drainage channel in San Luis in Yerbabuena.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost estimated at appraisal was US$ 240 million, including the front end fee
  (US$0.5 million), as well as the physical and price contingencies (US$25 million and US$8 million,
  respectively). The actual project cost at closing was US$235.7 million, or 98 percent of the appraisal
  estimate.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



   Financing. The World Bank provided a loan of US$200 million for the project, of which US$195.1 million or
   98 percent was actually disbursed by project closing. There were no other cofinanciers.

   Borrower Contribution. Of the US$240 million total project cost, the Borrower committed to financing US$40
   million, but actually disbursed US$40.6 million by project closing, or 102 percent of the original commitment.

   Dates. The project was approved on December 20, 2010. It became effective almost 6 months later on July
   4, 2011. A mid-term review was conducted about 4 years later on May 29, 2015. The original closing date
   was April 30, 2017. With 3 closing date extensions granted during project restructurings, the project finally
   closed on April 26, 2019 with a total project implementation period of 8.5 years.

   The project was restructured at level two four times, as follows:

   December 18, 2015 - to modify the Results Framework, given the shift from institutional strengthening and
   the preparation of a regional WSS information system toward the establishment of utility-level dashboards
   of key indicators to support management and decision-making.

   April 20, 2017 - to extend the closing date

   June 12, 2018 - to extend the closing date and reallocate among disbursement categories, given the 2015
   shift in the institutional strengthening activities and the savings made, which were reallocated to works
   under the sub-projects.

   February 28, 2019 - to extend the loan closing date by a few months to its final closure on April 26, 2019




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. The appraisal of the project was conducted in the aftermath of the global financial crisis
of 2008 and the economic slowdown that it caused, from which Argentina had just been recovering. As part
of this recovery, the Government of Argentina (GoA) adopted a countercyclical stimulus package, wherein
infrastructure investments were prioritized as a major component. GoA formalized these priorities in its
Strategic Plan for Territorial Development 2010 – 2016 and aimed to: (i) consolidate the market forces that
would enhance Argentina’s inclusion in the global economy; and (ii) mitigate the isolation and lack of
development of disadvantaged regions and communities, particularly by filling infrastructure deficits in
poorer provinces, in order to achieve a more equitable and sustainable growth. In this regard, despite
economic recovery in many areas of Argentina, the Norte Grande Region (NGR) remained the most
marginalized and underdeveloped region. The NGR, which covered one-third of the country’s territory, had
a population of 7.5 million people, or 21 percent of the total population. However, the NGR produced only
10 percent of GDP and 8 percent of exports. The poverty level at 48 percent was high (the national average
was 23 percent) and extreme poverty was 24.6 percent.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



Sector Context. The water and sanitation sector (WSS) was a key challenge for Argentina at the time of
project appraisal, particularly in the areas of universal coverage and improved service quality. The NGR
suffered the most acute gaps in terms of access and quality of service. The two decades prior to appraisal
showed frequent and drastic changes in sector policies: many private concessions were renegotiated or
terminated, and the freezing of water tariffs damaged the capacity of utilities to self-finance, thus leading to
sizeable public funding of service providers. These factors led to financial and operational difficulties for
many utilities and the weakening of sector institutions. The NGR, in particular, had low coverage rates, poor
service levels, water contamination of water sources, limited water availability, and institutional and
governance challenges. Investment needs were high but funding was limited.

Thus, the PDO directly sought to assist the NGR as Argentina’s second most-deprived region (after the
Buenos Aires Metropolitan Region), with almost 15 percent of the population lacking piped water supply
and 61 percent of the population lacking piped sewerage services. Cities in the NGR's urban areas were
also particularly susceptible to frequent flooding given their location in flat lowland areas. Investments in
urban drainage infrastructure were also needed to reduce vulnerability to floods, which posed a major
development challenge and affected the poor disproportionately.

Alignment with Government and Bank Strategies. The PDO is aligned with the FY19-FY22 Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) in two specific focus areas: (i) Focus Area Two: Addressing key institutional
constraints for better service delivery through Objective 5: Improving service delivery through enhanced
inter-jurisdictional coordination, and (ii) Focus Area Three: Supporting Argentina Implement its Climate
Related Nationally Determined Contributions through Objective 10: Building Resilient and Low-Carbon
Cities. The PDO also responds to the 2018 Argentina Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), which
identifies indigenous populations as particularly vulnerable to lower access to basic services. The PDO is
also fully aligned with the Government’s 2017 National Water and Sanitation Plan (NWSP), which sets
ambitious targets for providing sustainable universal access to water by focusing on improving both the
coverage and the quality of WSS services as well as the performance of services providers.

According to the ICR (page 13), indigenous populations are ten percentage points more likely to have at
least one unmet basic need compared to the non-indigenous population (at 23 percent vis-à-vis 13 percent,
respectively). In the cities, on average 79 percent of indigenous populations have access to water and 47
percent to sewerage, compared to 84 percent and 53 percent, respectively, of non-indigenous people. The
poor in NGR provinces are particularly vulnerable. Children under five in the poorest provinces in the north,
such as Formosa, are almost twice as likely to die, and maternal mortality rates in La Rioja and Formosa
are six to seven times higher than in the City of Buenos Aires.

The SCD indicates that water utility accountability needs to be strengthened in order to use public funds
more efficiently and deliver better services. A more comprehensive and strategic planning approach—one
that covers both expansion plans, as well as maintenance and improvement of existing infrastructure—is
required. Finally, both the SCD and CPF cite climate change as a growing challenge to cities, particularly in
terms of urban flooding and its disruption of transportation systems, as well as its negative impacts on
productivity and business profitability.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase access to water supply in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. The over-arching, long-term development outcome that the project sought to support was
               to alleviate the dire baseline conditions in the NGR that existed prior to the project’s implementation. Lack of
               access to piped household connections has compelled the affected population to rely on rainwater collection,
               public standpoints, wells (which entailed important health risks given the arsenic contained naturally in the
               area’s groundwater), or costly water trucks or pumps. Dispersed areas were dependent on dams, windmills
               and rainwater. The burden of collecting water almost 7 hours a day fell on women and children who had to
               carry water of dubious quality in buckets or drums weighing 44 to 66 pounds (about 20 to 30 liters). The
               small capacity of water supply systems resulted in intermittent services even for households with water
               connections. Water quality was poor given the limited water availability from small reservoirs and aquifers
               and rivers with high turbidity. Droughts that occurred about half of the year worsened these conditions by
               making water collection more difficult and worsening the already severely restricted water supplies.

               The causal chain underlying the project's theory of change is well articulated and valid. Moreover, the
               expected results can be directly attributed to the project's investments and institutional capacity-building
               activities. The causal chain starts with input activities consisting of the construction of water treatment plants,
               main distribution lines, and secondary networks, which are expected to directly deliver piped, safe and
               reliable water (treated to comply with regulatory standards) to households. In addition, a second set of input
               activities include the construction of public water tanks, standpoints, and rainwater harvesting systems
               intended to increase access of indigenous and dispersed populations to safer water sources. Taken together,
               these input activities and intermediate outcomes are expected to achieve the objective of improving access to
               water supplies.

               Indicators. The PAD established the following indicators for measuring improvements in water supply access
               in the NGR: (i) number of people in urban areas provided with access to i0mproved water sources under the
               project; (ii) at least 30 percent are poor out of the total additional beneficiaries of the new water supply
               infrastructure built under the project; (iii) number of piped households that receive safe water treated
               according to regulatory standards; and (iv) number of disperse indigenous population with improved access to
               water from the works built under the Project.

               Results. The project’s principal achievements comprise the following outcomes, according to the ICR (pages
               15-16). At Presidencia Roca-Pampa del Indio and five other localities, the investments benefitted 34,000
               people with access to improved water sources of better reliability and quality. In February 2019, a visit by the
               Servicio de Agua y Mantenimiento Empresa del Estado Provincial (SAMEEP) found that the treatment plant
               and its Bermejo River water intake point were functioning as expected and the intended beneficiaries were
               uninterrupted water supply. The ICR mission also confirmed that: (i) the plant is equipped with appropriate
               staff and is being operated properly; (ii) the plant’s laboratory specialist is monitoring water quality regularly;
               and (iii) logs for residual chlorine are within the safe parameters established by regulatory standards.

                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



Moreover, the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples’ Plan (IPP) included the construction of public
standposts, which are benefitting 2,700 indigenous people, for whom water collection times have been
reduced to 20-30 minutes from more than an hour daily. Reduced cases of diarrheal diseases have been
reported, compared to other neighboring communities. It is expected that these services would make an
important contribution to controlling the spread of COVID-19 in the area.

For the Wichi water supply subproject, the physical progress of works was at 96 percent by June 2020,
according to the ICR (pages 15-16). Most of the elements of the water treatment plants, as well as the
primary and secondary distribution networks, had been finalized. The delays between September 2019 to
May 2020 -- which were due to complex procurement processes that required revisions to a contract
amendment, a government transition at the end of 2019, unfavorable climatic conditions, and the impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic – had been resolved by June 2020. Critical works to commission the system are
assured for completion by October 2020, given the support from the new governments at the local and
national levels, the agreements reached on the contract amendment, a dry season favorable for implementing
works, and a revised planning timeline that incorporates COVID-19 mitigation measures. Thus, it is highly
likely that the intended beneficiaries will be reached and the intended outcomes will be achieved, i.e., 16,500
people of the localities of Wichi, el Sauzal, Nueva Pompeya and El Pintado would benefit from access to
more reliable and safe water services. In addition, around 6,400 people in dispersed areas would benefit from
access to public standpoints fed by the main system. The IPP implementation included the construction of
703 rainwater harvesting systems., and 22 more are to be completed by October 2020, which would benefit
approximately 3,600 indigenous and criollo people.

Based on the foregoing evidence, this review finds that the project has substantially achieved the first
objective of increasing access to water supply in the NGR.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to urban drainage services in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

Rationale
Theory of Change. With respect to the second objective, the project's long-term goal was to address serious
baseline conditions such as frequent flooding during periods of rain. With the main roads having turned into
waterways, small and non-motorized vehicles are unable to use the roads, while larger vehicles incur long
time periods for crossing them. Speeds of around 34 km/hour at regular periods fall down to a maximum of 5
km/hour when the roads are flooded. With no alternate routes available, road users are forced to wait 3 to 6
hours until the flood has receded. Businesses in the area become inaccessible during major storm events,
this harming economic activity.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



The causal chain from inputs to outputs and outcomes is valid, as is their attribution to project activities. The
input activities consist of the construction of urban drainage systems, which are expected to improve access
to drainage services and thereby protect residents from urban floods..

Indicators. Achievement of the second objective was to be measured through the following indicators: (i)
number of additional beneficiaries of urban drainage networks constructed as a result of the project; and (ii)
surface in hectares (ha) of urban area protected from flooding with drainage networks built under the project.

Results. The Boulevard 9 de Julio urban drainage subproject had been completed by project closing. The
sub-project benefitted 20,000 people and protected 300 ha from flooding events. Regarding the drainage
channel of Avenida San Luis, the works were almost finalized by project closing, but the pending works for
secondary drainage collectors and paving of streets were completed (with financing under the Plan Belgrano
Project) in November 2019. This benefitted the remaining 20,000 beneficiaries (thus reaching the 40,000
target) and protected an additional 350 ha, for a total of 650 ha protected from flooding. (Note that the ICR
cites 300 ha plus 350 ha in the text but shows 50 ha in Table 4.)

The ICR mission (ICR, page 17) verified whether the drainage interventions have improved the livability,
resilience and economic activity of the city of Yerba Buena. The ICR team found that as a result of the
project, rainfall events with intensities of 50 mm to 100 mm (occurring about seven times per year between
September to March) are no longer expected to produce flooding in the project area. The heavy rains of
January and February 2020 tested the drainage system, which was reported to have functioned as intended,
thus protecting 40,000 people from flood risk. It is reported that road paving and drainage infrastructure have
improved the city’s connectivity and reduced traffic congestion. Beneficiaries indicated that getting stranded
and disruption of daily activities during heavy rainfall no longer occurs. Maintenance and cleaning costs of the
roads under the project have been reduced, thus financially benefitting the municipality.

Based on the foregoing evidence, this review finds that the project has substantially achieved the
second objective of increasing access to urban drainage services in the NGR.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase the sustainabillity of water supply in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

Rationale
Theory of Change. The baseline conditions that the third project objective sought to address (through
technical assistance and capacity-building) included the chronically low operational and financial
management capacities of the utilities, which made significant losses and were considered unviable. Based
on criteria from the Utility Turn Around Framework (UTAF), all the utilities that the project supported were



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



ranked at the bottom of the Utility Maturity Index, given major deficiencies in their organization and strategy,
financial and human resources management, and technical and commercial operations.

The project’s causal chain is valid and could be expected to credibly achieve sustainability of service
provision. The logically linked set of activities were based on steps recommended by UTAF to support the
utilities in moving up the ranking ladder. In practice, the project supported measures to: (i) assess key
performance indicators for the utilities; (ii) improve their planning and develop an action plan keyed to those
indicators; and (iii) define targets and instruments to achieve them.

Indicators. The achievement of the third objective would be assessed through the following PAD indicators: (i)
number of water providers that have implemented a monitoring system (management panel) as a tool for
strategic decision making to improve management; (ii) number of service providers at the provincial or
municipal level enrolled in an institutional development program; and (iii) evidence of more efficient and
financially healthier providers of WSS services. The ICR team also assessed the ability of the Servicio de
Agua y Mantenimiento Empresa del Estado Provincial (SAMEEP) ability to operate and maintain the two
water sub-projects financed under component one of the project.

Results. Using a participative approach across several utilities in the NGR, the project’s technical assistance
and capacity-building activities achieved the following results:

Institutional diagnostics were conducted, priority actions were identified, the utilities received guidance to
progressively implement actions to improve performance. The identification of priority actions were done
through participatory, multi-stakeholder workshops, in one case jointly with the Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB). The Project also supported south-south knowledge exchange, e.g., with the water utility of Mar
de Plata and the Federal Council of Water and Sanitation Entities (COFES) for the purpose of exchanging
experiences on telemetry systems for water operations.

Utility indicator dashboards (tablero de control) to guide decision making were developed and utilized. The
first utility to participate was SAMEEP in May 2012, followed by Sociedad Aguas de Tucuman (SAT) in
January 2013, the utilities of Catamarca and Formosa in 2014, and the utilities of Salta and Corrientes in
2015.

Significant priority actions were achieved. Although specific to each utility, the actions shared some common
areas such as: (i) improvements in organizational structure; (ii) capacity strengthening for staff; (iii) increased
macro and micro-metering; (iv) roll-out of actions to reduce non-revenue water reduction actions; and
(v) improvements in the utility’s commercial cadaster. Special committees were set up to define technical
specifications for laboratory equipment and micro-metering. The National Water Utility of Uruguay also shared
their experience in the implementation of micro-metering programs and the technical specifications that they
used.

The utilities implemented strategic actions. SAMEEP and SAT introduced structural changes in their
organization. The utilities developed technical specifications for the procurement of micro-metering and lab
equipment. In the first phase in 2015 (under the subsequent Plan Belgrano Project), around 40,000 micro-
meters were supplied to the operators of Chaco, Tucuman, Salta, Misiones, Corrientes and Catamarca. The
utilities also received laboratory equipment at their central levels.

Operational outcomes for the service providers were significant. With operational support and accompanying
tariff increases in 2016, the Chaco and Catamarca service providers showed improvements in key

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



performance indicators. For Chaco, the collection ratio increased from 46 percent (2013) to 68 percent
(2018) and NRW decreased from 45 percent (2013) to 37 percent (2016), before increasing again to 58
percent in 2018 due to the utility’s increased coverage area. SAMEEP recorded improvements in its micro-
metering indicators, going from 48 percent in 2013 to 52 percent in 2019 after 12,000 micro-meters were
installed at the end of 2018. SAT was provided laboratory equipment and training, which resulted in the
improvement of bacteriological water quality compliance from 78 percent to 88 percent. SAT also
demonstrated significant improvements in terms of: (i) reducing NRW from 50 percent in 2015 to 44 percent
in 2018; and (ii) increasing micro-metering from 3.2 percent in 2013 to 12.2 percent in 2018. However, the
increase in its collection ratio was small, from 74 percent in 2013 to 75 percent in 2018. Aguas de Catamarca
showed a significant jump in its collection ratio, from 57 percent in 2014 to 91 percent in 2016.

The utility indicator dashboards implemented under the project laid the groundwork for the development of
Management and Results Plans (MRPs) under the subsequent Plan Belgrano Project, which targeting the
same utilities. Under the 2017 National Water and Sanitation Plan, the MRPs were to function as the planning
and performance monitoring instrument that would drive the turnaround of utilities at the national level. The
MRPs were expected to guide utilities toward more effective decision-making by: (i) establishing key
performance indicators and improvement plans; and (ii) identifying investment needs and activities to achieve
set targets. In consultation with their respective provincial regulators, the service providers prepare MRPs,
which are approved by the provincial and federal sector authorities. As of the ICR preparation date, eight
MRPs have been prepared and six have been approved between the relevant water utilities, the relevant
ministry within the province, and the National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation. The IDB is
supporting MRP development in other regions. It is also assisting the development of a digital National WSS
Benchmarking Information System that is fully compatible with the MRPs, with the goal of helping collect and
systematize utility performance data from the MRPs. These ongoing activities help ensure the sustainability
of the MRPs.

One risk to sustainability is SAMEEP’s financial deficit, which has been fully covered by transfers from the
central and provincial levels, except in 2016 and 2017 during Argentina’s macroeconomic crisis. These
transfers have enabled SAMEEP’s operations to remain viable but have created an increasingly dependent
relationship. The financial transfers are not subject to a transparent planning exercise, hence there is no
concrete principles underlying the amount and timing of the subsidies, which present a risk for the
sustainability of the activities supported by the Project. Nonetheless, it may be expected that the transfers will
continue given the importance of the Chaco region and the social commitment to improve services to its
population. SAMEEP developed an MRP in 2018 that establishes objectives and measures to improve its
longer-term financial and operational capacity. The MRP has been endorsed at the national and provincial
levels. Moreover, a Participation, Transfer and Maintenance Works Agreement (PTA) was signed on April 4,
2012 between the Province of el Chaco and the Central Government, through which the Province made a
commitment to provide adequate physical and financial resources to ensure the maintenance and operation
of the infrastructure during and beyond the project’s lifetime.

At the time of ICR preparation, SAMEEP’s key operational and financial indicators remained weak (i.e., its
high NRW, low collection ratio and low cost-recovery), although there have been some improvements in
these areas. SAMEEP has the technical capacity to operate the systems financed under the project and has
allocated resources accordingly. However, despite the efforts to increase tariffs, SAMEEP’s operational
deficit has increased in the past years, since prevailing tariffs do not cover operation and maintenance costs.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



                            On balance, based on the foregoing evidence on significant improvements, while recognizing risks particularly
                            with SAMEEP, this review finds that the project has substantially achieved the third objective of increasing the
                            sustainability of water supply in the NGR.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 4
                            Objective
                            To increase the sustainability of urban drainage services in the Norte Grande Region of Argentina

                            Rationale
                            The PAD did not provide specific outcome indicators to measure the sustainability of drainage
                            services. Hence, the ICR (pages 21-22) made a qualitative assessment of the achievement of this
                            objective. There were no activities in the project that were aimed specifically at improving the sustainability of
                            drainage services. The only directly related activity is the signature of a Participation, Transfer and
                            Maintenance Works Agreement (PTA) on May 20, 2013. To achieve technical sustainability, the urban
                            drainage sub-projects were placed within the framework of the municipality’s Yerba Buena and Faldeo
                            Drainage Master Plans. However, the master plan’s recommendations were not followed when the sub-
                            projects were implemented. Given the recent and large population growth, rapid urbanization and increased
                            run-off, there is a risk that the capacity of the existing Yerba Buena channel would not be adequate to receive
                            and conduct the waters collected from the sub-projects during high run-off events. The municipality has a
                            specific unit charged with the task of system operation and maintenance. However, the municipality’s
                            allocated budget and limited personnel can only respond to minor damages, despite the municipality’s
                            support for regular solid waste collection to reduce the risk of blockages. These underlying factors work
                            against ensuring the sustainability of the system.

                            Due to lack of evidence, this review finds that the project's achievement is modest with respect to the fourth
                            objective of increasing the sustainability of urban drainage services in the NGR.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For the first and second objective, the project achieved substantial success in improving access to water and
                            drainage services in areas in the NGR that were selected for implementation of four subprojects. For the third

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



  objective, the project also made substantial achievements in helping to ensure the sustainability of water
  supply, by developing a culture of utility self-assessment based on key performance indicators and
  associated targets, which was implemented through indicator dashboards in four utilities of the NGR. Due to
  lack of evidence, achievement of the fourth objective was modest. Overall, the project's efficacy in achieving
  its objectives is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR conducted an Efficiency Analysis (Annex 4), which delineated transparently all the assumptions related
to costs and benefits with and without the project, and was methodologically sound. The key findings are
presented below.

Economic analysis. An economic analysis was not conducted at the time of project appraisal pending selection
of the sub-projects for implementation. At appraisal, the Bank team focused on developing the methodology to
be used for screening and selecting potential sub-projects. The project’s Operational Manual (OM) delineated
the methodology, which required the application of benefit-cost analysis and returns that are higher than 10
percent. The OM also included a methodology for the financial assessment of water providers. The ICR
conducted an economic analysis of the subprojects that were implemented, following the benefit-cost approach
and 10 percent discount rate stipulated by the OM. The ICR also conducted sensitivity analysis based on the 6
percent discount rate in current use by the World Bank for these types of projects, as well as a financial
evaluation of the water provider SAMEEP.

For the four sub-projects, the range of of economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) were from 11.8 percent to
12.7 percent, with a weighted average EIRR of 12.2 percent. This ICR Review concurs with the ICR (page 23)
that these results were “on the conservative side as additional benefits that will come from the interventions
were not included, such as: environmental and health improvement, economic growth from secure water
provision and higher resilience to rainfall events.”

Financial Analysis. The ICR’s financial assessment of SAMEEP as the water provider brought out the current
weaknesses and risky vulnerability of its financial position. SAMEEP has been dependent on public funds (local
and federal) for financing its investment needs and recurrent expenditures. With the Government’s tightening
fiscal constraints during the past several years, tariff increases became necessary. A fourfold tariff increase was
implemented from 2014 to 2018, which amounted to about 63 percent increase in real terms. The added
revenues, however, were offset by the 68 percent increase in expenditures. Cost recovery levels have basically
remained stagnant at 57 percent in 2010 and 55 percent in 2017. This difficult overall situation only worsened as
the volume of public funds decreased while the operating deficits persisted. Thus, SAMEEP’s weak financial
position places a high risk on the viability and long-term sustainability of the works financed by the Project. This
risk is being mitigated through comprehensive technical assistance as part of developing MRPs. Through the
IPPs, the indigenous communities are also being encouraged to build ownership of the new systems and
provided tools for adequate maintenance and operation.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



Administrative and Operational Efficiency, The project required three closing date extensions and had a total
implementation time period of 9 years. ions. An important part of this delay is the framework nature of the
Project that allowed for defining the selected subprojects the project had been appraised and
approved. Preparation of the first sub-projects took about three years, including the preparation of all the
required environmental and social aspects. According to the ICR (page 23), other factors that contributed to
delays included the following: (i) the strong appreciation of the US dollar vis-à-vis the Argentinian peso; (ii)
disagreements over price index calculations, which hindered the issuance of work certificates; (iii) the lack of
counterpart funding, which resulted in work stoppage between July 2015 and March 2016; (iv) the change in
project management; (v) delays in implementing works due to unexpected inclement weather; and (v)
procurement delays to ensure the quality of bidding documents or works contract amendments. Disbursements
were low during the project’s initial years, reaching only 12 percent in 2014 (i.e., 4 years after project approval),
and increasing only in 2016 (i.e., one year before the original 2017 closing date. At closing, the disbursement
rate reached 98 percent.

Taking into account the relatively modest EIRRs, the continuing weaknesses and risky outlook in SAMEEP's
financial position, and the significant operational and administrative delays that led to implementation of almost a
decade, the project's efficiency is rated modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        94.00
 ICR Estimate                                                12.20
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



The relevance of objectives is high. The project's overall efficacy in achieving its objectives is substantial, while
noting that three of the objectives were rated substantial while the fourth one was rated modest. The project's
efficiency is modest. On the basis of these sub-ratings, the project's overall outcome is moderately satisfactory.

As indicated in Section 2(a) above, a split rating was not carried out because te project was designed as a
framework for financing subprojects that were to be specifically defined on the ground during implementation.
Hence, the modifications at the 2015 restructuring involved: (i) sharpening the definition of the outcome
indicators to correspond more closely with the subprojects that were eventually selected; and (ii) better defining
the Institutional and other indicator targets in a manner that did not lower the ambition of the project.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Ensuring the sustainability of access to WSS services will require the continued involvement and
commitment of the service providers. Risks to sustainability can be mitigated as follows:

For the water sub-projects, SAMEEP’s operational and financial performance needs to be improved and
maintained. SAMEEP’s financial weaknesses place the sustainability of the works at a significant risk,
despite the PTA that was signed between the province and the UCPyPFE at the time of sub-project
selection, which allocated budgetary resources for the maintenance of works financed by the project. In
particular, the Wichi sub-project will require significant resources to operate and maintain the water intake
point at the Bermejo river to ensure the water treatment plant’s continuous operation. Operational risks can
be mitigated by SAMEEP’s approved MRP and its continued involvement in the program.

The community’s commitment and ability to maintain the systems are important factors in ensuring the
sustainability of the decentralized water solutions. Risks to the community’s involvement could be mitigated
by the continuous implementation of the IPP under the follow-on Plan Belgrano Project.

For the drainage sub-projects, risks could be mitigated by allocating adequate resources to maintain the
drainage channels and find solutions to high peak run-offs. These are being assessed in the follow-on Plan
Belgrano Project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR (page 29) acknowledges that although the project’s development objectives responded directly
  to the goals of the Government’s NGR Development Program, the project’s design (i.e., consisting of a
  framework for sub-projects yet to be defined) resulted in low disbursements in the initial years and the
  first investments materializing only three years after loan effectiveness. The lack of strong technical
  studies, coupled with low technical capacity at the provincial level to address contract amendments,

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



  affected the implementation timeline. Risks and mitigation measures (e.g., close Bank reviews prior to
  issuing its no objections in order to ensure quality of the designs and documentation) were properly
  identified during project preparation; however, the low capacity at local and provincial level were not
  mitigated adequately. These caused important delays as technical designs usually lacked quality and had
  to be reviewed frequently. T Moreover, macro-economic risks, although difficult to predict, were not
  properly assessed at entry and when the serious risks did materialize, they caused significant delays in
  project implementation. Coordination and cooperation between the Bank and IDB teams were adequate
  and flowed smoothly, thus minimizing the risk of overlapping interventions particularly during the phase of
  identifying the sub-projects. This helped ensure complementarity between Bank- and IDB-financed
  subprojects.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (pages 29-30) report that the Bank team conducted 13 implementation support missions, during
 which it proactively identified constraints to implementation and provided guidance on appropriate
 solutions. The team also held frequent technical and field visits. The mission’s aide-memoires “were
 informative, clear, and timely, and identified the issues that needed to be addressed before the next
 mission” and the “…solutions [were] sought in close collaboration with the PIU, provinces, concerned
 government ministries and World Bank management.” The Bank promoted knowledge exchange through
 joint workshops among PIUs, including other teams responsible for strengthening of social and
 environmental, safeguard and fiduciary capacities.

 The Bank supervision team addressed proactively the technical design issues that arose during project
 implementation due to the overall technical complexity of the project and the low technical capacity at the
 provincial level. There were delays at the Bank’s no objection stage due to the inadequate quality of the
 technical designs and of contract amendments that were presented to the Bank. These had to be reviewed
 and revised several times to ensure that they meet the necessary standards. For example, the Presidente
 Roca-Pampa del Indio subproject, the Bank supervision team made recommendations for improvement but
 the PIU was slow to incorporate them. In the Wichi subproject, the Bank team reviewed the hydraulic
 model heavily and found it to be insufficient, and the review process plus the PIU administrative delays
 resulted in an implementation delay of two years. According to the ICR (paragraph 61), “the original
 designs for both sub-projects were flawed from the beginning and better technical due diligence from the
 Bank (preparation) team could have been provided at that stage to avoid modifications after
 implementation.”

 There were no counterpart funds allocated to the project between July 2015 and March 2016, which
 impeded the issuance of work certificates and eventually led to work stoppage in all sub-projects between
 October 2015 and March 2016. The Government resolved this issue by signing an Emergency and Needs
 Decree on November 26, 2015, which reassigned the necessary funds back to the project.

 The transition arrangements during the three changes in the Task Team Leader could have been better
 organized; for example, there should have been a handover mission between the last TTL and the new one
 to enable the latter’s faster familiarization with the project. Moreover, the voluminous project

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



 documentation should have been better organized and shared between the outgoing and incoming teams,
 since the heavy dependence on online archives led to supervision inefficiencies during the first months of
 the incoming TTL.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD’s results framework (RF) had shortcomings related to the adequacy and definition of indicators.
 There was no PDO-level indicator to monitor the achievements of urban drainage sub-projects. The
 indicators for measuring improvements in the sustainability of water services were not properly defined.
 However, during implementation, several adjustments were made to the RF to better align the indicators
 with the project’s interventions. This eventually led to an adequate number of indicators that were linked to
 each component’s activities. Nonetheless, a major shortcoming remained since the RF was never adjusted
 to add an indicator for monitoring the sustainability of urban drainage services; moreover, some indicators
 and targets were not properly defined.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIU of the Coordinating Unit for Programs and Projects with External Financing (UCPyPFE) was
  responsible for monitoring project performance. In addition, the participating municipalities and service
  providers also had obligations to report data on specific indicators. Biannual reports were submitted to
  the Bank For the purposes of monitoring progress and responding to any problems that have emerged,
  biannual reports were submitted to the Bank. The ICR (page 28) indicated that “an impact evaluation
  was to be undertaken jointly with the Roads Bank Team to evaluate the impact of transport and water
  investments in the Province of Chaco (PR No. 3 and Pampa del Indio Water Project). The baseline data
  was collected in 2015, but further assessment was suspended in 2020.”



c. M&E Utilization
  The RF served as an instrument for aligning the diverse set of project stakeholders with their respective
  project activities. The borrower’s own ICR indicates that the biannual progress implementation and
  financial reports helped to closely monitor the ongoing activities, and to identify and address issues that
  could cause delays. The reports also helped significantly in serving as the basis for structuring Bank
  supervision missions, which required working across different teams.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



  On the basis of the shortcoming related to the definition and adequacy of some indicators, and the
  suspension of the planned impact evaluation, which is highly important for a project of this type, M&E is
  rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project, which was assigned an Environmental Category B, triggered the following World Bank
   safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12) and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). According to the ICR (pages 28-29), environmental screening was
   applied to all sub-projects and only those with an Environmental Category of B or C were made eligible for
   financing under the project. Given its framework nature, the Government prepared an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF), which included an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
   (IPPF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF included an analysis of baseline conditions
   and delineated technical guidelines, procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and
   managing the potential environmental and social risks and impacts that could occur during project
   implementation. PIU was responsible for overseeing the implementation of the environmental and social
   safeguards, which making use of local supervision firms for day-to-day implementation of works under each
   sub-project. Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) were applied to the water sub-projects during implementation.

   Compliance with safeguards was consistently rated between Satisfactory and Moderately Satisfactory
   throughout the project implementation period, according to the ICR (page 29). However, the rating was
   Moderately Unsatisfactory as project closing due to two issues. One of the issues, related to the
   implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), has been resolved prior to ICR preparation. More
   specifically, the Government's relocation and compensation to an affected person did not follow the
   procedures of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). According to the ICR (paragraph 64), "the case
   was taken to the Argentine judicial system and it has been resolved with a compensation that has been
   deemed satisfactory by the affected party." The Bank is continuing to monitor the resolution of other issue
   related to the implementation of the IPP for the second phase of the Wichi sub-project. According to the
   ICR (paragraph 63), the IPP made commitments to beneficiary communities for results to be obtained in two
   phases. However, at project closing, there was uncertainty regarding the financing source to complete both
   the second phase and the IPP commitments. However, on April 16, 2020, the subsequent Plan Belgrano
   Project was extended until June 30, 2022, thus "providing assurance that the works will be completed, with
   an expected additional 13,200 indigenous beneficiaries and fulfilling the IPP agreements."

   No issues during implementation were reported regarding the safeguards on physical cultural resources and
   natural habitats.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project’s financial management (FM) performance ratings were either Satisfactory or Moderately
   Satisfactory throughout the project implementation period, according to the ICR (page 29). The project’s
   FM arrangements were adequate and complied with Bank requirements. The Bank received regular
   Interim Financial Reports, which were reviewed and found acceptable. Private firms carried out the audits
   of the project’s financial statements. The Bank received audit reports on time, which were reviewed and
   found acceptable. There were no accountability issues throughout the project period. The Bank found as
   acceptable the final audit report for the period from January 1, 2019 to the closing date, including the grace
   period.

   Procurement. Procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory at project closing due to delays
   that stemmed mainly from technical issues with the proposed designs, the lengthy review and quality
   assurance processes, and the slow approval process in the last year of implementation. The bidding
   processes themselves went generally smooth and complied with Bank norms, according to the ICR (page
   29).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following main lessons were provided by the ICR (pages 30-31) and are presented here with
some adaptation by IEG:

Project design and preparation needs to explore partnership options with local NGOs and be
guided by opportunities to involve the local community in a participative process. The
effectiveness of the project’s interventions was enhanced by active engagement with project
beneficiaries and NGO partnerships. The implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
underlined the importance of early engagement with project beneficiaries. For example, citizen

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



consultations at the time of modifying sub-project technical designs resulted in (i) a higher number of
final beneficiaries and (ii) the implementation of practical, on-site solutions (such as rainwater
harvesting systems) that may not have been considered otherwise. Partnering with the local NGO
Fundación Gran Chaco was an important factor in the IPP’s implementation success. The NGO had
thorough knowledge and engagement with the indigenous communities in the project area, which
were key for guiding and building SAMEEP’s capacity in managing social processes.

Improving the sustainability of water services involves a long process that requires patient
interventions at the levels of both the service provider and the overall enabling environment.
While the project’s main investments were for infrastructure development, the Bank team included
an institutional strengthening program during project design, which set the basis for a more
comprehensive approach for utility improvement in the subsequent Plan Belgrano Project. Focusing
on the water service provider is important but improvements in the enabling environment also need
to be introduced in order to achieve sustainability of services. Improved coordination among the
national, federal and local level stakeholders needs to be established to ensure more efficient
allocation of resources. Finally, the preparation and implementation of Management and Results
Plans can also serve as a useful instrument for facilitating commitment among these different
levels.

For framework projects to be efficient, the eligibility criteria and methodology of intervention
needs to be clear and the list of potential investments need to be sufficiently ready. Although
going forward with a framework project made sense at the time, the lack of a sufficiently ready list of
potential investments led to significant delays and risks during project implementation. Technical
studies were lacking, and technical capacity was low at the provincial level to address contract
amendments, thus causing implementation bottlenecks. In the future, the Bank could utilize funds
from other related projects or from trust funds to finance sufficiently ready and technically adequate
pre-investment designs. Alternatively, contracts could be undertaken under the design and build
modality, rather than on the usual works contract.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR is clear, logically organized, and well written. It placed a strong emphasis on providing a significant
amount of detailed quantitative evidence to support its findings and ratings. The efficiency analysis (Annex 4)
was thorough, particularly with respect to the financial situation of SAMEEP. The inclusion of maps and photos
from the subprojects in Annex 1 was very useful. The ICR focused adequately on accountability and was
candid about the project's shortcomings, particularly with respect to the long implementation delays and their


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Norte Grande Water Infrastructure (P120211)



various causes. Apart from some repetitiveness and minor drafting errors, as well as the excessive length at 31
pages (more than double the suggested 15 pages), the ICR was well prepared overall.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
