     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022166

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P127759                                  IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Armenia                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82670,IBRD-87860                    30-Jun-2017                                         31,030,974.87

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 22-May-2013                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           31,735,008.16                                              0.00

 Actual                                       31,659,236.60                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Joachim                    J. W. van Holst             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Vandercasteelen            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) for the Irrigation System Enhancement Project (ISEP) were (i) to
   reduce the amount of energy used and to improve the irrigation conveyance efficiency in targeted irrigation
   schemes; and (ii) to improve the availability and reliability of important sector data and information for
   decision-makers and other stakeholders.

   The PDOs are the same in the legal agreement and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD).


                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



   For the ICR review, the PDOs are parsed out into four objectives:

        1. to reduce the amount of energy used in targeted irrigation schemes,
        2. to improve the irrigation conveyance efficiency in targeted irrigation schemes,
        3. to improve the availability of important sector data and information for decision-makers and other
           stakeholders,
        4. to improve the reliability of important sector data and information for decision-makers and other
           stakeholders.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Irrigation System Enhancement (appraisal cost: US$33.1 million; actual cost: US$33.3
   million). This component aimed to lower the operation and maintenance (O&M) needs of the conveyance
   section of selected irrigation schemes by supporting the following three activities. First, four pump-based
   irrigation schemes (Baghramyan-Norakert, Geghardalich, Kaghtsrashen, and Meghri) were to be converted
   to gravity-based irrigation schemes. Second, in 13 pump-based irrigation schemes different from the four
   above, outlet (and other) canals conveying the pumped water to secondary and tertiary canals were to be
   upgraded (‘rehabilitated’). Third, in the Geghardalich scheme, the height of the reservoir’s dam was to be
   raised.

   Component 2. Management Information (appraisal cost: US$1.7 million; actual cost: US$0.9 million). This
   component aimed to improve the information available for decision making by supporting the following three
   activities. First, technical investigations would analyze the O&M and extraordinary maintenance (EM) needs
   of the irrigation systems. Second, a technical audit of different irrigation institutions supported by the project
   (see below) was conducted. Third, the project would install a supervisory control and data acquisition
   system (SCADA).

   Component 3. Support to Project Management and Water User Associations (WUAs) (appraisal cost:
   US$2.7 million; actual cost: US$2.9 million). This component aimed to support project management and
   strengthen the capacity of the Support Group (SG), staff, and executive bodies of WUAs.

   Note that the appraisal costs for each component above were derived from paragraph 32 in the PAD and
   included contingencies. The actual costs for each component were based on paragraph 15 of the ICR and
   not Annex 3 in the ICR.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The original total project cost estimate in the PAD was US$37.5 million. The estimated total
   actual cost as shown in the ICR Data Sheet was US$31.7 million.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



   Financing. The IBRD committed through a Loan Agreement to finance US$30 million of the project cost
   which was increased by US$2 million through Additional Financing (AF). The ICR (Data Sheet) reports that
   the actual IBRD disbursement totaled US$31.7 million.

   Borrower Contribution. According to paragraph 33 in the PAD the Government of Armenia (GoA)
   committed to contribute US$7.5 million to the project, but the ICR (Data Sheet) reports, without explanation,
   that the GoA did not contribute.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 22, 2013, and became effective on July 15, 2013. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was held on November 16, 2015. The original date of closure was June 30, 2018; but was
   changed several times as a result of several project restructurings. As a result, the actual closing date was
   December 31, 2019, i.e., two years after the original closing date.

   Restructuring. During the second project restructuring in November 2017, the project accommodated the
   request of the GoA for an AF of US$2 million for the project to rehabilitate the tertiary irrigation infrastructure
   of the Baghramyan-Norakert scheme. It would also allow more time to finalize infrastructure work in the
   Geghardalich and Kaghtsrashen schemes after local communities raised their concerns about the social
   and environmental impacts of the infrastructure works (see section 8).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The agricultural sector is the main livelihood provider for rural households in Armenia. As such, productivity
growth in agriculture plays an important role in rural development and poverty reduction. Irrigated
agriculture is the dominant agricultural production system but its full potential in terms of acreage has not
been achieved. Moreover, the delivery of irrigated water by irrigation institutions from the intake water
source to the end-users (farmers) is inefficient. First, the irrigation infrastructure dated from the Soviet
Union period. The Water Supply Agency (WSA) managing the primary irrigation canals had low cost-
recovery rates because of the high energy costs of pumping irrigation water into primary outlet canals and
the high O&M costs of the irrigation canals. Second, the deteriorated state of the irrigation infrastructure
also reduces the irrigation conveyance efficiency, thus limiting the amount of irrigated water available for
end-users. Third, while Armenia had already introduced WUAs as legal entities to manage secondary and
tertiary water canals, these groups require continued capacity-building and empowerment support. Finally,
the different institutions responsible for water delivery – the Water Committee (WC but earlier referred to as
State Committee for Water Management (SCWM)) of the Ministry of Territorial Administration and
Infrastructures and the Ministry of Energy, Infrastructures and Natural Resources (MOEINR) – lacked
information and accurate data on the financial sustainability needed for efficient and effective decision
making in the management of irrigation schemes of Armenia.

The PDOs were relevant to the principles outlined by the Government of the Republic of Armenia (GoA) in
its ‘5-year programme of the GoA for 2019 – 2023’. More specifically, the GoA aims to modernize the
management of its irrigation systems and make irrigation water more widely available (‘as common as
electricity’) by replacing mechanical irrigation systems with new gravity-based technologies. Such an
upgrade of the irrigation infrastructure is complemented with efforts to introduce technologies that reduce


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



               water losses (for example, drip irrigation), support for legislative and institutional reform in the management
               of irrigation systems, and collection of important data needed for improved water management.

               The PDOs were also relevant to the engagement of the World Bank in Armenia, as reflected in the most
               recent Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2017) and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2019 –
               2025). The SCD identified the outdated and uneconomical irrigation system as one of the main constraints
               holding back the transformation of the agricultural sector towards a modern commercial sector and more
               broadly a structural transformation. As a result, the third focus area of the CPF (Sustainable Management
               of Environmental & Natural Resources) drew attention to improved management of water resources,
               enhanced water security and climate resilience, and more sustainable energy consumption in, among
               others, irrigation systems. The CPF (paras 50 and 83), moreover, noted a shift in the World Bank approach
               from supporting the supply of irrigation water to bolstering the cost recovery and financial sustainability of
               irrigation schemes partly driven by the crowding-in of other development partners which focused on water
               supply issues in the sector. As such, the PDOs of the ISEP were aligned with both the CPF objectives and
               those of the development partners.

               The PDOs were also relevant to addressing the higher-level development challenge of the low productivity
               of the (irrigated) agricultural sector in Armenia. In particular, the project aimed to support different
               institutions responsible for the delivery of irrigation water by reducing their O&M costs and improving their
               access to information needed for decision making in irrigation management. As the focus was on water
               delivery, it addressed three of the four challenges in water delivery identified in the first paragraph of this
               section. However, while the activities under component 3 supported WUAs, institutional strengthening was
               not included in the PDOs. Hence, the ISEP did not explicitly address one of the main identified challenges
               to water delivery. According to the ICR (para 77), this decision was deliberate and requested by the GoA.
               The WUA-support activities were envisioned to improve data availability and reliability for decision-makers
               in the irrigation sector, but general capacity-building activities do not necessarily result in improved
               availability or reliability of important information. Nonetheless, the PDOs were clearly defined and had an
               appropriate level of ambition. Therefore, the Relevance of the ISEP’s objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: To reduce the amount of energy used in targeted irrigation schemes

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. By converting the existing pump-based irrigation schemes into gravity-based irrigation
                             schemes, the project sought to reduce the high energy usage of the four targeted irrigation schemes. More
                             precisely, the project aimed at reducing the electricity cost needed to pump the water from the water source

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



into the primary outlet canals. The use of gravity-based irrigation schemes that do not consume electricity
was a logical solution to avoid this pumping cost, under the assumption that the gravity-based irrigation
schemes have an equal water-supplying capacity compared to the existing pump-based schemes. The
replacement of pump-based irrigation schemes by gravity irrigation schemes was expected to result in the
shutdown of pumping stations, that would be removed or decommissioned. Thus, in the medium term, WSAs
would be able to reduce their O&M cost by relying on gravity rather than electric power.

Outputs. The ICR reports one intermediate results indicator that is an output indicator relevant for the first
objective of the project:

      One (1) pumping station shut down, far below the original target of four. According to Annex 1 (p43),
       only the Meghri gravity scheme was fully operational, and its shutting down of pumping stations can
       be attributed to the project.

Outcome. The outcome indicator reported in Annex 1 of the ICR related to the first objective is the following:

      3.7 GWh of energy saved annually in operating the irrigation system, far below both the original target
       of 38 GWh and the revised target of 36.8 GWh for the four schemes. The project therefore achieved
       only 10 percent of the revised target for energy savings.

Discussion. At the time of the ICR, the project was unsuccessful in converting the four targeted pump-based
irrigation schemes into gravity-based irrigation schemes. Only the conversion of the Meghri scheme was
successful. However, this achievement was only partial, as the pumps were required to be maintained and
functional during the drier moment of the production season. The construction works of the Geghardalich
Scheme were not finalized because the project failed to formally settle the complaints by one of the
communities in the upstream area of the irrigation scheme. The conversion in the Kaghtsrashen Scheme was
finalized but not yet operatorial: the infrastructure failed several pressure tests caused by leakages in the
cheaper but lower-quality construction material. The Baghramyan-Norakert scheme was also not operational.
Its inclusion into the project was questionable because both the gravity pumps and the tertiary delivery
system were dysfunctional for several years before the project started.

During the writing of the ICR review, the World Bank team provided an update on the status of the conversion
of the three remaining pump-based irrigation schemes to gravity-based irrigation schemes. In a follow-up
communication, the ICR team indicated that “the Kaghtsrashen irrigation scheme was declared operational [in
May 2020]. It now generates energy savings as envisaged at project stage”. The other two schemes have not
been finalized, but commitments have been made (see section 7). The saving of energy costs in the
Kaghtsrashen scheme amounts to 8 GWh. This brings the total amount of energy saved in 2020 to 11.7
GWh, which is still only one third of the revised target.

The rating for the Efficacy with which objective 1 was achieved is therefore Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)




Objective
Objective 2: To improve the irrigation conveyance efficiency in targeted irrigation schemes

Rationale
Theory of change. The project sought to increase conveyance efficiency and reduce water losses by
rehabilitating outlet (and other) canals conveying the pumped water from the water intake source to the
secondary and tertiary irrigation network. The assumption was that if less of the total water pumped into the
outlet canals was lost due to leakage of seeping, more water would become available for irrigation users. This
would allow the size of irrigated land to increase, including land previously (but not currently) irrigated or land
that previously could not access irrigated water. A smooth delivery of water from the main canal to end-users
assumed that secondary and tertiary distribution canals were functional so that the water from the outlet
canals would effectively reach the end-users.

Outputs. The ICR reports four intermediate results indicators that are relevant output indicators for the
second objective of the project:

      57 km of outlet canals receiving water from rehabilitated pumping stations, exceeding the target of 52
       km. The label of this output indicator is confusing. In the 13 irrigation schemes where the outlets (and
       other) canals conveying the pumped water to the distribution canals were upgraded, the pumping
       stations themselves were not rehabilitated. Only the canals were rehabilitated (under component 1).
       An indicator with the label “km of rehabilitated distribution canals through an outlet” would have been
       clearer.
      9,537 hectares provided with improved irrigation and drainage service, substantially below the original
       target of 12,932 hectares. The rehabilitated outlet canals contributed 8,851 ha and the Meghri gravity
       scheme contributed 686 ha.
      8,286 water users provided with improved services, substantially below the original target of 12,336.
      331 female water users provided with improved services, substantially below the original target of 493
       km.

Outcome. The outcome indicator reported in Annex 1 of the ICR related to the second objective is:

      21.44 Cubic Meter (m3) water losses reduced in rehabilitated canals, slightly below the revised target
       of 23.58 m3. Note that the original indicator was ‘lost liters per second per 100 meters in the targeted
       irrigation schemes’ with the original target of 0.71 liters per second per 100 meters. The indicator was
       simplified during the MTR and the measurement unit changed to million cubic meters. To measure this
       indicator, the ICR measured “the difference between the amount of water to be pumped before and
       after rehabilitation for irrigating the command area without changing the crops patterns or intensity.” It
       used data that were provided by the borrower, which were from 2018. Hence, the value reported in the
       ICR on what was actually achieved at completion in December 2019 was outdated by at least 12
       months.

Discussion. The project nearly achieved the outcome of reducing the amount of water lost in the
rehabilitated canals. At the same time, the project delivered more rehabilitated outlet canals as output than
targeted. Hence, while more canals had been rehabilitated (output) than anticipated, less water was saved
(outcome). In a follow-up communication, the ICR team explained that because the rehabilitated canals could




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



reach a larger command area (8,851 ha instead of 8,537 ha), more water has been pumped into the canals,
resulting in higher absolute numbers of conveyance losses and lower savings in water.

It is also unclear why the ICR reports three output indicators related to improved service delivery. There are
no project activities that support the improvement of irrigation and drainage services in the project. The ICR
(para 11) explicitly mentions that the project “intently focused on reducing costs of water delivery […] and less
directly on improving service delivery”. Moreover, improved irrigation and drainage service delivery does not
lead to improved efficiency, it is the result thereof. It is further unclear what the project considered to be
improved services and how the improvement was measured. Finally, the project did not achieve improved
service delivery, but even if it had done so, it cannot be attributed to the project and there was no impact on
conveyance efficiency. This review concluded that the efficacy assessment of the second objective should not
consider output indicators related to service delivery.

The rating for the Efficacy with which objective 2 was achieved is therefore Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3: To improve the availability of important sector data and information for decision-makers and
other stakeholders

Rationale
Theory of change. The project sought to improve decision making in irrigation management by improving the
availability of important sector data and information used by decision-makers and other stakeholders. The
project was, however, not clear on what type of sector data was important and who the decision-makers were
who would make use of the data.

Outputs. Annex 1 reports three PDO indicators and several intermediate results indicators related to the
availability of sector data and information. However, this review did not consider all of these indicators in the
assessment of the efficacy of the third objective. First, two of the original PDO indicators in the PAD (‘Data
about O&M and EM used by SCWM, WSAs and WUAs for decision making’ and ‘Technical audit of irrigation
agencies used by MOEINR and SCWM for decision making’) were later merged into one PDO indicator
([Data] entered into a data base to be used for budgetary and investment planning purposes). However, this
indicator refers to an achievement on an output and not does not reflect an objective. The ICR review,
therefore, considered this composite indicator as one output indicator. Second, not all of the seven
intermediate results indicators listed in Annex 1 were directly related to the availability of data. Therefore, a
selected overview of the achievements on this review’s choice of relevant output results indicators is provided
here:

      [Data] entered into data base to be used for budgetary and investment planning purposes, compared
       to the target of data used for budgetary and investment planning purposes. Since the results
       framework of the ISEP only reports on the entering and not effectively using the data, IEG could not
       verify the achievement concerning the original target. In footnote 27, the ICR acknowledges that

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



       “evidence is lacking for [the technical assessments] having informed decision making”. Similarly, the
       ICR (para 46) states that “because there have not been significant investment decisions by the
       irrigation sector institutions since the completion of these technical investigations in late 2018, the
       extent to which these indicator’ targets were achieved remains inconclusive at the time of completing
       this ICR”.
      80 observation points have been equipped with installation of limnographs and water measurement
       devices for the SCADA system, achieving the target of 71 observation points. However, at the time of
       the ICR, only 50 devices were considered fully operational, and 30 devices were planned to be
       repaired (ICR footnote 29). Hence, while the project achieved the target of installing equipment, it did
       not achieve the target of operational equipment.
      The ICR also lists five output indicators that were related to the institutional strengthening of irrigation
       management institutions. As mentioned before, there was no separate PDO on institutional capacity-
       building and it is unclear how institutional capacity-building activities affected the availability of data.
       Attribution would also be difficult. As a consequence, any achievement of these indicators was not
       considered as evidence in this review on whether important irrigation information was more readily
       available to decision-makers and stakeholders.

Outcome. The outcome indicator reported in Annex 1 of the ICR to measure the third objective was:

      93 percent of WUAs having water intakes tracked by SCWM in real-time, slightly below the target of
       100 percent. The underachievement is related to the fact that one of the 15 WUAs did not install the
       SCADA system, because that irrigation system receives water from local sources and not the WSA.

The outcome indicator in the results framework and the ToC related to information activities measured
achievement on the availability of water flow data. The project, thus, lacked outcome indicators to assess
achievement on improved availability of the two other sources of information, i.e, the O&M and EM costs and
a technical audit of irrigation institutions. There is, thus, inadequate evidence that the availability of important
sector data for decision makers improved.

Discussion. The evidence presented in the ICR does not allow IEG to conclude that the project successfully
achieved the objective to improve the availability of important sector data. The project reports slight
underachievement on the availability of information on water intakes to decision-makers (i.e., WUAs) but
more worrisome is that only 50 of the reported 80 observation points were operational devices to measure
water flows. Moreover, the presented evidence is too weak to conclude that the availability of information on
budgetary and investment to decision-makers improved. The fact that information is entered in a database is
a necessary but not a sufficient condition for the information to be available to (and being used by) decision-
makers and stakeholders. This is acknowledged by the ICR (ICR para 46). Moreover, evidence is only
available on improved information on water flows, not other important data and information.

Conclusion. Because of inadequate evidence, the achievement of the third objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 4
                                                                                                       Page 8 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)




                            Objective
                            Objective 4: To improve the reliability of important sector data and information for decision-makers and other
                            stakeholders

                            Rationale
                            Theory of change. The fourth and last objective to improve the reliability of data feeds upon the third
                            objective of data availability. Reliability, as defined in the Oxford Dictionary, is “the fact of being likely to be
                            correct or true”. Hence, not only is it important to have data available, the data needs to be measured
                            accurately (and frequently). But the same argumentation of why there is an unclear link between the
                            availability of information and effective use of information applies to the reliability of data.

                            Outputs. The same output indicators listed under objective 3 on the availability of information also contribute
                            to the reliability of the data.

                            Outcome. The same outcome indicators listed under objective 3 on the availability of information also
                            contribute to the reliability of the data.

                            Discussion. The near achievement of the project on the share of WUAs having water intakes tracked by
                            SCWM in real-time is of particular relevance to data reliability. According to the ICR (para 47 to 49), the real-
                            time tracking of water flow volumes by the SCADA system is much more accurate than the traditional
                            measurement system. This has contributed to resolving disputes and conflicts between (i) WSA and WUAs,
                            (ii) WUAs and its members, and (iii) WUAs and up- or downstream water users. More accurate and timely
                            measurement of water flows is stated to have improved decision making, suggested by the more accurate fee
                            collection by WUAs and lower operational losses by the WSA. The ICR (para 50) also states that interviews
                            with SWA staff indicated that the SCADA system “helped to advance their understanding of water balance in
                            the irrigation system; thus, improving management and future investment decisions”.

                            However, there is a lack of quantitative data to conclude achievement claimed in the qualitative assessment.
                            First, there is no evidence presented in the ICR that WUAs collected more accurate fees from users to close
                            their budget gaps. Data on WUA collection fees and budget are the outcome of an effective M&E system in a
                            project supporting WUAs. Second, the ICR shows a correlation between the aggregated water supply and the
                            amount of water lost, to illustrate the effect of the introduction of the SCADA system (Figure 2 p20). While this
                            correlation could be plausible, the ICR used data for the entire WSA network in Armenia, and not the specific
                            schemes and canals supported in this project. Hence, attribution to the project is difficult. Finally, the above-
                            mentioned qualitative assessment of ‘improving […] future investment decisions’ contradicts the ICR
                            statement that “there have not been significant investment decisions by the irrigation sector institutions” (ICR
                            para 46).

                            Conclusion. Because of insufficient evidence, the achievement of the third objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The achievement of the project to reduce electricity costs from the conversion to gravity-based pumps was
  Negligible. Only one of the four schemes was (partly) converted before the project closed but another was
  converted and declared operational 5 months after the project closed. Nonetheless, the amount of electricity
  saved remains well below the project target. The project almost achieved the targets on improved
  conveyance efficiency (measured as reduced water losses) but the evidence is weak. There is also
  insufficient evidence to assess whether the third and fourth objectives on improved availability and reliability
  for decision making were achieved. These three objectives were therefore rated Modest. As a result, the
  overall efficacy is rated Modest, as, from a system perspective, little progress was made to enhance the
  effectiveness of the irrigation system in Armenia.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence


5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial efficiency

The ICR states that the project intentionally focused on reducing the O&M costs of water delivery and improving
the information for decision making in irrigation. Thus, the direct project beneficiaries were the institutions
responsible for water delivery institutions and not the end-users, that is, the farmers. The latter were expected to
indirectly benefit in the medium term from the increased water availability that the WUA could distribute among
its members. This is expected to increase agricultural productivity in the longer term (ICR para 11).

The project’s short-term benefits thus accrue to the WUA with lower O&M costs and more water available for
their users to irrigate the existing land or to incorporate new land into irrigation.

The economic analysis in the PAD is based on a with-and-without project comparison that assumed three types
of benefits: (1) savings in electricity usage from the conversion from pump-based to gravity-based irrigation
infrastructure, (2) increased intensity of production and the shift towards higher-value crops, and (3) water
delivery to parts of the command area that could previously not be served. Combining both the benefits and
costs of the project, the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) at the project appraisal was 25 percent.

The ICR updated the assumptions and unit costs in the IRR methodology used in the PAD. Most importantly, the
assessment took into account delays in the finalization of irrigation schemes and applied an optimistic and
conservative calculation approach. However, these approaches are not well explained in the ICR. The footnote
on the conservative approach mentions ‘Lessons learned from completed projects (Meghri and outlet canals)
are reflected in the other water conversion schemes’ while the footnote on the optimistic approach mentions
‘Whole additional area considered will be irrigated.’ However, using these two approaches, the ICR arrives at an
optimistic IRR of 17 percent and a conservative IRR of 14 percent.

While it is applaudable that the ICR revised the methodology to account for the operational delays in the
estimated IRR, there are some flaws in the (updated) methodology presented in the ICR. First, there is friction in
the economic analysis between the expected achievement of the TOC (to reduced electricity costs and water
loss of irrigation institutions) and the medium- or longer-run benefits to farmers included. The benefits are

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



measured at the level of the end-users, not the project beneficiaries. The medium-term benefits of increased
productivity and higher-value crop production are also uncertain to accrue. Access to irrigation water is unlikely
to automatically incentivize beneficiaries to upgrade their irrigation farming system. Because the project did not
address farm-level constraints to irrigation systems, it would be difficult to attribute the yield benefits wholly to
the project. Moreover, it unlikely that the project would have achieved these medium-term benefits during the
course of the project given the implementation delays.

Second, several assumptions on the costs and benefits in the financial analysis require more discussion and
justification. First, it is unclear how the ‘water savings from rehabilitation of outlet canals’ result in savings of
electricity usage. Similarly, it is unclear what is meant when the optimistic approach assumes that “Whole
additional area considered will be irrigated” and how that assumption is different in the conservative approach.
Second, the estimation of the relative benefits of the increased irrigated area makes a strong assumption that no
crops were cultivated on the lands without access to irrigation water (because no data were available). However,
this assumption could have been verified with the project team on the ground, using government statistics, or
using georeferenced data. Third, the analysis assumes O&M costs to be 2 percent of the investment costs for
both the converted irrigation schemes and the rehabilitated outlet canals. Without more evidence, it is difficult to
assess whether this is a realistic assumption.

Operational efficiency

The project exhibited many operational inefficiencies. Most of these examples were related to design issues
(see Section 8). Most importantly, the design of the project failed to verify the existing field conditions of the
irrigation infrastructure in the four targeted schemes. It also failed to notice the non-operational pumps and non-
existent or highly-deteriorated state of the tertiary distribution network in the Baghramyan-Norakert scheme (ICR
para 28). Insufficient involvement of and consultation with local communities at the design stage resulted in
conflicts with local communities in two schemes (see section 9). It also overstretched the implementation agency
(WSPIU) because it had to focus on resolving community issues (ICR para 80). The efficient implementation of
the project was further constrained by some of the – according to the ICR – well-intended course changes that
turned out to be less effective than the original design. Most notably, the decision to replace the metallic/steel
pipes with locally produced glass-reinforced plastic (GRP) pipes was detrimental to the operational efficiency in
the Kaghtsrashen scheme. While GRP is a cheaper material, it does not perform well in high elevations, slopes,
and for long-distance pipes; and the local contractor was unaware of the construction requirements when
installing these types of pipes (ICR para 82). After failure on the first pressure test, the contractor replaced the
leaking pipeline joints at its own expenses, but the infrastructure failed the second pressure test as well. As
mentioned in section 3, the Kaghtsrashen scheme became operational 6 months after the project closure (that is
in May 2020).

Conclusion

The Economic and Financial efficiency analysis is based on the returns on investments to all four irrigation
schemes. The ICR is optimistic that the GoA will finalize the construction works in the remaining three irrigation
schemes (ICR para 53). On the contrary, the ICR also argues that it is uncertain that the GoA will complete the
remaining infrastructure work (ICR para 41). Besides the confirmation from the follow-up communication that the
Kaghtsrashen scheme is operational, it remains to be seen whether the project’s objectives in the two unfinished
irrigation schemes will be achieved within 2 years. This is crucial for the project to remain economically viable.
Moreover, it is also uncertain whether the expected benefits in the Geghardalich and Baghramyan-Norakert
Gravity Schemes will fully materialize, as the benefits as the actual amount of energy saved might be different
from the current amount of energy used for water delivery. Most notably, the engagement and interest of local


                                                                                                        Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



communities in using the irrigation schemes might be uncertain. Therefore, the project’s overall efficiency when
it closed, or even 5 months thereafter – when the Kaghtsrashen scheme became operational – is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 25.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project was high to the government’s objective to modernize the irrigation sector in
Armenia and to the main elements of the World Bank’s engagement with the country. The efficacy of the project
was, however, rated modest because of conclusive evidence that the project failed to achieve the first objective
to reduce energy costs and the inconclusive evidence that information was more available and reliable and that
it was used for decision making. The evidence on improved conveyance efficiency was weak. While the analysis
of the economic efficiency in the ICR arrived at an overall assessment that its internal rate of return was just
above a discount rate of 10%, it remains uncertain whether the unfinished irrigation works would be finalized
and operational in due time. Moreover, significant construction flaws resulted in operational inefficiencies in the
Kaghtsrashen Gravity scheme that could have been avoided with the use of higher-quality material.

According to IEG’s rating guidelines, a High rating for Relevance, a Modest rating for Efficacy, and a Modest
rating of Efficiency indicates an overall Outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the development outcome is expected to be significant. At the time of the ICR, it remained
uncertain whether the non-operational irrigation schemes would be finalized soon after project closure as
further implementation delays were expected. The ICR (para 108) warns for the “limited success in the final
year of the Project to effectively address the technical and community challenges that have hamstrung the

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



functionality and completion of the Kaghtsrashen and Geghardalitch Schemes”. According to the efficiency
analysis, if the infrastructure works are not finalized within two years, the project becomes economically not
viable. The ICR (para 64) states that: “[…] it is noteworthy that further delays in Geghardalitch and
Kaghtsrashen Schemes […] beyond a two-year delay […] would sufficiently place these schemes into the
category of being economically not viable”. Moreover, local communities have shown limited interest in the
new technologies considered in the Baghramyan-Norakert Scheme. According to the ICR (para 65) “A delay
in its implementation would only further decrease the expected net benefits below the 10 percent threshold”.
Hence, based on the lack of evidence that there is a strong commitment to finalize the conversion of the
three schemes within the next two years, and that communities will make use of them, the ICR anticipated
that the economic viability of the project could fall below a 10 percent discount rate.

In a follow-up communication to IEG, the ICR team expressed optimism regarding the completion of the
Gegardalich and Baghramyan-Norakert Schemes. “First, the [GoA] agreed to mobilize funds for the
completion of the Geghardalich gravity scheme [during the 2021 season]. There are 2.9 km of pipeline
missing upstream to connect the system to the reservoir. Once done and the system has been tested
satisfactorily, it will be declared operational and pumping will not be needed anymore. Second, the
Baghramyan-Norakert Scheme has been converted from a previously pumped to a gravity-fed system.
Additional financing was used to upgrade the entire system to a piped and naturally pressurized system
which, delivers filtered water to over 85 hydrant stations. The system has been tested and declared
functional. There are minor improvements needed to improve operability of the system. The problem is on
the downstream side as [most land is bare and not cultivated]. [This] needs investment into the development
of high value orchards and vineyards including drip irrigation systems. This component will be supported
from fund of the European Union (EU) and the Agence Française de Développement (AFD).” While these
commitments are indeed promising, the realization of these investments, and the full operationalization of
these schemes two years after the projects closure, remains to be seen. Moreover, if the Geghardalich
Gravity Scheme is rehabilitated by 2021, this is a considerable time after project closure in December 2019.

The ICR identifies the crucial necessity to solve the fundamental governance issues around water-user rights
and the continued need for institutional, technical, and financial support for the project to achieve the
expected outcomes. Regarding institutional support, the outlook is also not so promising. The WC and SG
have undergone several changes in their structure and leadership, resulting in reduced resources and staff
to provide technical assistance and support to WUAs. The decision to restructure and centralize the
governance of the WUA system also reduced the trust between WUA members and management. As a
result, the level of technical and institutional support has decreased over time and that is likely to put another
constraint to the effective management of irrigation schemes.

This review assessed the risk to the project’s development outcomes as Substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the solutions proposed by the project to reduce energy costs and water losses were simple and
  sound, the design and implementation of these solutions were not sufficiently prepared and finetuned to
  the local circumstances. Especially the design of the project component to convert pump-based irrigation
  schemes to gravity-based irrigation schemes was not adapted to the local socio-economic realities and

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



complex topography. Moreover, there was a lack of a comprehensive approach that would take into
account the concerns, water needs, and expectations of the local communities in and around the
irrigation schemes. The following design flaws significantly hampered the effective and efficient
implementation of the project but could have been avoided if the project design would have paid sufficient
attention to the preparation and feasibility of the infrastructure work.

First, the feasibility of the conversion to gravity-based schemes was not properly assessed during the
design stage and lacked a comprehensive perspective taking into account seasonality and water-user
rights of outside communities. At the time of project closing, only the Meghri scheme was operational. But
even the operational Meghri scheme still relies on the use of several electric pumps during drier periods
of the irrigation season. When the river contains insufficient water, the gravity system will not be able to
deliver water to the lower-located fields of remote end-users (ICR para 41). When the Geghardalich
scheme is finalized, it is envisioned that electric pumps need to remain in standby mode to assure that all
communities (in and around the scheme) have access to sufficient water. In redesigning the
Kaghtsrashen scheme to accommodate community concerns, the construction of additional electric
pumps was needed for the scheme to become operational. Even though the need to rely on electric
pumps is a consequence of departures from the design to accommodate the concerns of local
communities, the continued dependency on electric pumps defeats the whole purpose of promoting the
conversion away from pump-based water delivery. If further questions the feasibility of gravity-based
irrigation schemes if seasonal effects and the needs of all water users in the landscape are considered.

Second and similarly, during project implementation, it was found that the pumps in the Baghramyan-
Norakert scheme had been out of operation for between 5 to 20 years. It was also found that the tertiary
distribution network (for the reliable delivery of irrigation water from the outlet canals to water users) in
this scheme was non-existent or in a state of significant disrepair (ICR para 28). This implies that the
design of the project did not assess (or verify) but rather assumed the adequate state of the irrigation
pumps as well as the tertiary distribution network. This was an error that could easily have been verified
in the field (by, for example, an appraisal team field visit at the time of site selection). The ICR (para 40
and 78) rightly questions the site selection in the design of the project.

Third, in the Kaghtsrashen scheme, the project design inaccurately assumed that steel pipes could be
replaced by cheaper GRP pipes. The ICR (para 82) notes that “the decision to use GRP piping was made
to accommodate higher than expected costs for the steel piping and to experiment with a more modern
and innovative solution”. However, because GRP pipes are more sensitive to destruction due to topology
and seismic activity, and local contractors lacked the knowledge and experience to use the materials
during construction, quality issues (e.g. the in-field lamination of pipes joints and the lack of storm-water
overflow structure) caused the scheme to fail on pressure tests at the time of completion. The implicit
assumptions made by the project that construction material can be replaced and that local contractors
are capable of doing so are another clear example of how the project design did not fully understand the
impact of local conditions and capacity on the effectiveness of the solution the project introduced.

Fourth, the design of the project handed the control of the water flow upstream to operators who would
regulate the delivery of irrigated water to irrigation farmers based on the water availability upstream of the
river. This arrangement, however, could result in substantial water losses when water is supplied to the
irrigation canals at times of low downstream water demand. The ICR (para 25) states that it is only
because the completion of the irrigation infrastructure was delayed in two schemes, that the project had
the opportunity to adjust the regulation of water streams by installing control valves along the irrigation
canals that allowed downstream users to regulate water inlets into the tertiary canal system. While this

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



  project adjustment to a demand-based water control is likely to reduce water losses, it illustrates that the
  aspect of water control was not fully thought through at the design stage.

  Finally, the construction works in the Geghardalich and Kaghtsrashen schemes had to be halted because
  of conflicts with stakeholders in and around the local communities upstream of the irrigation schemes.
  These stakeholders raised concerns about the reduced availability of water for upstream use and the
  impacts on the environment and cultural heritage. This implies that the project lacked a more
  comprehensive approach to irrigation management that looks at the entire landscape and water users
  (upstream, downstream, members, and non-members) at each site. The project also did not discuss or
  formalize the water-user rights of the different stakeholders that rely on the same water source as the one
  used for irrigation by the schemes. Ex-ante consultation with the different stakeholders in the irrigation
  scheme could have avoided these complaints and delays easily.

  Hence, most of these technical and social issues could have been anticipated or minimized during a
  detailed, field-based, comprehensive feasibility study, and a careful appraisal. Surprisingly, the ICR (para
  76) states that the project “included selecting schemes already analyzed and considered for pump to
  gravity conversion under the MCC program”. The project, however, suffered throughout its entire lifespan
  from the lack of a decent feasibility study or on-the-ground verification of the prospects for pump to
  gravity conversion. Nor did the project sufficiently involve local communities in the design despite
  safeguard impact assessments conducted (see section 10). Later in the document, the ICR reaches the
  same conclusion. When explaining the drop in economic efficiency, the ICR states (para 62) that this was
  due to “insufficient detail of the investigations/feasibility studies performed at the time of the appraisal. If
  the analysis had been performed in more detail at the earlier stages by corroborating the desk review
  with field visits, the appraisal design and economic analyses would have identified some of the
  challenges, most notably the lack of an existing reliable tertiary distribution network in Bagramyan-
  Norakert Scheme.”

  Overall there were major shortcomings on a range of issues facing the project at entry. The project’s
  quality at entry is therefore rated Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 While the above-mentioned design problems became apparent as of the first year of the project’s
 implementation, many of them proved to be hard to overcome (e.g. inappropriate selection of sites and
 construction materials). Regarding supervision, the ICR notes that the World Bank team provided close
 support including several technical supervision missions, and regularly expressed concerns about
 safeguards and technical design issues.

 Despite this stated close World Bank support, the supervision team failed to address some of the key
 issues that emerged during the implementation of the project. First, the weak results framework and its
 disconnect with the M&E system was not addressed, except for some minor changes during the project
 restructuring. During the second project restructuring, it was decided that the technical assessments of the
 O&M and EM data and the audit of irrigation agencies (used for the third and fourth PDO indicators,

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



 respectively) were to be replaced by one indicator, reducing the scope and cost of the activity. Therefore,
 these technical assessments were not conducted early during the project implementation (as envisioned)
 but in 2018. As a consequence, the project failed to collect baseline data on O&M and institutional
 improvements (ICR para 22). Moreover, the results framework was updated to replace two earlier PDO
 indicators with a new indicator of “[Data] entered into database to be used for budgetary and investment
 planning purposes”. As discussed in the efficacy section, this is not a relevant indicator and especially not
 for measuring achievement towards an objective.

 Second, while the AF was requested to allow more time to finalize the infrastructure work in the
 Geghardalich and Kaghtsrashen schemes, it was mainly used as a pilot to introduce drip irrigation in the
 tertiary irrigation network in Baghramyan-Norakert. More specifically, the modernized tertiary irrigation
 network would provide pressurized and filtered water to individual plots suitable for drip irrigation. The ICR,
 however, states (para 84) that “[the AF] was a risky approach, in that there was no verifiable evidence that
 this modernization pilot was designed to meet expressed demand”. This was especially worrisome given
 that farmers themselves would be responsible to invest in on-farm drip tubing to be connected to the main
 water supply system. Moreover, at the time most of the infrastructure was already finalized, the Ministry of
 Agriculture requested adjustments to the initial design that would facilitate a (potential) future process of
 land consolidations. Hence, the AF suffered from similar complexity issues and did not properly incorporate
 the needs of the end-users in its design.

 Finally, the concerns of local communities in the Geghardalich and Kaghtsrashen schemes did not only
 delay the construction of irrigation infrastructure, they were also never formally settled.

 This review found that there were significant shortcomings in the project’s quality of supervision and it is
 therefore rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design lacked clear indicators to measure and demonstrate the project’s achievement to its
 PDOs. There were no indicators to measure the availability and reliability of important sector data and
 information for decision-makers and other stakeholders. Hence, the M&E design did not provide sufficient
 evidence to conclude that the third and fourth objectives were achieved. The indicators used for the first
 and second objectives were better, but as mentioned earlier in this review and by the ICR (para 86), there
 was no logical results chain from inputs, outputs, to outcomes in the results framework which posed
 difficulties for designing the M&E system. While five out of 12 output indicators reported on the delivery of
 institutional capacity-building, there was no PDO related to institutional capacity. Similarly, three output
 indicators reported on improved irrigation and drainage services, but the ICR explicitly mentions that this

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



 was not the focus of the project. Moreover, the concept of ‘improved irrigation services’ is not defined. The
 ICR (para 85) correctly concludes that “the indicators had shortcomings in their ability to accurately capture
 progress toward achieving the PDO (even after restructuring), in that they were defined in a way that left
 them open to interpretation.”



b. M&E Implementation
  The WSPIU was responsible for the data collection for the M&E – using existing systems and databases
  – and reporting on the progress of project achievement. The project restructurings had to adjust
  definitions, measurements, and targets during implementation to address some of the issues in the initial
  results framework, but many issues remained (see also above). The ICR (para 89) mentions that
  reporting by the WSPIU focused on procurement and but barely discussed the project’s implementation
  progress (using the M&E system). Moreover, the WSPIU adjusted indicator targets beyond what was
  agreed during the formal restructuring, resulting in inconsistent definitions and targets and a mismatch
  between the information collected in the M&E system of the WSPIU and the information needed to track
  and illustrate progress on indicators included in the official results framework of the project (ICR
  paragraph 88 and 90).



c. M&E Utilization
  Due to the design issues and inconsistency between WSPIU’s M&E system and the project’s results
  framework, the information in the M&E was not used effectively to track implementation or inform
  decisions during project restructurings (ICR para 90). Hence, the M&E system failed to guide decision
  making in the project’s implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified under the environmental category B and triggered OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
   Assessment, OP 4.09 on Pest Management, OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, OP/BP 4.37 on
   Safety of Dams, and OP/BP 7.50 on Project on International Waterways. Accordingly, the borrower
   developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework to
   guide site-specific environmental and social work for all sub-projects. The ICR (para 93) states that
   “Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was carried out for works on some irrigation
   schemes and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) developed thereafter, or self-standing ESMPs
   were prepared for others” but it is unclear whether all irrigation sites targeted by the project received a
   social and environmental assessment.

   The PAD (para 84) states that “because the detailed designs of the civil works have not been finalized and
   the exact footprints of the works are still not defined, as a precautionary measure, the World Bank's

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



  Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) was triggered and a Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF) was prepared.” The ICR notes that the project did not cause any resettlement impacts
  and therefore Resettlement Action Plans were not prepared. However, the ICR also notes the unrecorded
  use of private land for the placement of water pipes in the Meghri scheme after the redesign, and that this
  issue was settled by voluntary use agreements between the SWPIU and the land-owners. This, however,
  downgraded the social safeguard performance to Moderately Satisfactory.

  The ICR (para 93) states that the ISEP complied with all triggered safeguard policies at project closure.
  Nonetheless, there were significant issues with the design and reporting of safeguard implementation. The
  implementation of the Geghardalich and Kaghtsrashen schemes had to be halted because local
  communities in and around the water intake for the irrigation schemes voiced their concerns about the
  environmental, economic, political, and cultural damage of the construction works (see earlier references in
  this review). As a consequence, an inspection panel request was submitted to the World Bank in 2016
  concerning both schemes. However, such social and environmental issues were only discovered during
  project implementation, which illustrates that these aspects were not properly taken into account when
  preparing the ESIAs. The borrower’s comments to the ICR (para 10) state that for the Geghardalich scheme
  “the project had passed through all the procedures set by the Armenian legislation and the WB operation
  policies and all the required consultations”, so it is unclear why local communities’ protests emerged during
  project implementation if they were consulted during the project’s preparation. Moreover, the ICR notes the
  low quality of the ESIA reports, which contributed to the delay of construction works. Finally, the ICR (para
  96) states that the monitoring and reporting of environmental aspects as well as work-safety aspects
  “remained a relative weakness of the Project implementing entity throughout the Project implementation”.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR reports an overall adequate and satisfactory quality of the financial
  management of the project. Unaudited financial reports were received by the World Bank on time and in
  acceptable quality. External audits of the financial statements issued unmodified (clean) opinions and were
  publicly disclosed. The ICR does not mention that audits were qualified.

  Procurement. The financial procurement system of the project implemented the World Bank’s STEP
  system and procurement specialists were properly trained. Despite this, the ICR notes that the complex
  structure and the later reorganization of the implementing agency caused insufficient proactivity and delays
  in procurement activities. In response, the World Bank supported the WSPIU by a ‘contract monitoring
  activity’ to improve their procurement administration and reporting.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not mention unintended impacts.



d. Other


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   The project suffered from
                                                                                   several major design issues
                                                                                   which were the result of an
                                                                                   insufficient assessment and
                                                                                   preparation of the feasibility of
                                                                                   the irrigation works. The
                                                                                   environmental, social, and
                                                                                   water-use implications of
                                Moderately                                         communities outside the WUAs
Bank Performance                                       Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                     were not properly assessed. The
                                                                                   additional financing during the
                                                                                   supervision period failed to
                                                                                   address the weak results
                                                                                   framework, the M&E system
                                                                                   continued to be weak, and the
                                                                                   introduction of a complex drip-
                                                                                   irrigation network was out of line
                                                                                   with farmers’ interests.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provides 4 detailed lessons, of which the following lessons are retained (with language
adapted):

Support for the enhancement of irrigation systems needs to integrate water delivery with
service delivery. In Armenia, where a minimum level of irrigation infrastructure is available, support
to the irrigation sector has traditionally focused on improving water delivery. However, water delivery
cannot be addressed without addressing service delivery or water rights governance at the same
time. The development of the irrigation sector needs an integrated model that combines investments
in infrastructure to improve water delivery with investments in improved service delivery and water-
rights governance at different levels of water users. Moreover, irrigation development needs to
incorporate institutional strengthening when the sector-wide institutional reform in the irrigation
sector is still in a relatively early stage of development. In this project, however, there is no mention
of the quality, uptake, and impact of service delivery, and therefore it provides no evidence on

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



whether the rehabilitation of the irrigation system enhanced the irrigation sector as a whole in
Armenia.

Projects investing in irrigation infrastructure need a feasibility phase to understand and
adapt the proposed solutions to the on-the-ground realities of the topology, local capacity,
and social context of the irrigation infrastructure. The most significant design flaw of this project
was the lack of on-the-ground feasibility study of the condition of the irrigation infrastructure and
network as well as a limited understanding of the needs and perceptions of the different
stakeholders involved.

Site selection for irrigation development need to look beyond the agroeconomic benefits of
an irrigation scheme and include the perception and concerns of all stakeholders (within and
around the irrigation scheme) that rely on the same source of water. Local communities in and
around the water source of two targeted schemes raised concerns about broader-level water
availability and the impact of the infrastructure works on the environment as well as cultural heritage.
These complaints by local communities illustrate the obvious need to involve all local stakeholders in
decisions on where and how to develop irrigation sites.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was logically written with enough information on the project background, implementation, and
achievements and it complies with OPCS guidelines. The arguments made in the different sections are to-the-
point, yet with sufficient detail and some concrete examples. In general, the ICR provides a candid discussion
of the achievements and design (issues) of the project. Many of the issues identified in this review were
acknowledged by the ICR, although in a less direct manner and with more subtle language. The ICR also
critically assessed the data and reporting on project indicators received from the borrower’s M&E system. The
updated financial and economic analysis, despite some unclear assumptions, critically reviewed and extended
the efficiency analysis.

This candid discussion is, however, not fully reflected in the conclusions it draws. At some points in the ICR, the
text is optimistic and not justified based on the narrative in the preceding text. For example, in paragraph 74,
the ICR states that “it can be concluded that the Project will likely have a lasting positive impact on the
achievement of the ‘twin goals’ in Armenia”. Given the ICR’s description of implementation delays, the unlikely
prospect of the finalization of infrastructure works in the future, and the lack of any indicator on household-level
outcomes, the quote from paragraph 74 is a strong and unfounded statement.

The ICR is very brief in discussing several crucial parts of the report. Most importantly, there is only one
paragraph in the ‘quality at entry’ discussion as part of the Bank performance section, although the project
suffered from substantial design flaws at entry. The ICR does discuss the consequences of these issues



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)



throughout the other sections, but a critical and detailed assessment of the project’s design flaws at entry is
missing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
