     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022188

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132623                                    IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18700                                   30-Jun-2018                                           7,181,721.71

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Dec-2014                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              8,000,000.00                                   8,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               7,181,721.71                                   7,181,721.71

 Actual                                           7,181,721.71                                   7,181,721.71




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph
   28) was identical to one stated in the Grant Agreement (GA, page 4) and aimed to:

   "improve adaptive capacity of the rural poor engaged in farm-based livelihoods to cope with climate
   variability and change."



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



   The project will be implemented in the states of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Planning, Service Provision and Implementation of Climate Change Adaptation (appraisal cost:
   US$6.20 million, actual cost: US$5.21 million). This component aimed to support risk assessment,
   planning, service provision and implementation of climate adaptation interventions. The key activities
   included: (i) community-led risk assessment and participatory planning of climate adaptation interventions;
   (ii) provision of strategic climate change adaptation services through partnerships with resource institutions;
   and (iii) implementation of climate adaptation interventions in agriculture by community institutions (self-help
   groups/federations) utilizing the Community Climate Adaptation Grant Mechanism.

   2. Scaling and Mainstreaming Community Based Climate Adaptation (appraisal cost: US$1.48
   million, actual cost: US$1.32 million). This component aimed to enable support and build capacity for the
   implementation of climate adaptation interventions, and to develop the strategy for scaling up. Key activities
   include: (i) capacity building of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) national and state staff and
   creation of a cadre of community resource persons (CRPs); (ii) building knowledge support system for
   climate adaptation including policy inputs for scaling-up of the community-based climate adaptation
   approach within the NRLM. The key activities to be financed were: training of NRLM national and state staff
   in project and non- project areas, training of CRPs from non-project areas of NRLM; development and
   publication of knowledge products including adaptation planning tool and policy briefs; website and annual
   meetings of consortium of resource organizations; and policy seminar.

   3. Project Management and Impact Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$0.32 million, actual cost: US$0.25
   million). The project would support component 4 of the National Rural Livelihoods Project (NRLP) by
   augmenting the management units within the NRLM and State Rural Livelihoods Mission (SRLM)
   institutional structure to enable coordinated functioning and efficient implementation of the project. The
   activities included: (i) establishment of climate adaptation units staffed with full-time professionals within the
   NRLM and the SRLMs of the participating states;
   (ii) establishment of a monitoring system and evaluation arrangements (baseline, mid-term and end-of-
   term); (iii) fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards management.



   Revised components. At the 2018 restructuring the project was scaled-up to cover "350 additional villages
   in the same geographies (same states and same districts, Restructuring Paper)." However, the ICR

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



   (paragraph 17) stated that "a primary change, reflected in the amended legal agreement, was the scale-up
   of successful interventions to 487 additional “scale-up” villages." This number increased again to 593
   scale-up villages according to the ICR (paragraph 27). There was no explanation provided in the ICR on
   the reason behind these differences. The project components remained the same with no changes in
   activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$10.17 million. The actual cost according to the
   ICR (page 2) was US$11.37 million. The project had surplus funds due to increasing the state contribution
   from 25% to 40% combined with the US Dollar appreciating from an exchange rate of INR 60 to INR 62, this
   resulted in US$2.5 million extra funds becoming available.



   Financing. The project was financed through a US$8.0 million Grant from the Global Environment Fund’s
   (GEF) Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF). The actual amount disbursed was US$7.18 million or about
   90% of the appraisal amount.



   Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$2.17 million of counterpart funding.
   The actual amount contributed by the Borrower was US$4.19 million (ICR, page 2). The increase of
   borrower contribution was a result of a change in policy by the Government of India which increased the
   mandatory state contribution to 40% rather than 25%.



   Dates. The project was approved on December 9, 2014 and became effective two months later on February
   15, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on October 17, 2016. The PAD did not include a
   specific date for the MTR. The project closed on December 31, 2019 which was 18 months later compared
   to the original closing date on June 30, 2018. According to the ICR (paragraph 21) the 18 months extension
   was necessary to 18 months to "use the extra funds to strengthen the work in the original villages, to scale
   up to newer villages, allow for better convergence, prepare training materials for future scale-up, and to
   assess the results and learning for dissemination." The project was restructured once (Level 2) on June 14,
   2018, when the amount disbursed was US$4.75 million, in order to extend the loan closing date to
   December 31, 2019 and to reallocate funds between the disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. India has seen a 0.4 C increase in mean surface air temperature over the past
century (1901–2000) and climate change projections up to the year 2100 indicate an overall 2–4 C rise in
temperature. Risk factors in addition to temperature increase include

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



changes in the monsoon pattern, increased intensity of extreme weather events including flooding and
tropical cyclones, extremes of heat, and sea-level rise. The project was expected to bring a comprehensive
risk management approach to livelihood planning and implementation in the National Rural Livelihoods
Mission/National Rural Livelihoods Project, so that climate change impacts on livelihoods could be
mitigated.

At appraisal, objectives were in line with the principles and adaptation priorities articulated in
India's National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) and in the state action plans. These call
for mainstreaming climate change considerations in a large national program and raising the policy dialogue
on these issues, particularly in respect of the rural development and agriculture sectors. The
implementation of the NAPCC is an integral part of India's Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012–17)
which recognizes that there is an urgent need for developing agro-climatic zone-specific technologies to
enable rural communities to withstand the effects of climate change. Objectives were also in line with the
Bank’s goal of reducing poverty and increasing shared prosperity, stated in the Country Partnership
Strategy for India (2013–17). The Strategy states climate-resilient
agriculture as an operational business line under Outcome 2.4 on increased agricultural productivity.
Objectives were also in line with Goal 7 of the United Nations (UN) Millennium Development Goals, which
aimed to ensure environmental sustainability.



At completion, objectives continued to be in line with India's NAPCC and its specific initiatives, namely, the
National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) and National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA), with the objective to make agriculture productive
and resilient, conserve national resources and adopt soil health management practices. Objectives were
also in line with the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana program which aimed to increase the farm
area under irrigation and improve water use efficiency. Objectives were also in line with the state action
plans of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh on climate change, which focused on agriculture, water resources and
rural development. Objectives were also in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF,
FY2018–FY22) which emphasized climate resilient farming. The CPF called for supporting the Government
of India and the States in capacity building to promote climate smart agriculture.

The statement of objectives was clear regarding the target beneficiaries (rural poor engaged in farm-based
livelihoods), but could have benefited from more clarification on the meaning of "adaptive capacity" and "to
cope with climate variability and change". The absence of a clear definition for climate resilience made
assessing the PDO challenging. Also, the statement of objectives lacked a connection to higher level
objectives namely, reducing yield and income loss associated with adverse weather conditions and
mainstreaming climate change considerations in a large national program. Overall, the project could have
benefited from a simpler PDO statement that could be assessed without the need to redefine the PDO
during implementation.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. This rating
reflects the lack of connection to higher level objectives and some vagueness related to the statement of
objectives.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve adaptive capacity of the rural poor engaged in farm-based livelihoods to cope with climate
                variability and change.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would increase awareness and
                understanding among farmers of the impact of climate risks on their livelihoods through providing technical
                assistance for community sensitization, training and participatory planning. Also, the project would increase
                awareness about climate change adaptation investments through technical assistance for partnerships and
                facilitation of greater consistency across government programs. To increase adoption of climate change
                adaptation investments, the project would provide loans to self help groups and village organizations to
                finance climate change adaptation interventions at the household and community levels. To improve
                integration of climate change adaptation interventions at the national level, the project would provide technical
                assistance for knowledge products (community adaptation planning tool and manual, CRP training
                curriculum, web-based inventory of climate adaptation actions, audio visuals -PAD, paragraph 34) and
                capacity building of national and state programs. These activities were expected to improve the adaptive
                capacity of farmers and improve their ability to manage climate variability and on-going climate change. This
                would contribute to the higher level outcome of reducing yield and income loss associated with adverse
                weather conditions.

                The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by eight key assumptions (ICR, page 7). These relate to
                farmers and communities adopting climate change adaptation investments and the Government
                mainstreaming successful interventions by project completion.

                Overall, the ToC included activities that were directly linked to the PDO and the key assumptions were
                logical.



                Outputs

                The outputs below were reported by the ICR (Annex 1). Targets are provided where available.

                1. Improved adaptive capacity of the rural poor engaged in farm livelihoods to cope with climate
                variability and change.

                      32,642 self help group (SHG) members (Bihar 15,754, Madhya Pradesh 16,888) were trained in
                       adaptation related technologies.


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)




     1,660 (Bihar 810, Madhya Pradesh 850) community cadre/Community Resource Persons trained in
        adaptation related technologies. The training was classified into inputs and production practices,
        knowledge and technology, ecological system support and financial services. Training was conducted
        by individual experts, resource institutions and agriculture universities.
       974 (Bihar 360, Madhya Pradesh 614) staff members were trained in adaptation related technologies.
       19,376 (Bihar 9,958, Madhya Pradesh 9,418) community members and community cadre were part of
        exposure visits.
       298 (Bihar :148, Madhya Pradesh: 150) Community Resource Persons and project staff received
        certified training in Climate Change Adaptation.
       3 (Bihar 1, Madhya Pradesh 1, and one seminar was organized in Hyderabad) seminars organized for
        sharing insights/lessons for policy making with government, donors, NGOs
       16 knowledge products for dissemination of knowledge and experience were generated by the
        project.

2. Poor farmer households adopt climate resilience measures in their livelihoods to cope with climate
variability and change.

     97% of the project farmers belonged to a poor or disadvantaged community, pointing to the success of
        the project's outreach.
       793 (Bihar 383, Madhya Pradesh 410, target: 687) villages, 8 (Bihar 4, Madhya Pradesh 4) blocks, 4
        (Bihar 2, Madhya Pradesh 2) districts were covered under the project.
       8,706 (Bihar 4,861, Madhya Pradesh 3,845) Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and 32,120 (Bihar 15,320,
        Madhya Pradesh 16,800) farmers were covered by the project.
       8,119 (Bihar 5,034, Madhya Pradesh 3,085) farmers were covered by soil testing services. However, it
        was not clear n the ICR whether all benefited from the service.
       200 (Bihar 100, Madhya Pradesh 100) automated weather stations and automated rain gauges were
        established. But it was not clear if all stations were operational.
       8,704 (Bihar 4,216, Madhya Pradesh 4,488) farmers were covered through weather based agro
        advisory services
       605 (Bihar 361, Madhya Pradesh 244) Custom Hiring Centers (CHCs) were established. CHCs
        were aligned with the Ministry of Agriculture’s sub-mission on agricultural mechanization and used for
        renting farm machinery and tools, plant protection tools.
       13,884 (Bihar 5,884, Madhya Pradesh 8,000) farmers who accessed a Custom Hiring Center or
        Village Tool Bank.
       113 (Bihar 73, Madhya Pradesh 40) solar irrigation systems installed. The ICR did not clarify how
        many were fully operational.
       793 (Bihar 383, Madhya Pradesh 410) Village Organizations (VOs) developed Climate Change
        Adaptation Plans (CCAP) and were provided CCAP grants. The average amount of CCAP grant
        provided per VO was INR 410,652, and the average amount of loans provided (for agriculture
        activities) per VO was: INR 203,297.
       175,776 (Bihar 163,883, Madhya Pradesh 11,893) households received technical or financial benefits
        through convergence from other government or non-government sources.
       INR 466,125,575 (Bihar INR 196,336,393, Madhya Pradesh INR 269,789,182) for which convergence
        funds were obtained. This amount benefited 75,776 (Bihar 163,883, Madhya Pradesh
        11,893) beneficiaries.

                                                                                                Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)




      30 (Bihar 18, Madhya Pradesh 12) schemes/agencies with which convergence with Government
       programs was undertaken.
      647 (82%) (Bihar 317, Madhya Pradesh 330) (and %) of VOs benefited from convergence funding.
      INR 720,441 (Bihar INR 619,358, Madhya Pradesh INR 817,543) was the average amount of
       convergence funds received per VO.



Outcome

Assessing the outcome of this project is challenging given the lack of a clear methodology to define resilience
in terms of adoption of key practices or to measure the extent of resilience or recovery after an adverse
weather event. Also, with M&E weaknesses and the lack of control groups, an accurate assessment is
problematic. The project did train farmers and staff to adopt climate resilient practices. Also, Communities
were partnered with technical support agencies to obtain climate adaptation solutions: Against a target of
eight, 25 resource agencies were engaged by the Ministry of Rural Development and the two State Rural
Livelihoods Missions in addition to individual experts. The project also provided financial support and
facilitated convergence with government programs for farmers to have financial capacity to implement climate
adaptation measures. Against a target of 30% of Village Organizations leveraging financial support from
convergence, achievement was 76% among the 200 original villages (152 received financial support from at
least one other government program through convergence). The project also supported the creation
of infrastructure (e.g. micro-irrigation schemes, Custom Hiring Centers, and soil testing laboratories) run by
community institutions to provide technological and ecological services to enable adoption by farmers.

The PDO was assessed through the following two elements:

Improved adaptive capacity of the rural poor engaged in farm livelihoods to cope with climate
variability and change. According to the ICR (paragraph 20) the definition of improved adaptive capacity
was that a farmer should "(i) have demonstrated knowledge of climatic risks, their impacts on livelihoods and
the interventions that would help in adaptation (measured through a test in the end-term survey); (ii) be
trained in adaptation interventions and/or participated in Climate Change Adaptation Plan (CCAP) meetings;
and (iii) have adopted and/or be willing to adopt at least two interventions in the future." The project had an
outreach of 32,12031 farmer households in 793 villages (compared to 687 villages planned). This included
8,650 from the 200 original villages and 23,470 farmer households in the 593 scale-up villages. Based on
a survey (in late 2019) of 1,583 participating farmer households in the original villages and 120 households in
the scale-up villages for a total of 1,703 farmer respondents, 50.7% of the target farmers demonstrated
strengthened awareness and ownership of adaptation and climate
change risk reduction processes/measures compared to a target of 50% (which translates to 16,282 of the
total outreach to 32,120 farmers). However, the sample size of the survey respondents in the scale-up
villages was only 120 and with a notably high margin of error at 13%.



Poor rural farmers adopted measures to cope with climate variability and change. Assessment of the
achievement of this element of the PDO is challenging given the lack of a clear definition on farmer's climate
resilience and concerns on the data used to reach the reported results in the ICR. Due to the lack of a
standardized definition of farmer’s climate resilience, a project definition was used which defined coping with
climate variability and change as a farmer adopting any three of the following CCA practices: "(i) implemented

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



                            soil management improvements; (ii) used weather forecast-based advisories to improve scheduling of
                            production practices; (iii) used climate resilient seeds; (iv) used improved water conservation, harvesting and
                            allied practices; (v) undertook new livelihood or crop diversification; (vi) used tools from the project’s CHCs,
                            (vii) borrowed loans from the Climate Change Adaptation Fund; (viii) used better livestock management,
                            inputs and market linkages (ICR, paragraph 38)." According to the ICR (paragraph 38) when the full project
                            definition was applied 50.1% of the surveyed framers demonstrated enhanced livelihood resilience against
                            the target of 50%. 19,202 farmer households (target: 12,300) in 793 original and scale-up villages, adopted a
                            core set of climate resilient agricultural practices out of the total project outreach of 32,120 farmer
                            households. As mentioned above the sample size for the scale up villages was 120 sample size with a
                            relatively high margin of error. Another concern was that the willingness of farmers to continue applying the
                            selected interventions beyond the project was below 50% for all activities except water conservation activities
                            in Bihar which reached about 55% (ICR, Figure 1). This raises concern on the sustainability of the project
                            activities which are directly related to the ability of farmers to cope with climate variability and change.



                            Based on the above-mentioned assessment efficacy of achieving the PDO is rated Substantial despite
                            concerns on the quality of the M&E data and the lack of a clear definition on farmer's climate resilience. In a
                            further communication, the project team explained that efficacy of the PDO was assessed based "on the
                            achievements of PDO outcomes measured by the endline survey which was done well by a competent team
                            of academics from the Institute of Rural Management, Anand. The supporting data for these PDO
                            achievements is from aggregated physical progress reported by the project which is expected to be rigorously
                            monitored due to financial implications for the government. There is no evidence from the endline survey to
                            suggest that these project data are incorrect."



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                             The project achieved the target values of its two PDO outcomes, and individually exceeded targets on
                            several intermediate indicators. However, there are concerns regarding the quality of M&E data. Also, the
                            absence of a standardized definition of climate resilience makes it difficult to assess the impact of the project
                            on this aspect. That said, in further communication, the project team explained that efficacy of the PDO was
                            assessed based "on the achievements of PDO outcomes measured by the endline survey which was done
                            well by a competent team of academics from the Institute of Rural Management, Anand. The supporting data
                            for these PDO achievements is from aggregated physical progress reported by the project which is expected
                            to be rigorously monitored due to financial implications for the government. There is no evidence from the
                            endline survey to suggest that these project data are incorrect."




                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

ex ante

     There was no economic and financial analysis undertaken at appraisal for two main reasons:
      first, predictions of future climate scenarios is uncertain, especially at the local level, which made
      estimating the expected benefits and expected losses difficult and time consuming; Second, the project
      featured a demand driven adaptation plan which made it difficult to predict the exact adaptation activities
      that will be undertaken in each village. (PAD, paragraph 59).
     The PAD (paragraph 60) cited some available evidence on the economic impact of climate adaptation.
      This included an IEG study of 22 Bank projects, initiated between 1998 and 2011 on adaptation to
      climate variability and change. The study found that projects with a presumed positive impact on climate
      adaptation, such as those focusing on watershed management and sustainable land and water
      management had a high economic return, with a median economic rate of return of 20% and crop yield
      increments between 20% and 70%.

ex post

     There was no ex-post cost–benefit analysis conducted due to technical difficulties (ICR, paragraph 43).
     An ideal economic analysis of a CCA project would compare the productivity and incomes of farmers
      who adopt adaptation interventions with those who do not adopt adaptations despite normal weather and
      adverse weather events over the years, during and beyond the
      project. Such an analysis is technically difficult to undertake since it requires data on adverse weather
      events and farmer outcomes during the project and projections beyond the project period.
     Cost-effectiveness was quantified by computing the total project cost per beneficiary household (with and
      without convergence funds) and comparing it to the estimated value at appraisal and with past projects of
      similar budget and scale. The cost per beneficiary at completion was US$354 without convergence
      funds. This compared favorably with the cost per beneficiary estimated at appraisal of US$1,030. The
      lower costs were due to the higher outreach achieved (32,120 farmers) compared to planned (12,300
      farmers). It was also lower than
      the average cost per beneficiary of comparison projects of US$626.
     At project closure, the total amount spent by the project was US$11.37 million, which was 111.8% of the
      appraisal estimates. This was partially offset by the exchange rate gains of 8.5% over the project’s life.
      While the project spent more than the appraisal estimates, it was not able to utilize the grant fully due to
      lower expenditure at the center level through the Ministry of Rural Development. This
      reduced expenditure stemmed from initial implementation delays.


Administrative and Institutional Efficiency



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



The project closed on December 31, 2019 which was 18 months later compared to the original closing date on
June 30, 2018. The 1.5 year extension was needed to "use the extra funds to strengthen the work in the original
villages, to scale up to newer villages, allow for better convergence, prepare training materials for future scale-
up, and to assess the results and learning for dissemination (ICR, paragraph 21)." The project experienced
an extended preparation period and experienced initial implementation delays during the first two years after
effectiveness. . Delays stemmed from: a slow hiring process of the state project teams and the Lead Technical
Support Agency, delays in fund releases to the states, and the need for more time to educate the community
about climate risks and promote the project’s objectives before entrusting them with the grants (ICR, paragraph
60). The final disbursement rate was 90% of the appraisal amount. This was in part due to delayed fund
programming at the center and over-estimation of expenditures.



Overall, efficiency is rated Modest. This rating reflects the absence of an ex-post cost-benefit analysis and
significant implementation delays.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial despite concern on the quality
of M&E. The project achieved the target values of its two PDO outcomes, and individually exceeded targets on
several intermediate indicators. Efficiency was rated Modest due to the absence of an ex-post cost-benefit
analysis and significant implementation delays.

Based on a Substantial rating for both Relevance of Objectives and Efficacy, and a Modest Rating for Efficiency,
Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 74) discussed the following five risks that could potentially impact the project's
development outcome:

1. Farmers forget climate resilient production practices or need further support. While the occurrence of this
risk is expected to be low, its impact on the development outcome is high if it materialized.

2. Farmers are unwilling to continue with the recommended production practices. About 26% to 55% of the
adoptees of the various project interventions said they would continue that practice after the project ended.
The impact on the development outcome is expected to be moderate.

3. Farmers are unable to continue the recommended practices. The occurrence of this risk was expected to
be low, and if it materialized the impact on the development outcome would be moderate.

4. Weather forecasting services stop. The occurrence for weather service is high because it is a subscription-
based service. If it materialized, the ICR rated the impact on the development outcome as moderate.
However, this Review rates it as high because without weather forecast service the farmers would be subject
to unanticipated weather events.

5. Overall lack of support and monitoring by staff and Community Resource Persons stop practices from
continuing. The occurrence of this risk is medium and the impact on the development outcome is high.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) is a large-scale rural development program for poverty
  reduction and livelihoods enhancement implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD).
  While NRLM sought to address adaptation deficit issues, it did not have a systematic approach to assess
  and address climate change risks or build long-term resilience. In this context, the Government of India
  sought the Special Climate Change Funds (SCCFs) through the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to
  implement this project to deal with adaptation gap and deficit issues. This was the first GEF project in
  India with the Ministry of Rural Development (as the implementing agency). The Bank took the lead in the
  preparation of the project since the Ministry of Rural Development was more focused on the Bank-funded
  National Rural Livelihoods project and had limited experience on climate resilience. The project had a
  relatively long preparation period from identification and clearance by the Bank and GEF in April 2012 to
  Board approval in December 2014, almost three years. Project design benefited from wide consultations
  and technical workshops with MoRD, State Rural Livelihoods Missions, technical experts, resource
  agencies and Non-Government Organizations. According to the ICR (paragraph 67), the project was
  strategically relevant and its design reflected adequate environmental and fiduciary safeguard
  arrangements. The project built on experiences from the Bank-supported livelihood projects in Andhra
  Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. Notable lessons reflected in the
  project design included: attention to operation and maintenance of weather-based agro-advisory services

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



  is needed to sustainably help farmers make climate smart decisions, adaptation interventions need to be
  targeted to particular groups and their characteristics, and adoption of technical solutions needs an
  enabling environment including incentives. Ten risks were identified at appraisal, all of which were rated
  moderate. Risk assessment was comprehensive and relevant mitigation measures were included.
  However, the ICR did not discuss the effectiveness of the mitigation measures. The ICR (paragraph 67)
  noted that despite three years of preparation, the readiness of the Government of India for
  implementation was low with delays in hiring the project staff. Finally, M&E had design weaknesses,
  notably the PDO1 and PDO2 indicators suffered from lack of clarity (see section 9 for more details).

  Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating
  reflects M&E design weaknesses and concerns on the readiness of the Government to implement the
  project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supervised the project (including ICR preparation) with Bank-executed Special Climate Change
 Fund (SCCF) trust funds (50 weeks; US$462,322) staying within the financial envelope provided by the
 GEF. The Bank supervision included 10 implementation support missions as well as a number of technical
 support missions (ICR, paragraph 70). The Bank support missions included a balanced skill-mix from
 procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards specialists, M&E, and technical
 experts. The project procurement benefited from the Bank-provided training and technical assistance. In
 the initial years of implementation, the Bank provided technical support, organized workshops, and trained
 district staff to guide the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) in designing interventions. The Bank
 team also worked with the Country on the timely restructuring of the project and addressed the slow
 disbursement of funds at the beginning of implementation. The ICR (paragraph 72) highlighted that the
 project received recognition in various local publications. Also, the Bank oversaw the transition
 arrangements to ensure sustainability of the project outcomes and facilitate potential scale-up in the future.

 The Bank could have invested more time to improve readiness and avoid implementation delays during the
 first two years after effectiveness. The Bank also could have addressed the lack of clarity of the PDO
 indicators at an earlier stage during implementation. Also, scale-up plans could have benefited from more
 clarity.

 Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.
 This rating reflecting reflects concerns on readiness for implementation and a delay in addressing M&E
 design weaknesses.

 Overall, Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project appraisal document (PAD) did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not mandated at
 appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR (page 7) included one which reflected the relation between the planned
 project activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts. The achievement of the PDO was to be
 assessed through two PDO level indicators: 1. Poor farmer households have improved adaptive capacity to
 cope with climate variability and change which would be assessed through: at least 50% of the targeted
 households adopt livelihoods with enhanced climate resilience, and 2. Poor farmer households adopted
 adaptation measures to cope with climate variability and change, which would be assessed through: at
 least 50% of the targeted households demonstrate strengthened awareness and ownership of adaptation
 and climate risk reduction processes/measures. The baseline value of PDO indicators were set to zero.
 The ICR (paragraph 59) reported that there was a lack of clarity regarding the definitions of both PDO
 indicators because they were only defined in late August 2018. Also, the definition of climate resilience was
 not clear, and efforts to define a climate resilience index by engaging a mid-term evaluation agency in 2018
 were not successful due to methodological complexity (ICR paragraph 59). The design lacked any
 methodologies to define resilience in terms of adoption of key practices or to measure the extent of
 resilience or recovery after an adverse weather event.

 The Results Framework included seven intermediate outcome indicators to assess the different activities
 supported by the project. While these indicators were linked to the activities and had clear targets,
 baselines were all set to zero. Also, the definition of climate resilient agricultural practices was not clearly
 defined. Finally, it was not clear in the PAD who was in charge with the overall responsibility of M&E
 activities.

 Overall, M&E design suffered from poorly defined PDO level indicators and included no clear methodology
 to assess climate resilience.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project lacked a digital Project Management Information System (PMIS), although it was mentioned
  in the PAD (paragraph 35). The two State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) collected data aggregated
  at the village level. However, the ICR (paragraph 60) reported that "farmer level adoption data were
  difficult to collect" and "PDO indicator achievements reported in some ISRs (October 2018 and May
  2019), were not accurate in comparison to the project end evaluation findings, since the project data were
  not accurate." Pre-project values were collected through the mid-term survey because a baseline survey
  was not conducted since the SRLM teams were not fully staffed. While a qualified agency was hired for
  the program-end evaluation as planned, spill-over effects from interventions from other projects
  compromised the control villages. This made a with–without comparison approach to be dropped from
  the evaluation, so that determining the levels of achievements in the absence of the project was not


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



  possible. The end-line survey measured the absolute values of achievements related to the project
  recommended interventions. Also, the end-term evaluation relied on a relatively small sample of
  120 farmers in the scale-up villages. According to the ICR (paragraph 59), the relatively smaller sample
  resulted in higher margins of error in measuring the two PDO-level indicator achievements. The ICR
  (paragraph 60) described the agency that carried out the Mid-term evaluation as having done
  a "mediocre job." At the 2018 restructuring the Bank brought in an expert to provide technical support and
  contracted an agency to design and implement the PMIS. However, the PMIS was never implemented.
  Attention to M&E improved in the last two years of implementation as the States became results oriented
  and focused on the key performance indicators (ICR, paragraph 62).

  Overall, M&E implementation was weak and there are concerns on the quality of data collected.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 61) "the mediocre quality of the mid-term evaluation partly contributed
  to the results not being used for informing the implementation," and the "implemented Project
  Management Information System was used only for monitoring by the State Rural Livelihoods Missions,
  and not for learning and course correction."



  Overall, M&E Quality is rated Modest. This rating reflects design weaknesses, implementation
  challenges and limited utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as environmental category B. The following safeguard policies were triggered at
   appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Forests (OP 4.36), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Pest
   Management (OP 4.09). The project activities were likely to contribute to environmental sustainability;
   individual activities might have had small-scale impacts or might be environmentally benign, without
   significant and/or irreversible impacts. Negative impacts due to poor management and improper planning
   could have included: soil erosion, poor water availability and quality, depletion of groundwater, decreasing
   fodder availability, among others. The project relied on the Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
   of the National Rural Livelihoods Project (NRLP) since it was anchored in its existing institutional set up.
   Overall, the project was environmentally benign and supported the improvement of the local environment
   through the reduction of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, organic farming, water harvesting and
   conservation, reduced air pollution through the use of solar pumps rather than diesel, and enhanced
   biodiversity and green cover (ICR, paragraph 63).




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



  Environmental safeguards compliance. According to the ICR (paragraph 63) "the project complied
  satisfactorily with all the triggered safeguard policies." Specifically, chemical pesticides were excluded from
  crop advisories; no activities were implemented in forests or critical natural habitats; and drilling bore wells
  and tube wells for irrigation were subject to regulatory approval.

  Social Safeguards compliance. During implementation, OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered.
  The project adopted and customized the National Rural Livelihoods project's Indigenous People’s
  Framework that emphasized inclusion and alignment with the Bank’s guidelines on assets creation and
  equity. Also, National Rural Livelihoods project's Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) was used. Social
  measures taken included consultations, targeting, capacity building and inclusive Climate Change
  Adaptation committees. According to the ICR (paragraph 64) "the project complied satisfactorily with all the
  triggered safeguard policies."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The project used the same FM Manual as used for the National Rural
  Livelihoods Project. The project accounts were maintained using an accounting software in the states and
  at the National Mission Management Unit . Setting up financial controls at the village organizations (VOs)
  was initially challenging, specifically setting up a uniform system for submission and monitoring of
  Utilization Certificates (UCs) for the VO funds. External audit at the National Mission Management Unit
  was done by the office of the Controller and Auditor General of India and at the State Rural Livelihoods
  Mission by private chartered accountants. While the audited reports were unqualified, they were
  often submitted with delay to the Bank. According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "financial management
  complied satisfactorily with Bank policies and guidelines."



  Procurement. The project relied on the procurement staff and manuals of the National Rural Livelihoods
  project. There were delays in hiring state teams and the Lead Technical Support Agency. According to the
  ICR (paragraph 66) "all procurement complied satisfactorily with Bank policies and guidelines."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  According to the ICR (paragraph 52): "The project's final achievement of 19,202 farmers who adopted a
  core set of climate resilience interventions was substantially more than the target of 12,300 set during
  restructuring. This was due to scaling up of selected interventions to more villages than planned in the
  post-restructuring phase."



d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three lessons are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

      M&E design for a climate-change related project needs to include a clear definition
       of resilience and a methodology to measure it in a standardized manner to adequately
       assess outcomes. The project's experience demonstrated that despite the Bank's efforts, it
       was not easy to arrive at an appropriate methodology to define and measure a farmer’s
       extent of climate resilience and the ideal target value for a project to aspire for. The
       methodologies to define resilience in terms of adoption of key practices or to measure the
       extent of resilience or recovery after an adverse weather event are not evident. Research
       efforts to define resilience and measure it in a standardized manner would help future
       projects in design, monitoring and project-end evaluation.
      Post completion support is required for a climate-change related project to ensure
       sustainability of the project technologies with a focus on landless farmers. Despite
       intensive and focused efforts in this pilot, farmers reported unwillingness to continue some
       practices beyond the project period. Further research is required to understand the reasons
       and to provide support in the future. Around a third of the farmers in this project were
       landless and able to practice only diversification as a resilience measure since they had not
       leased-in farm lands. Future climate resilience projects may consider including non-farm
       livelihoods, in particular to support landless farmers better and to provide more holistic
       resilience.
      Weather forecasting through mobile technology combined with climate resilient
       practices are critical elements to improve the sustainability of livelihoods. Weather
       forecasting through mobile phone applications enabled women farmers to adjust their
       farming schedule and better manage farming operations of their crops. This, combined with
       the application of climate resilient farming technologies improved the resilience of farming
       communities to sustain their livelihoods.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Climate Change & Livelihoods (P132623)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that M&E design had shortcomings and implementation was
challenging. The survey sample for the scale-up villages was relatively small and had a high margin of error.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings to the extent possible - given
the M&E weaknesses. However, the lack of baseline data and control groups raises concern on the
assessment of the project results.

Lessons were generally based on evidence and analysis, and reflected the project experience.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a good discussion on outcomes despite concerns on the accuracy of the
M&E data.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data-to the extent possible to justify the assigned
ratings. Discussion of outcomes was thorough, but the ex post efficiency analysis was deficient, for example it
lacked a cost-benefit analysis.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided thorough coverage of the implementation experience and
candidly reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. However, assessment
of outcomes was difficult due to the absence of baseline data and control groups. The outputs in Annex 1
lacked targets, and there were different figures presented for the number of the scale-up villages. Gender could
have benefited from more coverage given that the primary beneficiaries were women farmers.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
