     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022178

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P130421                                     REG DEV 2

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Georgia                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86070,IDA-51780                        30-Jun-2017                                           35,744,916.27

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Nov-2012                                 31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              39,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          35,744,916.27                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl              Fernando Manibog              Victoria Alexeeva                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 7) and the Financing Agreement of November 9, 2012
   (p. 5), the objective of the project was “to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity to support
   increased contribution of tourism in the local economy of the Imereti Region”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Mar-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Infrastructure Investment (appraisal estimate US$41.62 million, actual: US$35.09
   million. This component received AF in the amount of US$10.72 million and additional funding from
   the Borrower in the amount of US$4.93 million): This component had two sub-components:

   Component 1.1: Urban Regeneration of Tskaltubo: This sub-component was to finance: a) rehabilitation of
   municipal infrastructure and utilities in the central area; b) upgrading of public spaces and parks and
   construction of tourist amenities; and c) restoration of public buildings with historic vernacular architecture.

   Component 1.2: Tourism Circuits Development: This sub-component was to finance upgrading and
   improving the management of the six most attractive cultural heritage sites in Imereti: Gelati Monastery,
   Vani Museum and the surrounding archeological site, Ubisa Church, Katskhi Church, Katskhi Column
   Monastery, and Motsameta Monastery. Activities were to include: a) improvement of urban landscaping; b)
   construction of information kiosks and public toilets; c) restoration and refurbishing of the exterior and
   interior of Vani Museum; d) improvement of access roads; and e) preservation of selected cultural heritage
   sites.

   The Additional Financing was to support: i) scaling up existing activities for the completion, rehabilitation
   and reconstruction of selected municipal and tourism infrastructure for cultural heritage sites in the Imereti
   Region that were to ensure the full functionality and sustainability of key investments delivered so far under
   the project; ii) new construction of a Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) and the reconstruction of the
   Vani Museum.

   Component 2: Institutional Development (appraisal estimate US$4.88 million, actual US$9.22 million.
   The component received AF in the amount of US$0.46 million and additional funds from the
   Borrower in the amount of US$3.32 million): This component was to enhance the institutional capacity of
   the Georgian National Tourism Administration (GNTA), the National Agency fur Cultural Heritage
   Preservation of Georgia (NACHP), the Georgian National Museum (GNM), and the project-implementing
   entity and other local and regional entities to implement the following activities: a) establishment of a
   Destination Management Office in Tskaltubo; b) sustainable tourism development and promotion; c)
   preparation of visitor management plans for the sustainability of the project’s cultural heritage sites; d)
   skilled workforce development and capacity building; e) performance monitoring and evaluation; and f)
   construction supervision support.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



   The Additional Financing was to support the necessary technical assistance for detailed designs and
   supervision activities and increased operating costs for the project extension period.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$46.5 million. Actual cost was US$43.24 million.
   According to the ICR (p. 9), US$2.19 million was not disbursed due to a cancelled investment in the
   rehabilitation of the Tskaltubo Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) under the Additional Financing.

   Financing: The project was financed by a US$30.0 million IDA credit (of which US$28.94 million disbursed)
   and a US$9.0 million IBRD loan (of which US$6.79 million disbursed).

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower contributed US$7.5 million as planned.

   Dates: The project was approved on November 6, 2012 and became effective on January 29, 2013. The
   project closed on December 30, 2019, 30 months later than originally planned on June 30, 2017. The
   project was restructured twice.

         On March 16, 2016, the project was restructured to: i) receive Additional Financing (AF) in the
          amount of US$9.0 million. In addition to adding new activities (described above under components),
          the AF was to cover (i) cost overruns caused by additional investments needed for a limited number
          of unforeseen additional restoration works related to cultural heritage sites supported under the
          original operation; and (ii) a financing gap resulting from currency depreciation of the loan
          commitment (XDR) (AF Paper, 2016). The AF (i) triggered a new OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on
          International Waterways); ii) extended the closing date by 18 months from June 30, 2017 to
          December 30, 2018; iii) revised targets of indicators in the Results Framework to reflect the
          increased project scope; and iv) added a new indicator on citizen engagement.
         On March 29, 2018 the project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date by 12 months from
          December 30, 2018 to December 31, 2019 to allow for the completion of all major works that were
          delayed due to concerns by local residents, requests for design revisions by the contractor and the
          Project Implementation Unit (PIU), and the slow mobilization of the contractor; ii) revise the Results
          Framework to introduce a new PDO indicator “Square meters if new or rehabilitated urban public
          spaces in selected municipalities”, revise the wording of the third PDO indicator and associated
          outcome target on the private sector investment, drop the first and second PDO indicator, and revise
          an intermediate outcome indicator.
         The mid-term review took place on April 18, 2017, which was late in the implementation and only
          two months before the original closing date.

   A split rating will not be applied in the assessment as changes to the outcome indicators reflected (i) a scale
   up in line with additional financing in 2016 and (ii) dropping of outcome indicators in 2018 that lacked causal
   linkages to project activities; reduction in the outcome target for private sector investment volume in dollar
   terms reflected depreciation of local currency, as reported, and it is not indicative of the reduced ambition.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)




Rationale
The country was recovering from the twin shocks of a war with Russia in August 2008 and the global
economic and financial crisis, which resulted in a sharp decrease of economic growth. Georgia’s recovery
was stronger than other emerging countries in Eastern and Central Europe due to the government’s
effective counter-cyclical response. Strong exports, foreign direct investment, tourism inflows and high-
levels of public investment were the main contributors to the pace of economic expansion. At that time, the
government aimed to address two priorities: increasing employment and narrowing the current account
deficit. The government supported the private sector to lead economic growth and job creation efforts. The
Government developed a regional development framework to focus its efforts on attracting private investors
in secondary cities across various sectors, including tourism. However, there were some physical and
institutional capacity constraints to attract private investments in regions with high economic development
potential.

The project focused on the Imereti region since it has a lot of tourism potential and has several cultural
heritage sites. Also, according to the PAD (p. 2), the government had already made substantial investments
such as rehabilitation of the airport of the region’s capital Kutaisi and other urban renewal of the capital.
Tourism, trade, and industry were identified as main drivers of growth in several different strategies such as
the Imereti Regional Development Strategy (2010-2014), the Imereti Spatial Economic Analysis 2012, and
the Imereti Tourism Development and Marketing Strategy 2012.

According to the PAD (p. 2), the government of Georgia developed the State Strategy on Regional
Development (2010-2017), which aimed to create a favorable environment for regional socio-economic
development and improve living standards. These were to be achieved through balanced socio-economic
development policies, increased competitiveness, and greater socio-economic equality among the regions.

The objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY19-22),
which focuses under Focus Area 1 (Enhance Inclusive Growth and Competitiveness) on infrastructure
upgrading, cultural heritage renovation, capacity building, and private-sector attraction. The CPF also
emphasized the importance of increasing spatial equity, connectivity, and economic participation in the
regions.

The Bank has been supporting Georgia’s regional development through a programmatic approach, which
has included several projects such as the Regional Development Project (RDP) (with financing in the
amount of US$39.0 million) in the Kakheti region. A follow-on project (The Third RDP with a financing
amount of US$60.0 million) is going to be implemented in the Mtskheta-Mtianeti and Samtskhe-Javakheti
regions.

The ICR’s brief discussion of the relevance of the project’s objectives is focused solely on the PDO
alignment with the strategies of the Government and the Bank. There is no discussion to demonstrate this
project as among those with the highest net economic benefits to Georgia, compared to other investment
alternatives. Moreover, there is also no discussion on whether the project’s design is appropriately pitched
to the country’s institutional capacity. Finally, a clear delineation of the Bank’s role and contribution across
the Bank-financed regional development projects in Georgia would have been useful. Taking everything
together, the relevance of objective rating is High.




                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      REG DEV 2 (P130421)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve infrastructure services to support increased contribution of tourism in the local economy of the
                             Imereti Region.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as urban regeneration and infrastructure
                             rehabilitation were to result in the outputs of improved infrastructure and improved urban environment. Also,
                             project activities such as rehabilitation of cultural heritage, provision of tourism services facilities, and
                             improved access to heritage sites were expected to result in project outputs such as rehabilitated tourist
                             attractions with improved access and facilities. These outputs were to result in outcomes that would signal the
                             achievement of the project’s objective of improved infrastructure and services. The project's theory of change
                             envisioned that improved infrastructure and services were to result in an increased contribution of tourism in
                             the local economy of the Imereti region. As the ICR itself indicates, however, attribution of increased tourism
                             to the project's interventions has not really been established, thus raising issues about the robustness of the
                             theory of change.

                             Outputs

                                        The number of hotel beds in circuit route areas increased from 2,661 beds in 2012 to 4,809 beds in
                                           2019, surpassing the original target of 3,193 beds and the revised target of 4,400 beds.
                                          813,664 square meters of urban public spaces in selected municipalities were rehabilitated,
                                           surpassing the target of 584,296 square meters.
                                          Revenue from tickets sold at Vani museum did not increase as planned since the museum was
                                           rehabilitated but not yet open by the time of project closing. According to the ICR (p. 12), the target
                                           value is expected to be reached by October 2020. However, due to the Covid-19 pandemic it is
                                           highly uncertain if this target value will be reached.
                                          14 buildings were restored and constructed in Tskaltubo and Vani, surpassing the original target of
                                           nine buildings and the revised target of 11 buildings.
                                          Two parks were upgraded in Tskaltubo, achieving the target of two parks.
                                          Five tourism facilities were constructed at cultural heritage sites along the tourist circuit, not achieving
                                           the original target of six facilities and achieving the revised target of five facilities.
                                          2,301 street lighting posts and bulbs were replaced, surpassing the original target of 1,448 and the
                                           revised target of 1,800 street lighting posts and bulbs.
                                          6,164 piped household water connections benefited from the rehabilitation works undertaken by the
                                           project, surpassing the target of 5,000 piped household water connections.

                                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REG DEV 2 (P130421)




      6,252 people in urban areas were provided with access to all-season roads within a 500-meter range,
       surpassing the target of 6,000 people.
      10.3 kilometers of roads were rehabilitated, surpassing the target of 5.1 kilometers.
      The project benefited a total of 22,546 residents, surpassing the target of 20,000 residents. 53 percent
       of the beneficiaries were female, surpassing the target of 50 percent being female.

Outcomes

The ICR reports the following project outcomes:

      The number of international visitors increased from 140,617 people in 2015 to 345,773 people in 2018
         (a 146 percent increase).
      At appraisal, the average annual growth rate of tourists in the Imereti region was projected at 5
         percent. The actual annual growth rate from 2012 to 2018 was significantly higher at 21 percent.
        The average number of nights spent by international visitors in Imereti increased by 9 percent
         between 2015 and 2018.
        The average daily spending by tourists increased between 2012 and 2018 by 19 percent.
        The number of visitors at project sites increased from 740,000 visitors in 2012 to 953,646 visitors in
         2018, surpassing the target of 903,000 people.
        In Tskaltubo municipality, where most of the investments under the project were made, the number of
         visitors staying in hotels increased from 9,097 visitors in 2012 to 44,495 visitors in 2018 (an increase
         of 389 percent).
        The M&E consultant conducted a survey, in response to which 92 percent of the registered
         businesses (and 86 percent of the unregistered businesses) stated that the infrastructure investments
         under the project had a positive impact on their enterprises, and 50 percent of interviewed enterprises
         stated that they had expanded their businesses or started new business activities during the time of
         project implementation.

The project achieved its targets for an increase in the number of international visitors and an increase in the
number of visitors at project sites. The project team consequently included the data for 2019 that was not
available at the ICR stage, which confirmed the positive trend. Also, the survey conducted by the M&E
consultant found a positive impact on registered businesses. Taking everything together, the achievement of
the first objective is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve institutional capacity to support increased contribution of tourism in the local economy of the
Imereti Region:


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               REG DEV 2 (P130421)




                            Rationale
                            The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as public-sector capacity building for
                            tourism promotion and management were to result in outputs such as the operationalization and
                            establishment of a Destination Management Organization (DMO) for coordination efforts, site management,
                            and M&E plans being prepared. Also, the project activity of training employees of the tourism industry was
                            expected to result in the output of employees being trained. These outputs were to result in outcomes that
                            measure the achievement of the project’s objective of improved institutional capacity. The project's theory of
                            change envisioned that improved institutional capacity was to result in an increased contribution of tourism in
                            the local economy. However, this causal and direct link is rather vague. Also, as much as other investment
                            financing sources were already contributing to tourism growth, the incremental value-added of this project has
                            not been clearly demonstrated in the project's theory of change.

                            Outputs:

                                  5,500 people participated in consultation activities during project implementation, surpassing the
                                     target of 5,000 participants.
                                    All grievances were responded to and/or resolved within one month of being filed, achieving the target
                                     of all grievances being resolved within one month of being filed.
                                    All grievances related to delivery of project benefits were addressed, achieving the target.
                                    The Imereti Destination Management Office was established and is operational, achieving the target.
                                    93,250 maps based on geo-tourism database were produced and distributed, surpassing the original
                                     target of 10,000 maps and the revised target of 15,000 maps.
                                    The project financed a contract for sustainable tourism development, marketing, promotion, and
                                     destination management for the Imereti and the Kakheti region. Six visitor management plans were
                                     developed for the cultural heritage sites. For the Gelati Monastery a management plan was developed
                                     in accordance with the requirements of the World Heritage Committee.



                            Outcomes:

                                  US$25 million in private sector investment was mobilized by the Imereti Destination Management
                                     Office in Tskaltubo, slightly below the original target of US$26 million and surpassing the revised
                                     target of US$13 million. According to the ICR (p. 16), the target was revised to reflect a 35 percent
                                     currency devaluation of the Georgian Lari in 2018; it is not indicative of the reduced ambition.

                             The evidence that establishes clear and direct attribution of private investment outcomes to project activities
                            is weak or absent. Therefore, the achievement of Objective 2 is Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REG DEV 2 (P130421)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The achievement of the first objective was Substantial given the increase in the number of international
  visitors and an increase in the number of visitors at project sites. However, the evidence that establishes clear
  and direct attribution of private investment outcomes to project activities is weak or absent. Taking everything
  together, the project's outcome rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

Both, the PAD and the ICR conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The PAD (p. 15) identified the benefits of the
project as increase in tourists (overnight stays and spending), increase in number and profitability of economic
enterprises, property and rental value appreciation, and temporary job creation. The analysis used a 20-year
time period, from 2012-2031, including four years of project implementation. For the economic analysis, financial
costs were corrected and conversion factors were applied. The analysis assumed a 12 percent discount rate.
The analysis calculated a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$10.45 million, with a Financial Internal Rate of Return
(FIRR) of 19.10 percent, and an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 31.05 percent. However, as stated
in the efficacy section, it is questionable to what extent the benefits (increase in overnight stays, spending etc.)
can be traceable to causality chains intrinsic to the project and attributable to the project.

The ICR used a discount rate of 5 percent and calculated an NPV of US$18.26 million, with an FIRR of 16
percent and an EIRR of 27.95 percent. The ICR (p. 19) stated that the returns on investment at project closing
were higher than at appraisal due to several reasons: i) a lower discount rate was used according to the most
recent guidelines (5 percent at closing versus 12 percent at appraisal); ii) the average annual growth rate
between 2012 to 2018 was 21 percent, which was significantly higher than the assumed 5 percent at project
appraisal; and iii) actual loan disbursement was lower.

The ICR also benchmarked unit costs of investments completed under the project with other municipal, urban,
and regional infrastructure projects in Georgia. Under this project, road construction was 10 percent more
expensive per kilometer, municipal buildings were 17 percent more expensive and water and sewage supply
networks were 20 percent more expensive than the average comparator project. However, some of the
investments in infrastructure under this project were complex such as rehabilitation of the municipal buildings,
which were cultural heritage assets and required specific materials and techniques. Therefore, it is important to
emphasize that the works are not easily comparable. Also, the ICR did not provide any evidence to assess if the
other infrastructure projects performed better and were more cost-effective.

Given the lack of evidence that support project attribution of the reported stream of benefits, the validation of
project worth is cast into doubt.



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REG DEV 2 (P130421)



Operational efficiency:

With the AF, the project closed 30 months later than originally planned. According to the ICR (p. 20), the project
experienced several implementation delays as a result of the retendering of contracts including investments in
Tskaltubo and Vani Museum (totaling US$ 9 million). The need to retender these major contracts also resulted
in additional costs for the investments. The Additional Financing was to finance the rehabilitation of the WWTP
in Tskaltubo, which did not take place, since it ended up being financed by the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) and resulted in US$2.3 million remaining undisbursed.

Also, the ICR (p. 22) stated that the project experienced inefficiencies in contract management due to
coordination issues among MDF, the supervision consultant, and contractors. Also, the project faced the
challenge finding high-quality and reliable contractors.

According to the ICR (p. 22) the project experienced delays related to several designs prepared by government
agencies requiring adjustments. The insufficient designs resulted in frequent variation orders of contracts
throughout implementation, and the need for remediation works of several sub-projects experiencing insufficient
quality. This resulted in construction delays and additional costs. The ICR (p. 20) stated that contract variation
orders decreased throughout implementation due to higher design quality and improved contract management
and supervision.

However, significant delays and remediation works indicate an inefficient use of project resources. Therefore,
taking together shortcomings related to economic, financial and operational criteria, the project’s Efficiency
rating is Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     90.00
 Appraisal                                                 31.05
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     81.00
 ICR Estimate                                              27.95
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective is rated High. Efficacy is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings, and
Efficiency is rated Modest. In line with Appendix H, page 38, of the Bank’s Guidance for the preparation of ICRs
(dated September 27, 2018), these sub-ratings lead to an overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REG DEV 2 (P130421)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome can be categorized in the following broad areas:

Financial: According to the ICR (p. 28), investments made under the project will require a budget for
operation and maintenance in order to ensure their sustainability. When the project closed, assets were
handed over to the municipality or church. Some of the investments made under the project were leased to
the private sector. The Municipal Development Fund (MDF) developed for each finalized sub-project financial
agreements and handover agreements, which were signed between the municipality and any other relevant
stakeholders. These agreements ensure the maintenance of the investments. Ensuring sufficient financing
will also be important for the sustainability of the DMO and its role in coordinating the promotion of the
tourism industry.

Technical: While the project built institutional capacity in the tourism sector of the Imereti region, additional
capacity will be necessary when the tourism in the region continues to grow.

Political: According to the ICR (p. 28), the government is implementing the DMO model also in other regions
of Georgia, indicating a political commitment by the government to improve destination management in the
regions. The project is being followed by the Bank’s Third RDP (US$60 million), which also focuses on
infrastructure and cultural heritage development as well as capacity building.

Economic: The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on tourism in Georgia. According to the ICR
(p. 29), the number of international travelers coming to Georgia has already decreased, which will affect the
tourism-related economy and the overall economy of Georgia.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 21), the project was based on analytical studies such as different analyses of
  regional development in Georgia and economic development and tourism potential in the Imereti
  region. Also, the Bank conducted consultations with various stakeholders. The ICR stated that there was
  no sufficient time to take lessons from RDP1 into account, given the long delays in RDP1's start-up,
  which was only 8 months into implementation while the project under review had already been launched.
  However, throughout the implementation of this project, some lessons were incorporated such as
  reducing the number of contracts, focusing investments in new areas of the region only, and delivering
  equipment as well as rehabilitated buildings to ensure the fully functioning of assets. According to the
  Bank team (September 4, 2020), some additional lessons from RDP1 could have been taken into
  consideration for the design and implementation of RDP2. For example, the contract management

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



  capacity of the PIU could have been better assessed during project preparation and more capacity
  training could have been provided to the PIU regarding the management of complex contracts and
  coordination with stakeholders as well as safeguards compliance. In addition, packaging of contracts and
  the use of designs by government agencies, which were also challenges during the implementation of the
  RDP, could have been adequately mitigated.

  According to the ICR (p. 21), implementation arrangements for procurement, safeguards, and financial
  management were based on existing structures and mechanisms. However, since RDP1 became
  effective just 8 months before the RDP 2, there was not sufficient time to assess whether the existing
  structures and mechanisms were actually working.

  Furthermore, additional design shortcomings included a weak theory of change that did not
  sufficiently demonstrate key links between project activities and outcomes. Also, the project had complex
  institutional arrangements with frequent coordination between various stakeholders such as the Ministry
  of Regional Development and Infrastructure, the Georgian National Museum, the National Agency fur
  Cultural Heritage Preservation, the Georgian National Tourism Administration, the United Water
  Company, as well as the municipality of Tskaltubo and other stakeholders. This complex structure also
  resulted in implementation delays.

  Finally, the project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings (see section 9a for more details).

  Given these shortcomings, the Quality at Entry rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 27), the Bank provided close supervision throughout implementation. While the
 first Task Team Leader (TTL) was based in the country, which had a positive impact on addressing any
 early implementation bottlenecks, the second TTL was based in headquarters and conducted supervision
 missions on a bi-annual basis. The Bank team included local cultural heritage specialists who conducted
 regular field visits to project sites. The ICR (p. 28) stated that the Bank discussed implementation issues
 and compliance with safeguards in Implementation Status Reports and Aide-Memoires. When
 implementation progress was downgraded to “Moderately Unsatisfactory” in October 2018, the Bank
 addressed implementation issues such as delays with the works at Vani Museum by increasing supervision
 onsite and conducting bi-weekly calls. The Bank team upgraded the Implementation Progress as well as
 the Development Objective ratings in July 2019 to ‘Moderately Satisfactory’ when it assessed that the
 construction works in Vani museum could be completed on schedule by December 2019 and the
 envisioned project development objectives could be reached until the project closing.

 The ICR (p. 23) stated that the Bank team coordinated with the MDF and the municipality to repair some
 initial investments, which were damaged due to operation and maintenance issues during the initial phase
 of the project.



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



 However, according to the ICR (p. 22), the Bank team did not adequately address the PIU’s insufficient
 capacity for managing multiple contracts at a high quality, coordinating with stakeholders frequently, and
 ensuring safeguard compliance, which resulted in significant implementation delays of several sub-projects
 requiring two extensions of the closing date. These shortcomings were not adequately addressed during
 project preparation.

 Also, the Bank only revised the Results Framework five years into project implementation (two months
 before the original project closing date) (see section 9b for more details). The outcome target for volume of
 the private sector investment was reduced only in 2018, when the Additional Financing Restructuring
 Paper reported the exchange rate GEL2.50: USD 1 in 2016; the same rate as reported in 2018 to justify the
 target adjustment.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s development objective was clearly specified. The indicators were set to measure the outputs
 and outcomes related to improved infrastructure and institutional capacity. However, the theory of change
 and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes were not sufficiently sound or
 well reflected in the project's results framework and underlying assumptions. The selected indicators did
 not sufficiently measure outcomes that were attributable to the achievement of the objective. Also, the M&E
 design was far too one dimensional given the variety of project activities. Furthermore, the Results
 Framework included two PDO indicators (“increased number of hours per day of piped water services in
 Tskaltubo” and “increased energy efficiency of street lighting in Tskaltubo”) that were dropped during the
 second project restructuring in April 2018 since the cause-effect relationship between project activities and
 the indicators was not clear (Project Restructuring Paper, 2018). In addition, these indicators would not be
 expected to contribute to the increased tourism in the local economy of the Imereti region.

 Also, the ICR (p. 25) stated that the Results Framework did not capture the increased volume of all private-
 sector investments mobilized in Tskaltubo related to project activities instead of only those mobilized by the
 DMO.

 All indicators had a target and a baseline when possible and were sufficiently specific. The revised
 Framework was relatively extensive and included four PDO indicators and 16 intermediate outcome
 indicators. According to the PAD (p. 45), the Municipal Development Fund (MDF) was to be responsible for
 the project’s M&E. The MDF was to produce quarterly progress reports to assess implementation and
 suggest any need for adjustments. The MDF capacity in data collection and analysis was to be




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



 strengthened by an international M&E consulting firm whose services were to be obtained through
 Component 2.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 25), M&E data was adequately collected and analyzed. The Bank team stated
  (July 23, 2020) that the M&E data was found to be reliable and of good quality. The Imereti Tourism
  Development and Marketing Strategy provided baseline data. The MDF reported implementation
  progress of each sub-project in its quarterly progress reports.

  The project hired a M&E consultant to conduct M&E activities. Although the M&E consultant’s work
  products were of high quality, the consultant was hired too late and the concomitant revision of the
  Results Framework occurred only a year before the project’s closing date, that in itself had already been
  extended 2.5 years. Thus, the goals set at the M&E design stage did not really materialize, which
  hampered the tracking of implementation progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 25), M&E was used to track implementation progress. Also, M&E data was
  used to inform the MDF and Bank about implementation bottlenecks that required additional supervision
  such as the establishment of the DMO and the rehabilitation of the Vani Museum. However, as stated
  above, the M&E consultant was hired late and the Results Framework was revised only one year before
  the project closed. Therefore it is questionable to what extent the project’s M&E could be used to assess
  implementation progress.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement). The Additional Financing in 2016 triggered OP/BP 7.50 (International Waterways).

   According to the ICR (p. 26), the project prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF), which
   was approved by the Bank. Each sub-project was screened in terms of environmental, social, and cultural
   heritage impacts. Also, environmental screening reports, environmental reviews and/or Environmental
   Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared. The project faced noncompliance issues in regards to waste
   disposal, which was addressed by strengthening the environmental monitoring and reporting capacity of the
   MDF greatly.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    REG DEV 2 (P130421)



  Also, compliance with health and safety standards for onsite workers was an issue. The ICR (p. 26) stated
  that the management of safeguards improved throughout implementation since the Municipal Development
  Fund (MDF) improved its safeguard monitoring and reporting capacity as well as close supervision.

  The ICR (p. 26) stated that the project complied with OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). The PIU
  coordinated with the Ministry of Culture, the National Agency of Cultural Heritage Preservation and the
  church to ensure compliance with the safeguard policy. However, six months before project closing the
  safeguard policy rating was downgraded to “Moderately Satisfactory” due to significant delays in the works
  at the Vani Museum, which resulted in the inaccessibility of the museum to the public longer than planned.

  Also, the ICR stated that the project complied with OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The project
  prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which was accepted by the Bank. Resettlement took
  place under one sub-project at Gelati Monastery due to livelihood impacts. The project prepared an
  abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan for this sub-project in accordance with the Bank.

  OP/BP 7.50 (International Waterways) was triggered due to the planned rehabilitation of the wastewater
  treatment plant (WWTP) in Tskaltubo. The EMF was updated and redisclosed. However, according to the
  Bank team (July 23, 2020), the construction of the WWTP in Tskaltubo was not financed under the project
  in the end.

  The project developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), which included a unified phone and email
  address managed by one person at the MDF. The ICR (p. 26) stated that three grievances were recorded
  and addressed appropriately.

  The project also conducted a Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage, and Social Assessment to assess
  the tourism development vision and action plan defined in the Imereti Tourism Development and Marketing
  Strategy in terms of environmentally and socially sustainability.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 27), the project’s procurement rating was Satisfactory. However, during the first
  year the project faced the challenge of contracts having to be amended due to incomplete designs.
  According to the Bank team (July 23, 2020), Tskaltubo, where most of the construction works were
  implemented, had a very specific and sensitive context with a rich network of thermal and mineral water
  boreholes. This specific context was not appropriately considered in the designs for the construction of
  underground infrastructure, roads, etc. Other designs did not take into consideration the specific
  requirements of cultural heritage works and the sensitive nature of cultural heritage sites. Also, the project
  faced the challenge of low participation of bidders in procurement processes. This issue was addressed by
  better packaging of contracts to increase values of contracts and attracting participation of medium-size
  contractors, and reassessing cost estimates to ensure that they reflected current market prices.
  Furthermore, the MDF coordinated with the Bank to offer trainings for contractors and potential bidders.

  Financial Management:


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



   According to the Bank team (July 23, 2020), the project complied with the Bank’s financial covenants; the
   external auditor’s opinion was unqualified and provided on a timely basis.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p.29-30) included several lessons, which were adapted by IEG:

      Cultural heritage projects that include retrofitting, restoration, and adaptive
         reuse require specialized workers and time, which need to be taken into account in the
         project design. In this project, these factors were not sufficiently taken into account when
         preparing the project, resulting in delays during implementation. Also, several designs
         prepared by government agencies had to be adjusted to the actual situation, also resulting in
         delays in construction and the necessity to revise works for several sub-projects due to poor
         quality resulting in additional costs.

      Designing a Results Framework that measures the impact of project activities needs
         to be put in place before project implementation starts. In this project, major changes in
         M&E such as hiring an M&E consultant and revising the Results Framework only took place
         one year before project closure. This makes the extent to which the project’s theory of
         change was accurate and operational questionable as well as to what extent reliable data
         was collected.

      Learning from previous projects, especially if the current project is a follow-on
         project, is critical and helps to develop mitigation measures to ensure that previous

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REG DEV 2 (P130421)



        issues do not materialize again. In this project, the first RDP was only effective for eight
        months before this project became effective, not allowing to learn from the first RDP’s
        implementation experience. Therefore, the Bank team could not take previous lessons
        learned into account, which resulted in several implementation issues (similar to the ones of
        the first RDP) such as the PIU not having the necessary capacity to perform its procurement
        functions resulting in implementation delays.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Yes. There are many design and implementation aspects of this project that need to be assessed in the field
  in consultation with stakeholders and beneficiaries. Questions to discuss could include:

         What are the lessons from RDP 1 that could have informed and improved the performance of RDP 2?
         What lesson-learning is occurring across the three regional development projects? Are they
            strategically consistent?
           What is the relative significance of the three regional development projects vis-à-vis other similar or
            related projects funded by other donors and the private sector?
           How could/should the theory of change and the Results Framework be designed when multiple lines of
            causality and attribution are present?
           What are the appropriate indicators for these kinds of projects, especially when they finance
            infrastructure components like water supply, electricity distribution, street lighting, etc.?
           Beyond just procurement and implementation aspects, what sector-wide lessons can be derived from
            the first two projects, and are there specific lessons that the Third project should be focusing on
            deriving?



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR is internally
consistent and points out implementation bottlenecks that resulted in delays. While well presented, the cost-
benefit analysis possibly overstated project benefits. Also, the ICR does not report whether the external
auditor’s opinions were unqualified and timely. Most importantly, the ICR would have benefitted from a stronger
discussion of the counterfactual. The lack of analysis on attribution issues meant that contribution versus
attribution of outcomes was not well articulated, thus raising doubts in IEG whether the achievements were as
legitimate as claimed. While it is understandable that more recent data as 2018 was not available when the
ICR was written, it would have been important to ensure that the reader understands why that was the case
and why the presented data is still relevant for project achievements.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REG DEV 2 (P130421)



Finally, the ICR made a factual error in describing the AF project restructuring. It says in para 19 that the AF
mainly aimed to finance a number of cost overruns as well as “to address a financing gap resulting from the
national currency devaluation (there was a 35 percent exchange rate devaluation of the Georgian Lari with
respect to the US$).” As per the Additional Financing Restructuring Paper (2016), the currency depreciation
was in the loan commitment (XDR)- not the local currency- that led to a financing gap (page 23). While there
was a depreciation of the local currency at that time, a 35 percent exchange rate devaluation of the Georgian
Lari with respect to the US dollar was reported in the Project Restructuring Paper of 2018 to justify the
adjustment of the outcome target; the exchange rate was however the same as in 2016 (GEL2.50: USD 1).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
