     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022244

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P126361                                   TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-15774                                  31-Dec-2018                                            5,964,639.94

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Sep-2013                               31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               5,980,000.00                                  5,980,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                5,964,639.94                                  5,964,639.94

 Actual                                            5,964,639.94                                  5,964,639.94




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               Stephen Hutton                Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) in the PAD (para 16) was to enhance biodiversity conservation in
   the Kihansi catchment. In this context, “enhance” was defined as “to provide for long term sustainability of
   species and institutions” (Ibid).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



   In the Global Environment Facility Grant Agreement dated December 2, 2013, the PDO was to enhance
   biodiversity conservation in the Recipient's Kihansi catchment (Schedule 1, page 4). The Recipient was
   United Republic of Tanzania.

   The PDO in the PAD provided a definition of “enhance” in the objective, which was not indicated in the Grant
   Agreement. The PDO in the PAD was used for this ICR Review, as it was more specific and in line with the
   ICR (para 7).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:

   1: Institutional capacity building for the management of the Kihansi catchment (Planned: US$1.07
   million, Actual: US$1.07 million). This component had two sub-components: (i) Developing operational
   guidelines for conducting the Environmental Flow Assessment to incorporate into the Integrated Water
   Resource Development and Management Planning Framework; and (ii) Developing a sustainable financing
   plan for the Kihansi catchment to ensure conservation and management in the long-term.

   2: Conserve endangered species in the Kihansi catchment (Planned: US$4.61 million, Actual:
   US$4.60 million). This component had two sub-components: (i) Supporting conservation of key species
   and habitats through monitoring and reintroducing the Kihansi Spray Toad (KST), mapping and
   monitoring other endangered species such as wild coffee and butterfly species, and developing a Kihansi
   Catchment Management Plan (KCMP) to gazette and protect priority biodiversity hotspots and important
   water resources areas. (ii) Supporting community conservation and livelihood activities aimed at improving
   use of resources and introduction to alternative livelihood activities. This included training of key sector staff
   in ecological monitoring and sharing of best practices in endangered species conservation with local and
   international civil society organizations (CSOs). Training in Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and land use
   practices to enhance water quality and quantity in the Kihansi catchment would be provided to three village
   communities in upstream and downstream.

   3: Project Management (Planned: US$0.30 million, Actual: US$0.30 million). This covered project
   management including financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation and safeguards
   monitoring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated to be US$24.28 million, which consisted of
   World Bank financing of US$5.98 million and non-World Bank financing of 18.3 million (ICR, page 3). At
   project closing, the total actual cost was about US$5.96 million for World Bank financing (Ibid).


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



   Financing: At appraisal, the project was expected to be financed with the grant of US$5.98 million from the
   Global Environment Facility (GEF), which complemented US$14.67 million from a national water sector
   program funded by development partners titled the Water Sector Development Program (WSDP), in
   combination with the Borrower's in-kind contribution of US$3.62 million (PAD, Annex 6, para 22). Actual
   project financing came from the grant of about US$5.96 million from the GEF, in-kind contributions of
   US$3.62 million from the Borrower, the original US$14.67 million and an additional financing of US$9 million
   from the WSDP (ICR, Annex 4, para 18).

   Dates: The project was approved on September 26, 2013, and became effective on December 2, 2013.
   The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was completed on June 6, 2016. The project was closed on December 31,
   2019, one year after the original closing date of December 31, 2018.

   Restructuring: There was one restructuring of the project which was approved in June 2017. This
   restructuring resulted in changes in the results framework, specifically revisions of the PDO indicators and
   the Intermediate Results (IR) indicators, as described below in Section 9.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Sector Context. Tanzania is home to large forests and woodlands, freshwater lakes, a variety of flora and
fauna, and ecosystems, as well as various endangered species of plants and animals. Among the
biologically rich ecosystems in Tanzania, freshwater ecosystems are of particular importance. Tanzania
contains the highest diversity of endangered aquatic dependent organisms of any East African nation, and
twice that of any of its neighbors (PAD, para 5). Within Tanzania, the Kihansi catchment located in south
central Tanzania within the Rufiji River basin is of particular global importance because of the high numbers
of critically endangered and highly endemic plant and animal species which occur here. The construction of
the Lower Kihansi Hydropower Plant, in which the Bank provided financing as one of the development
partners (PAD, para 6), diverted water away from the waterfall and destroyed spray wetlands habitat. In
order to incorporate biodiversity protection into water resource management and to allocate water for the
environment, the government developed a legal and policy framework under the Bank-financed Lower
Kihansi Environmental Management Project (LKEMP). While the legal and policy framework was
established, its operationalization encountered challenges on sustainability due to the lack of financial and
operational capacities in the ministries and national agencies that were responsible for biodiversity
conservation. In addition, the agricultural practices by the local communities caused pollution and
degradation to the watershed, further threatening the endemic species. The project objective was relevant
to address the issue as it aimed for achieving long-term sustainability of institutions.

Relevance to Government Strategies. The project was aligned with the National Strategy for Growth and
Poverty Reduction II (NSGRP II, MKUKUTA II) (2010/11-2014/15), the National Five Year Development
Plan (2011/12-2015/16), and Tanzania Development Vision 2025. The project aimed to contribute to the
NSGRP II’s fourth goal under the Growth for Reduction of Income Poverty Cluster, which envisioned
“ensuring food and nutrition security and environmental sustainability and climate change adaptation and
mitigation” (PAD, para 12).



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



               Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project was consistent with the Country
               Assistance Strategy (FY12-15), especially the first strategy on Promote Inclusive and Sustainable Private
               Sector-Led Growth and the outcome on enhanced sustainability and improved management of natural
               resources. (PAD, para 13). At project closing, the PDO supported the objectives of the current Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-22) through objective 1.3. “Manage Natural Resources for Resilient
               Economic Growth” under Focus Area 1: “Enhance Productivity and Accelerate Equitable and Sustainable
               Growth” by strengthening the knowledge and use of natural resource management at the institutional level
               to incorporate environmental considerations in planning and development. The project was also aligned
               with CPF objective 3.1 “Strengthen Public Sector Accountability and Financial Efficiency in Delivering
               Services” through the development of a financing plan for the Kihansi Catchment.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance biodiversity conservation in the Kihansi catchment

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: Conducting an economic analysis of water use of the Lower Kihansi Hydropower Plant
                             and an economic valuation of ecosystem services from the Kihansi Catchment would inform development of a
                             sustainable financing plan of the catchment, which served to inform the government of financial resources
                             needed to maintain the ecological integrity of the protected area and fund the environmental management
                             activities of the various institutions. The economic analysis and valuation, combined with a communication
                             strategy for the Rufiji River Basin, would support developing and mainstreaming operational guidelines for
                             environmental flow assessments, leading to a short-term outcome of incorporated environmental
                             management in planning for water resources and infrastructure. Establishment of a protected area in the
                             catchment would protect critically endangered and endemic species. Assessing endemic species in the
                             Kihansi Gorge would support research on amphibian diseases. Supporting maintenance and operation of the
                             captive and breeding facilities of the Kihansi Spray Toads (KSTs), conducting surveillance and monitoring of
                             chytrid fungus, and reintroducing the KSTs to the Kihansi Gorge spray wetlands would increase self-
                             sustaining population of the KSTs. A critical assumption here was that the re-introduced KSTs would be able
                             to survive and self-sustain in the wild. Conducting research on the new indigenous species of wild coffee and
                             butterfly would identify and map diversity and propagation of the species. The legally established protected
                             area in the catchment, the Kihansi Catchment Management Plan, the increased self-sustaining population of
                             the KSTs, and the research findings on the new endemic species would restore or preserve the targeted
                             species (i.e. the KSTs, the wild coffee, and the new butterfly together with host plants species), leading to a
                             short-term outcome of protected endemic flora and fauna. Identifying and mapping water sources in the
                             surrounding districts would support developing the Kihansi Catchment Management Plan. Providing training
                             in integrated pest management and agricultural land use practices would improve use of agrochemicals by

                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



surrounding communities, leading to a short-term outcome of strengthened awareness and capacity of the
communities on conservation. The short-term outcomes listed above would lead to the medium-term
outcome of enhanced biodiversity conservation in the Kihansi catchment associated with the project
development objective (PDO). The focus of the PDO was twofold: a long-term sustainability of species
and institutions. The first and third short-term outcomes aimed to mainly contribute to the long-term
sustainability of institutions, while the second one aimed to mainly contribute to that of species. A critical
assumption was that the Tanzania National Electric Supply Company would maintain infrastructure and water
flows required to sustain the ecosystem. The achievement of the medium-term outcome would ultimately
contribute to long-term outcomes of sustainable management of water resources and watersheds as well as
conservation of endemic and endangered species. A critical assumption here was that the government would
develop a long-term plan to achieve environmental sustainability with clear descriptions on fiduciary
and technical responsibilities of the ministries and agencies, and would mainstream the long-term plan into
sector plans and budgets.

Outputs:

The key outputs were organized below based on three intended intermediate outcomes.

Environmental management incorporated in planning for water resources and infrastructure

      The national protected area was not legally established, not meeting the target (ICR, page 33). The
       gazettement process of the protected area was delayed due to a prolonged decision-making on the
       protection status of the Njelela Forest Reserve, which occupied a large area in the proposed protected
       area. After appraisal, the Njelela Forest Reserve was found to already possess a protection status as
       national forest reserve. Whether to retain the national forest reserve status had implications on
       livelihoods for the surrounding communities, who would be able to access fuel wood, herbs, and bush
       meats in a conservation area but not in a reserve (ICR, page 28). In the Project Steering Committee
       on October 17, 2019, it was decided to retain the national forest reserve status of the Njelela Forest
       Reserve and to gazette Kihansi Environmental Protected Area (KEPA). The decision-making on the
       gazettement was also delayed because the Permanent Secretary of the Vice President’s Office
       changed three times between 2016 and 2019 (ICR, para 61). A Conservation Management Plan,
       which aimed for a co-management of the KEPA, was developed (ICR, page 33). The plan was not
       approved, though it was at an advanced stage at project closing.
      No sustainable financing mechanism was established based on payment for ecosystem services, not
       meeting the target (ICR, page 33). A draft financing plan was completed, informed by two studies:
       Economic Valuation of Ecosystem Services from Kihansi Catchment and Economic Analysis of water
       use of Lower Kihansi Hydropower Plant. The draft of the financing plan was reviewed by authorities
       but not approved at project closure, pending a final decision to be made based on the legal status of
       the Kihansi catchment. The government decided the Kihansi catchment to be a part of the existing
       Njerera Forest Reserve and under the oversight of the Tanzania Forestry Service, which led to
       operational changes of the financing mechanism (Regional Director’s response to IEG). The studies
       conducted under the project contributed to develop a collaborative management plan, which was
       expected to be formalized by an endorsement of a memoranda of understanding in November 2020
       and incorporated into annual budgets and plans of the relevant institutions (Ibid). To what extent the
       new financing approach would lead to the long-term financial sustainability after the end of support
       from the project was uncertain. Operational guidelines for conducting environmental flow assessment
       were developed and approved by the National Environment Management Council, but were still
       waiting for an approval from the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (ICR, page 35). Though the guidelines

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



      were not formally approved by the Minister, the application of the guidelines was tested by the
      ministry, contributing to an establishment of an environmental water requirement of the Kihansi gorge
      and an identification of the need to develop an environmental water assessment guidelines specific to
      gorge environments (ICR, para 23). Guidelines on rivers and riverbank management were developed
      and submitted to NEMC in April 2020, though the approval and implementation by the Steering
      Committee were scheduled for November 2020, being delayed due to the Covid-19 pandemic (ICR,
      page 54; Regional Director’s response to IEG).
     New areas outside protected areas managed in a biodiversity-friendly manner increased from the
      baseline of 9 hectares to the actual achievement of 3,187 hectares, not meeting the target of 5,500
      hectares (58 percent of the target) (ICR, page 36). This indicator measured hectares outside protected
      areas where, as a result of the operation, the site became managed at least in part to obtain
      biodiversity gains (PAD, page 21). The increased area of 3,187 hectares was demarcated for the
      Kihansi Environmental Protected Area (KEPA). The target was raised from 4,000 hectares to 5,500
      hectares at restructuring. The target was under-achieved because it was found during the
      implementation that more land than initially planned had some forms of protected status, and hence
      was not covered by the indicator (Response from the TTL/ICR team).

Endemic flora and fauna protected

     The coverage area of functioning spray irrigation system in the gorge increased from the baseline of
      1.5 hectares to the actual achievement of 2 hectares, meeting the target of 2 hectares (ICR, page 34),
      supporting the re-establishment of the habitat of the KST and the reduction of invasive species of
      flora. The project provided equipment to extend and maintain the sprinkler lines, and a suspension
      bridge to support this.
     Chytrid disease, a main contributor to the KST extinction in the wild, was controlled, meeting the target
      (ICR, page 36). Foot sterilization baths were installed at all entry points of the gorge with the
      instruction signs.

Awareness and capacity of the communities on conservation strengthened

     The Kihansi Catchment Management Plan was developed and approved by the Rufiji Basin Water
      Board (RBWB) in 2017, meeting the target (ICR, para 32). The management plan was developed in a
      participatory manner involving the Local Government Authorities and the Water Users Associations,
      with an aim to guide sustainable use of the Kihansi catchment resources by providing mapping of
      biodiversity rich sites, vital water sources, harmful land use practices, and illegal use of water.
      Following its approval, awareness campaigns were conducted in 22 villages, which introduced the
      residents with the management plan and the existing legislation and policies (ICR, para 32).
     A hundred percent of the important water sources were managed based on the Kihansi Catchment
      Management Plan in the three districts that formed Kihansi sub-catchment, meeting the target (ICR,
      page 37). The indicator could have been clearer if it included accompanying definitions. The
      integrated approach for catchment conservation enhanced the working relationship between Village
      Councils and Water User Associations through identification of 901 water sources and demarcation of
      important ones (ICR, para 32). The mapping exercise highlighted the need for gazettement of the
      catchment, showing that 77 percent of the perennial water sources and 62 percent of the seasonal
      water sources were not protected (ICR, para 32). The integrated approach for catchment conservation
      also enhanced the communities’ understanding of the need and importance of water sources
      conservation for livelihood improvements (Response from the TTL/ICR team). However, more time

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



       would be needed to tell whether the observed improvements in water sources management would
       lead to substantial behavior changes in the future. To achieve that, further interventions might be
       required.
      Villages using integrated pest management strategies for cropping and pesticides use increased from
       the baseline of zero to the actual achievement of 22 villages, surpassing the target of 14 villages (157
       percent of the target) (ICR, page 37). The activity originally targeted the 14 upstream villages in the
       Kilolo and Mufindi districts, and later expanded to the 8 villages in the Kilombero District. The
       Integrated Pest Management (IPM) plan packages and guidelines for agricultural products were
       developed in Swahili and English languages in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and
       distributed to the Districts of Kilolo, Mufindi, and Kilombero for further dissemination to the farmers.
       Economic benefits expected from new agricultural techniques and crops were the main motivations of
       the communities to participate in the training on IPM and land use practices (ICR, para 80).
      The project directly benefited 3,216 people, exceeding the target of 3,000 people (107 percent of the
       target), of which 52 percent was female, exceeding the target of 50 percent (ICR, page 38). No
       beneficiary survey was conducted; thus, to what extent the communities’ awareness was raised was
       not measured. On a positive side, the ICR mission found that villagers interviewed in the Mufindi and
       Kilombero districts were satisfied with the results of the project and would not revert to previous
       agricultural practices (ICR, para 34). In addition, all districts reported that introducing beekeeping as
       an alternative livelihood activity contributed to reduce a local agricultural practice of valley bottom
       cultivation which could cause destruction of wetland vegetation and contamination of water sources
       (ICR, para 34).

Outcomes:

Referring to the theory of change above, of the three short-term outcomes that contributed to the
achievement of the project objective, environmental management incorporated in planning for water
resources and infrastructure was partially achieved. No financing mechanism for the catchment was
established as envisioned, while the post-project activities to protect the catchment were planned to be
conducted under annual budgets and plans of the relevant institutions. The operational guidelines for
conducting environmental flow assessment informed plans on environmental water management of the
Kihansi gorge, though the guidelines had not been fully approved. The short-term outcome on endemic
fauna and flora protected was achieved to a certain extent. One of three targeted species was re-introduced
less than half of its target population, though it was noted that the reintroduction of the toad was the
pioneering activity in the world without prior benchmarks. Two of them maintained the status, though the
achievement’s attributability to the project could be questioned, as no protection status of the Kihansi
catchment was established by project closing. The short-term outcome on community awareness and
capacity on conservation strengthened was mostly achieved, especially in terms of water sources
protection and integrated pest management; however, no beneficiary survey was conducted to measure
behavior changes at the community level.

      Total area in the Kihansi catchment protected for biodiversity conservation increased from the
       baseline of 9,080 hectares to the actual achievement of 12,267 hectares, not fully meeting the target
       of 13,080 hectares (93 percent of the target) (ICR, page 31). The baseline of 9,080 hectares was an
       area already under protection status including the areas protected by the Njelela Forest Reserve and
       the Tanzania National Electric Supply Company. The increased area of 3,187 hectares was newly
       demarcated for the Kihansi Environmental Protected Area (KEPA). The PDO outcome indicator on the
       area under protection was not fully adequate to measure the enhancement of long-term sustainability


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



       of species or institutions, as it did not show what changes in the biodiversity were brought by what
       protection measures.
      Of the three targeted endemic species of Nectrophrynoides asperiginis, Coffea kihansiensis,
       Charaxes mtuiae, two likely maintained their status while a third was re-introduced but achieved less
       than half of its target population (ICR, page 31). The estimation involved in the target setting for the
       third was difficult to make as such reintroduction activity had never been done in the world.
             o The Kihansi Spray Toad (KST), Nectophrynoides asperiginis, was restored with the increased
               population from the baseline of zero to the actual achievement of 445, partially meeting the
               target of 1,000 (44 percent of the target) (ICR, page 31). The under-achievement in the PDO
               outcome indicator could be attributed to: (1) the less than expected number of releases, (2) the
               age class of the released KSTs, (3) the accuracy of the estimates of the KST population in the
               wild, and (4) the lack of prior benchmarks. First, there were 14,713 KSTs reintroduced under
               the project, which was significantly lower than the planned annual releases of from 4,000 to
               5,000 KSTs due to the chytrid fungus outbreaks in the captive breeding facilities (ICR, para 27
               and 60). Second, it was found during implementation that the babies and juveniles had a
               higher probability of survival than the adults, though baby toads comprised of only about 25
               percent of the KSTs released between 2012 to 2020 (ICR, Annex 7, page 57). Third,
               estimating the wild KST population faced accuracy challenges, especially after discontinuation
               of some monitoring methodologies introduced under the project, such as marking the released
               KSTs with elastomer tags and conducting intensive surveys of the KST population outside of
               enclosures (ICR, para 27). Fourth, the reintroduction of amphibians was a globally pioneering
               attempt which did not have prior benchmarks (Regional Director’s response to IEG), implying
               the difficulty to set an appropriate target thus an issue in achievability. The third and fourth
               points above indicated the indicator was not adequate in terms of measurability to justify the
               achievement of the outcome. Despite the under-achievement of the indicator, what was
               achieved and learned through the reintroduction activity was substantial progress. The
               government showed commitment to continue the reintroduction of KSTs after project closing,
               by extending the KST Breeding Agreement with the Wildlife Conservation Society until June
               2021 and identifying the location of a new, larger captive breeding facility (Ibid).
             o The wild coffee, Coffea kihansiensis, was preserved, as the population stayed the same from
               the baseline of 21,000 to the actual achievement of 21,000, meeting the target of 21,000 (ICR,
               page 32). The wild coffee was restricted to the Kihansi gorge, which made it more extinction-
               prone than species having broad geographic ranges (PAD, page 60). Based on the studies
               supported by the project, the wild coffee showed a potential for generic improvement of locally
               produced coffee plants through hybridization and an expected benefit to the industry (ICR,
               para 51).
             o The host plants of the new species of butterfly, Charaxes mtuiae, were restored in the area
               from the baseline of zero to the actual achievement of 200 hectares, meeting the target of 200
               hectares (ICR, page 32). At appraisal, the taxonomic status and conservation of the endemic
               butterfly was not fully known. The project supported a research on the butterfly and its host
               plant that recorded an abundant number of 890 stems of the host plant in the gorge (ICR,
               para 30). No immediate threats to the host plants were indicated in the research, except for
               wildfires triggered by valley bottom cultivation could be an issue.

In sum, on the two focuses of the project objective, the long-term sustainability of species was achieved to a
certain extent, while that of institutions was partially achieved, as described above. Overall, the achievement
of the project objective is rated substantial.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As described under Outcome of Objective 1, the overall efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, no economic analysis was conducted due to difficulties to estimate the
   monetary value of expected benefits at local, country, and global level (PAD, para 40). At project closing, the
   ICR (Annex 4, page 45) provided an economic analysis of the project based on an assessment of the watershed
   value and the actual area covered by the project direct interventions. No Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was
   provided.

   The methodology of the ICR economic analysis is not fully clear, and may apply a questionable methodology.
   The analysis conducts a cost benefit analysis intending to compare total anticipated costs (including those costs
   outside the project from implementing the environmental management plan) to total expected benefits. The
   assessment of costs appears reasonable. The assessment of benefits draws on the project-supported
   assessment of the Kihansi river catchment ecosystem services (e.g. water and forest resources for household
   consumption and economic activities, crop production, biodiversity conservation, and carbon sequestration),
   which concludes the total value of the catchment was US$629,087 per hectare (ICR, Annex 4, para 4).
   However, it was not clear what incremental change or averted loss of ecosystem services was assumed to be
   caused by the project, and the analysis may even implicitly assume that the entire ecosystem service value is
   attributable to the project – i.e. that without the project the ecosystem services value of the project area would
   be zero. This would be unrealistic. Second, the analysis appears to include as a benefit an environmental fee of
   1 percent of the annual revenues of the Tanzania National Electric Supply Company, forest plantations,
   household timber production, and crop production could be collected, which would be equivalent to US$55.9 per
   hectare (ICR, Annex 4, para 5). However, the fee levied on users should not be considered as an economic
   benefit, but rather as transfer payment. The 1 percent level is arbitrary and is not a proxy of environmental
   benefits. Such a fee could be considered as part of a financial analysis but not an economic analysis.

   Aspects of Design and Implementation that Influenced Efficiency: There were delays in the project
   initiation, the KST reintroduction, and the gazettement of the Kihansi Environmental Protected Area
   (KEPA). First, there were initial delays in implementation due to a freeze on disbursements for the Bank’s
   portfolio in Tanzania until 2015. It constrained the project to conduct only preparatory work in the first year.

                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



Second, for the first two years of the project, Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute lacked institutional and
financial capacities to carry out its responsibility on the reintroduction of the KSTs under Subcomponent 2.1:
Species and habitat conservation, which limited full utilization of the experience gained under the preceding
intervention. Third, establishing the Kihansi gorge as an Environmental Protected Area was delayed, due to the
fragmented protection status of the demarcated area. In addition, Permanent Secretaries in the Vice President’s
Office changed three times between 2016 and 2019, causing the decision on gazettement of the KEPA to be
pending until project closing (ICR, para 61). Those adverse factors caused the project to be extended for one
year without additional financing.

In sum, the economic analysis did not provide clear evidence of substantial economic value of the project, and
the implementation efficiency was negatively affected by institutional and financial issues. Overall, the efficiency
is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was substantial, as the project objective aimed to improve sustainability of
institutions that was identified as an obstacle to implement the policy and legal framework on biodiversity
conservation established in the preceding project. The achievement of objective was substantial. Of the three
short-term outcomes that contributed to the efficacy, the one for the incorporated environmental management in
planning for water resources and infrastructure was partially achieved due to the shift in the envisioned
protection status of the Kihansi catchment from a protected area to a forest reserve, which required changes in
the financing approach. The operational guidelines on environmental flow assessment informed plans on
environmental water management of the Kihansi gorge, though official approval and implementation were yet to
be done in the future. The one for the protected endemic species was mostly achieved considering the
pioneering nature of the activity to reintroduce the KSTs the wild. The one for the strengthened community
awareness and capacity was mostly achieved, especially in terms of water sources protection and integrated
pest management. The efficiency was modest, as there is a lack of clear evidence on the economic value of the
project. The adverse factors in design and implementation also caused the implementation delays, affecting the
efficiency. Overall, the outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were following risks to the sustainability of the achieved results presented in the ICR:

1. Frequent reintroductions of the Kihansi Spray Toad (KST) were needed over the near future to
sustain species recovery. The agreement between the government and the Bronx and Toledo Zoos to
breed the KST was expired in June 2020. While the government was looking to have a significant portion of
the KST transferred to the facilities in Tanzania, it was expected to take some time until the facilities would
be adequately prepared to receive the toads. The last transfer of KST planned for April 2020 was cancelled
due to travel restrictions following the novel coronavirus outbreak. To overcome the risk, NEMC confirmed
that the government was committed to continuing the program in its current state for at least two years and
going to maintain the same coordination arrangements with other agencies as under the project to allow a
smooth transition.

2. The project handover process was incomplete at project closing. Some agencies like the Tanzania
Wildlife Research Institute (TAWIRI) were unclear of their roles after project closing. To overcome the risk,
NEMC planned to continue the oversight of the steering committee and establish the MOUs with the
respective agencies before the end of the project to sustain accountability and project efforts. The MOUs
were drafted and expected to be signed at the steering committee meeting planned for April but that was
postponed due the novel coronavirus outbreak. Moreover, the ministries and agencies were expected to
adopt the recommendations of the financing plan to ensure that the post-project budget for conservation
would be adequate.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project ensured strategic relevance and approach adequately before appraisal. Technical and
  environmental aspects were considered based on the prior sector intervention. Based on the 10 years of
  experience and lessons learned from the Lower Kihansi Environmental Management Project (LKEMP),
  the Bank identified, prepared, and appraised a well-grounded project. The project could have been
  prepared faster to fully utilize the momentum of the LKEMP, which was gradually lost after it was closed
  in 2011, even though there was a support from the Additional Financing for the Tanzania Energy
  Development and Access Expansion Project (2010-14) on a transition from the LKEMP to this project
  (ICR, para 56). Risk assessment and mitigation were not fully adequate to avoid the implementation
  delays. It was due to the insufficient data managed by the government and provided to the Bank team at
  preparation, as well as the ambiguity in the boundaries of the forest reserve which was demarcated in
  2019 (Regional Director’s response to IEG). Considering that the issue with the forest reserve and status


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



  became a major cause of delays and failure to finalize by project closing, identifying the existing
  protection status of target areas with a verification of the accuracy of the data was essential during
  preparation. Revealing the issue at design would have allowed the project to address it early in
  implementation (ICR, para 73). Overall, the quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was supervised by the TTL who was involved in the preceding project and stationed in the
 country. It materialized close supervision and coordination with the government, to deal with sensitive
 issues such as the reintroduction of the KST. The Bank team’s missions were held biannually to supervise
 financial management, procurement, and safeguards. The detailed Aide memoires and the Implementation
 Status Reports (ISRs) provided clear guidance and action plans. During the ICR mission, various agencies
 expressed satisfactions with the Bank’s supervision, including research, guidance, and problem solving in a
 timely manner. Overall, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The National Environment Management Council (NEMC), which was responsible for monitoring and
 evaluation (M&E), had adequate capacities to centrally collect and report M&E data on project results.
 However, the NEMC could show more commitment on data reporting, as the Bank team often received
 data directly from the other agencies. Institutions responsible for collecting and sharing raw data were
 appropriately identified.

 The indicators were set in line with planned activities per component in general, with baselines set at
 appraisal. On the other hand, the results framework was not fully aligned with the theory of change. The
 results framework did not capture behavior changes required for biodiversity conservation. Survey data on
 changes in specific land and water use practices might have helped assess the project’s likely impact on
 conservation and environmental management. The IR indicator on “water sources managed” meant to refer
 that an integrated approach for catchment conservation was taken by different stakeholders as agreed in
 the Kihansi Catchment Management Plan (Response from the TTL/ICR team). The wording of the indicator
 would be more appropriate if it reflected that. The IR indicator on the number of villages using integrated
 pest management strategies was not a very good proxy in terms of measuring villagers’ changes

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



 in practices. The original PDO indicator 1 on conserved area lacked a clarity in definition and a focus on the
 Kihansi catchment that caused challenges in monitoring the progress of achievement towards the target.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was revised at the restructuring in June 2017, as summarized in the Table 1 on
  page 10-11 in the ICR. At appraisal, there were two PDO indicators and six intermediate results (IR)
  indicators (PAD, Annex 1, page 19-20). At the restructuring, the PDO indicator 1 on conserved area was
  revised for clarification and specification of the target area. A supplemental indicator for PDO 1, which
  was disaggregated by three targeted species, was added. The PDO indicator 2 was revised and re-
  classified as an IR indicator. Redundant IR indicators were dropped. New IR indicators were added to
  reflect the limiting factors affecting the survival of the species being monitored. After restructuring, there
  were one PDO indicator with one supplemental PDO indicator, as well as ten IR indicators (ICR, Annex 1,
  page 31-38). While this restructuring addressed weaknesses in the results framework at design, it
  introduced new shortcomings. The revised PDO indicator 1 on the area covered under protection status
  was not adequately designed to measure the achievement of project objective on biodiversity
  enhancement, as described in Section 4. In addition, the outcome of the biodiversity conservation
  enhancement was not adequately measured by the indicator for the KST due to measurability and
  achievability issues, as described in Section 4. Regarding the original PDO indicator 2 on the operational
  guidelines, when it was repositioned to the intermediate level, no outcome indicator was set to measure
  institutional sustainability.

  Setting up the M&E arrangement was affected by the slow start of the project due to the freeze in
  disbursement (ICR, para 58). Notwithstanding the slow start, the Implementation Status and Results
  Reports reported results and indicated possible challenges in achieving the project’s objective. Progress
  towards meeting the GEF Biodiversity goals were captured and reported in the tracking tools updated at
  mid-term and completion. The data relevant to breeding and re-introducing the KSTs, the community
  livelihood activities, and the water quality and quantity was closely monitored and recorded.



c. M&E Utilization
  Progress reports were developed and shared regularly with main stakeholders, informing decision-
  making, restructuring, and work plans. The data collected through experiments on conservation of the
  three endemic species in the Kihansi gorge, especially those published in a series of papers on the
  reintroduction of the toads to the wild, was expected to support the global community with subsequent
  interventions in the future.

  In sum, the results framework was not fully adequately designed, with limitations in capturing causal
  links leading to biodiversity enhancement, sustainability of institutions, and behavior changes. The
  experimental data collected in the project would inform the future attempts in reintroducing endangered
  amphibian species to the wild. Overall, the M&E quality is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was given an Environmental Assessment Category B. The triggered safeguards policies were:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09);
   Forests (OP/BP 4.36); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The prepared mitigation measures
   were: an Environmental and Social Assessment including an Environment and Social Management Plan for
   OP/BP 4.01, 4.04, and 4.36, an Integrated Pest Management Plan for OP/BP 4.09, and a Process
   Framework for OP/BP 4.12. All the triggered safeguards policies except for OP/BP 4.12 were complied with
   (ICR, para 69). A community conservation management plan, which was a requirement under the Process
   Framework, was not finalized by the government due to the delay with establishing the protected area
   status for the catchment. The project developed a Grievance Redress Mechanism to receive complaints
   through the Village Government, the Local Government Authorities or the National Environment
   Management Council. No grievances were reported in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management was adequately conducted, as interim financial reporting, issue identification and
   resolution, and external audits were completed in a timely manner. The ICR did not comment on whether
   the external auditors’ opinions were qualified and whether all audit recommendations had been addressed.

   Procurement was conducted in line with the Bank’s guidelines. It was consistent with the annual work plan
   and within the expected budget. There were delays during the procurement process especially contracting;
   nevertheless, the project activities were not affected.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impact was reported in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                              The quality at entry was
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              moderately satisfactory mainly

                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



                                                                                  due to the issue with the forest
                                                                                  reserve and status, which
                                                                                  became a major cause of delays
                                                                                  and a failure to finalize the
                                                                                  legalization of the protected area
                                                                                  by project closing.
                                                                                  The results framework was not
                                                                                  fully adequately designed, with
                                                                                  limitations in capturing
                                                                                  biodiversity enhancement,
                                                                                  sustainability of institutions, and
                                                                                  behavior changes. The
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Modest
                                                                                  experimental data collected in
                                                                                  the project would inform the
                                                                                  future attempts in reintroducing
                                                                                  endangered amphibian species
                                                                                  to the wild. Overall, the M&E
                                                                                  quality is rated modest.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The following two lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects on
biodiversity conservation and are presented here with some editing.

1. Reintroduction is a long-term process that will require dedicated resources, careful
monitoring and continued research. The close monitoring of released population of the KST
under the project found that the rate of survival after reintroduction was higher in babies and sub-
adults than adults. This could be linked to adaptation and immunity considerations since the KST
have been bred for several generations in captivity. Releasing more babies, sub-adults, and gravid
females in the wild would improve chances of a self-sustaining population. Moreover, the release of
the KST under the project started before the sufficient population was bred in the reproduction
facilities, considering the captive population that need to remain within the facilities. An expansion of
captive breeding facilities to increase the total KST population and the number of them being
released would be critical for sustain the achievements of the project.

2. A multi-sector project needs strong involvement from relevant sectors. The Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) was located in the National Environment Management Council (NEMC),
which reported to the Vice President’s Office and was not tied to any of the ministries in the relevant
sectors. This positively affected the project to coordinate multi-sector stakeholders with different
expertise and priorities, proceed with procurement, and conduct M&E.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Kihansi Catchment Conservation (P126361)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative loosely supports the ratings and there are
some gaps in evidence that are later provided by the TTL/ICR team and the Regional Director. It is candid,
concise, and generally aligned to the project development objective. It provided breakdown of data for
achievement of indicators where appropriate to explain the achievements against targets. The ICR provided a
theory of change which helps the reader to understand the causal relationship among the inputs, outputs, and
outcomes; however, there is a limited reference to the theory of change to explain how the ratings have been
reached. The ICR’s lessons are clear, useful and based on evidence outlined in the ICR. The economic
analysis in the efficiency section did not provide sufficient information to assess the benefits attributable to the
project. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 16
