     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022286

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P113542                                   KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1440,IDA-48730,TF-18327             30-Jun-2016                                         101,587,879.19

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2011                               30-Nov-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                    8,300,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            108,298,818.01                                    8,300,000.00

 Actual                                        101,587,879.19                                    8,300,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                John R. Eriksson              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 11):

   "To improve living conditions in informal settlements in selected municipalities in Kenya".




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



   The PAD adds that the PDO was to be achieved by enhancing tenure security and improving
   infrastructure based on plans developed in consultation with the community.

   Revised objective. The revised PDO approved by the Board on May 7, 2015, was:

   "To improve living conditions in informal settlements in selected urban centers in selected counties in
   Kenya".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-May-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 12 -17).

   1. Strengthening Institutions and Program Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$10.0
   million. The actual cost was US$10.0 million. This component aimed at supporting the institutional
   strengthening of the Ministry of Housing (MoH), the Ministry of Lands (MoL) and the selected municipalities.
   Activities included: (i) capacity building of the MoH for undertaking its responsibilities under the new
   constitution, establishing a housing quality index, and developing a database with inventory of slums: (ii)
   capacity building of the MoL for planning, surveying and administering the land registration process: and (iii)
   capacity building of municipalities for developing slum upgrading infrastructure: and (iv) project
   management support, including for establishing monitoring and evaluation systems and conducting socio
   economic surveys.

   2. Enhancing Tenure Security. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.0 million. The actual cost was
   as estimated. This component aimed at improving the land tenure process. Since the settlements were at
   different stages, this component supported activities aimed at supporting the MoL with the regularization
   process, including community mobilization, preparing development plans, surveying and registering and
   issuing titles to individuals or groups in informal settlements or slums. (The terms "informal settlements" or
   "slums" used interchangeably are defined as those lacking at least two of the following: tenure
   security, adequate infrastructure, settlement level planning and quality housing).(PAD, page 9).

   3. Investing in Infrastructure and Service Delivery. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$70.3 million.
   The actual cost was US$70.3 million.This component planned to support infrastructure investments in
   settlements (such as, roads, street lighting, solid waste management, storm water drains and water and
   sanitation systems).


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



  4. Planning for Urban Growth. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.0 million. The actual cost was
  US$4.0million. This component planned to support activities for planning and developing options
  for infrastructure service delivery for future urban growth.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$173.3 million. The actual cost was US$148.8
  million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$100.0 million and a Trust Fund (TF) of
  US$8.3 million. With this, the total Bank financing for the project was US$108.3 million. The total amount
  disbursed was US$101.5 million (including US$93.2 million of the IDA credit and US$8.3 million of the TF).
  There was co financing for slum upgrading activities from; (1) The Swedish International Development
  Cooperation Agency (SIDA). The appraisal estimate was US$10.0 million. The amount disbursed was
  US8.3 million. and (2) The French Agency for Development (AFD). The appraisal estimate was US$45.0
  million. The amount disbursed was US$38.9 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$10.0 million at
  appraisal. According to the team, the borrower contribution was as planned during implementation.

  Dates. The project approved on March 24, 2011, became effective on June 30, 2011, and was scheduled to
  close on June 30,2016. The project closed about three and half years behind schedule on November 30,
  2019. The ICR (paragraph 16) notes that the IDA credit closing date of November 30, 2019 was maintained,
  although the AFD credit was open until December 30, 2020. However,the AFD funds had been fully
  disbursed by November 30, 2019.

  The project was restructured four times, including once through a Level 1 restructuring and three times
  through Level 2 restructurings.

  Level 1 restructuring on May 7, 2015.

  The following changes were made through the Level 1 restructuring.

        The PDO was revised to reflect the institutional changes following the first elections under the new
         constitution on March 4, 2014. Under Kenya's 2010 constitution, newly created county governments
         were responsible for managing urban areas, and municipalities ceased to exist. The PDO was
         hence revised from "improving living conditions in selected informal settlements in municipalities" to
         "improving living conditions in informal settlements in selected urban centers".
        The targets for the PDO indicator "people benefitting from improved tenure security" was
         reduced drastically from 180,000 to 71,000 after the Bank team's assessment of implementation
         progress and challenges in the tenure regularization in the initial years of the project.

  The following changes were made through the first Level 2 restructuring on April 6, 2016.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



         The project closing date was extended by 23 months from June 30, 2016, to May 31, 2018, to
          provide additional time for completing project activities, as the five-year implementation period was
          deemed to be unrealistic, given that community engagement was required for prioritizing
          infrastructure investments in the selected settlements.
         The target for the PDO indicator "people benefiting from tenure security" was further revised
          downwards from 71,000 to 25,000, due to the slow progress in the distribution of ownership
          documents to residents of informal settlements.

   The following changes were made through the Second Level 2 restructuring on May 7, 2018,
   subsequent to the institutional changes after the elections on March 4, 2014.

         The implementing agency for the project before the elections - the Ministry of Housing (MoH) - was
          merged into the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD). Another ministerial
          reorganization separated land from Housing and Urban development functions. With this, the
          Ministry of Transport, Infrastructure, Housing and Urban Development (MTIHUD) became the
          implementing agency.
         The original PDO indicators were made to reflect the anticipated co financing from SIDA and AFD,
          which became available only after the project became effective. Once the funds became available,
          the target for "people benefitting from tenure security" were revised upwards from 25,000 to
          100,000. This was still lower than the original target of 180,000.
         The capacity building activities (component one activities) were dropped as they were completed
          using government funding.

   The following changes were made through the Third Level 2 restructuring on December 6, 2017.

         The closing date was extended by 18 months from May 31, 2018 to November 30, 2019, to extend
          the Bank's supervision of AFD co-financing which became effective in July 2018 and to supervise
          the implementation of the outstanding Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).
         The funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.

   Split rating. The original target for "people benefitting from tenure security" was reduced drastically with the
   first Level 2 restructuring. The target was then revised upwards with the second Level 2 restructuring once
   the co-financing funds became available, though the target was lower than the original target. While the
   revisions in this target did lower the level of ambition of the land tenure activities, this assessment does not
   see these adjustments reflecting negatively on the overall impact of the project and the uncertainty attached
   to working in this space does require a degree of adaptation. Thus, in this instance, IEG has chosen to not
   undertake a split evaluation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. In 2009, 39% of Kenya's population lived in urban areas. The rapid
urbanization coupled with poor urban management resulted in the proliferation of sprawling, overcrowded
and impoverished informal settlements. Over half of Kenya's urban population (55%) lived in

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



               these settlements. The settlements were often inaccessible, and many residents in these settlements did
               not have either tenure security, or access to essential infrastructure (such as roads, water supply or
               sanitation services). The poor living conditions in these settlements were primarily due to the lack of
               national guidelines, exacerbated by weak institutional capacity at the sub national level. Improving the living
               conditions in these settlements was important to the government strategy.

               Government strategy. At the national level, the PDO was relevant to the government overarching strategy
               articulated in Vision 2030. The government's Medium-Term Plan for 2008-2013, which was the first five-
               year plan to implement Vision 2030, specified improving conditions in informal settlements as a priority,
               through among other things, installing physical and social infrastructure, constructing permanent houses,
               and attracting private investment. In the years before appraisal, the government formulated a 15-year
               National Slum Upgrading Program that outlined interventions for activities such as participatory planning,
               strengthening tenure security, and providing housing and infrastructure services in the settlements.

               Bank strategy. The activities associated with supporting the formal recognition of rights of residents
               in informal settlements and reducing the vulnerability of residents to displacement without warning or
               compensation, was well-aligned with the equity theme of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
               2010 - 2013. The PDO was well-aligned with two of the three strategic results areas of the Bank's current
               Country Partnership Strategy for 2014 - 2018 (extended to 2020): (i) competitiveness and sustainability of
               growth: and (ii) development of human resources for shared prosperity.

               While this project aimed at building on previous work in the sector and was consistent with the Bank and
               Government strategy, the five-year implementation period envisioned at design was unrealistic, given that
               community engagement was required for prioritizing infrastructure works in informal settlements. The
               original time period did not factor in the time required for community engagement. The relevance of the
               PDO is substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To improve living conditions in informal settlements in selected municipalities in Kenya.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The results framework was logical. Regularizing tenure in informal settlements was likely
                             to increase the number of people with secure tenure. Upgrading infrastructure were intended to improve
                             service delivery in settlements. Capacity building activities for the national and county level agencies in the
                             participatory process were likely to improve their institutional capacities. These activities together were likely

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



to improve the living conditions in urban informal settlements. The causal links between the activities, outputs
and outcomes were clear, and the intended outcomes were measurable.

Outputs (ICR pages 10 - 13 and 29 -33).

The targets for the following indicators were either exceeded or realized when the project closed.

Water supply and sanitation services.

        21 ablution blocks were constructed as targeted.
        35,000 people in settlements had access to improved sanitation services (target 3,050).
        8,739 new piped household water connections were provided (target 7,306).
        11 water kiosks were provided in the settlements as targeted.
        59 km of sewer lines and 4,788 new sewer connections were provided as targeted.

Transport sector infrastructure. .

      98.28 km of roads were upgraded to bitumen standards (target 90 km).
      120 km of footpaths were rehabilitated as targeted.

Security infrastructure.

      134 high mast security lights were provided as targeted. According to the team, these are
         floodlights similar to those found in stadiums, to provide lighting over a broader area.

Capacity building activities.

      The Geographic Information Systems (GIS) were upgraded in three government departments of the
         Ministry of Lands and Physical Planning involved in planning, surveying and land management as
         targeted. The staff of the departments were trained in using the GIS.
        An inventory of informal settlements was completed as targeted.
        A situational analysis which provided key data on 351 informal settlements in 15 urban centers was
         completed, and a housing survey was undertaken.
        The staff of the Settlement Executive Committee (SEC) in the project areas were trained. There were
         no targets for this indicator.
        26,148 direct jobs were created on construction sites during implementation.

The targets for this indicator were partly realized.

      Tenure security was provided in 80 informal settlements, short of the target of 86. The reason for the
         shortfall was due to unclear land ownership and related documentation. According to the ICR
         (paragraph 30) tenure security was considered to be achieved at the point the beneficiary's name
         was included in a Registry Index Map at the Ministry of Lands.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 10 -13 and pages 27 -28).



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



                            The ICR (paragraph 27) notes that the project commissioned a beneficiary survey to independently assess
                            the project's results. The assessment was based on focus group discussions with beneficiaries and
                            interviews. The main conclusions of the assessment are as follows:

                                  1,389,980 people directly benefitted from project activities, exceeding the target of 1,030,000. Of this,
                                    694,000 beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 585,000.
                                  262,870 people in the urban settlements had access to improved water sources, exceeding the target
                                    of 162,000.
                                  About a million people in informal settlements were provided with access to improved drainage and
                                   access to all season roads within a 500 meter range. This was slightly short of the target of 1.1 million.
                                  125,525 people had improved tenure security in 14 counties at closure. This exceeded the revised
                                   target of 100,000, although short of the original target of 180,000.
                                  1,389,980 people directly benefitted from project activities. This was 35% more than the target of
                                   1,030,000 beneficiaries. Of these, 694,000 (50%) beneficiaries were females as targeted.
                                  About 7,300 titles were either issued or dispatched to counties for onward distribution when the project
                                   closed. According to the clarifications provided by the team, an additional 10,600 titles are with the
                                   Ministry of Lands for printing. The team further clarified that the remaining 7,000 titles are expected to
                                   be prepared by November 2020.

                            While there were a variety of targets altered during restructuring, particularly with regards the land tenure
                            component, IEG acknowledges that achievements were still significant and the alterations diminish only
                            marginally from the overall impact of the project on the livelihoods of those in the informal settlements. Thus,
                            overall Efficacy is rated as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Considerable progress was made to improve the livelihoods of those in informal settlements. Thus, efficacy is
                            rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



Economic analysis. The PAD, paragraph 64) notes that as the project was designed as a framework project
(the interventions were not known in advance), economic analysis was not conducted at appraisal. A cost -
benefit was conducted at closure, for activities associated with infrastructure investments. These
activities accounted for 76% of the actual cost. The benefits of road and drainage systems were assumed to
come from: (i) travel time and travel cost savings: (ii) reductions in vehicle operating costs: (iii) enhanced access
to jobs, markets, health facilities and other services: (iv) reduced number of days lost due to flooding: (v)
reduced property damage: and (vi) reduced costs of illness due to exposure to polluted water. The benefits from
water and sanitation services investments were assumed to come from: (i) improved health: (ii) value of saved
lives: and (iii) value of time saved fetching water. The benefits from floodlight investments were assumed to
come from: (i) increased safety: (ii) reduced road accidents: and (iii) increased ability to do business after sunset
in informal settlements. The Net Present Value (NPV) of roads and drainage investments at 12% discount rate
was US$152.9 and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was 41.4%. The NPV of water and sanitation investments
at 12% discount rate was US$137 and the IRR was 41.2% and the NPV of investments in floodlights at 6%
discount rate was US$97 and the IRR was 30%.

Other cost considerations. The project was extended twice for a total of 41 months. The per capita
investment reduced from the expected US$157 ($110.0 million/700,000 beneficiaries) at appraisal, to an actual
US$115 (US$160.3 million/1,389,980 beneficiaries), indicating that the potential negative impact of project
extension was to an extent offset by additional outcomes.

Other efficiency considerations. In response to the COVID -19 pandemic, the government developed
emergency measures in informal settlements. Between April 19, 2020, and June 2020, the government
implemented Phase IA of the labor-intensive National Hygienic Program (NHP) in informal settlements, after
making necessary adjustments to accommodate COVID- 19 response activities (discussed in section
10a). 26,148 jobs were created in 27 settlements across eight counties constricted by restricted movements,
The wages were financed by the AFD funds.

Administrative and Operational issues. Following the changes in government after the elections on March 4,
2013, functions, staff and responsibilities of the new ministries and county level agencies were unclear. These
changes meant that the project could not formally decentralize to counties at closure, as envisioned at
design. The weak implementation capacity and inadequate staffing of the Project Coordination team
(PCT), contributed to delays in the initial years. These were rectified and implementation accelerated in the latter
years. The activity associated with issuing land titles was delayed, due to delays in preparing the Resettlement
Action Plans (RAPs). During the October 2018 mission, the Bank team learned that six fatalities had occurred
between 2015 and 2018 that had not been reported by the Project Coordination Team (PCT) at that time to the
project high-level management and the Bank. At the time of preparing the ICR, one fatality case was resolved,
three of the fatality cases were in court, one with the insurance company and one in dialogue with the
contractor. According to the team, the Bank was working with the government to resolve the pending cases to
date.

In sum, although there were operational issues during implementation, efficiency is rated as substantial, in view
of the economic justification for the project,

In sum, although there were administrative shortcomings, efficiency is substantial, in view of the results of the
economic analysis of the project.


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        76.00
ICR Estimate                                                 38.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government and the Bank strategy is Substantial. Both Efficacy and Efficiency
are rated Substantial.

Thus, the overall Outcome rating is Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. There is institutional risk, given that most counties had not taken responsibility for
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of the infrastructure established under the project.

Financial risk. The ICR (paragraph 94) notes that despite the upgrading of key infrastructure, the uptake of
water and sewer connections by beneficiaries has not been to the extent envisioned at design, due to factors
such as: existing bills (or arrears) from previous connections, standing charges (minimum monthly charges
regardless of consumption) and water rationing. It is also not clear whether some counties could afford the
electricity bills of high mast lights.

Technical risk. The ICR (paragraph 93) notes that there was discharge of wastewater into the drains,
raising the possibility of flooding.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared in collaboration with donors (AFD and SIDA), providing co financing. The
  implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Coordination Team (PCT) in the MoH
  responsible for national level implementation, and the PCTs at the counties responsible
  local implementation. Several risks were identified at appraisal, including risks associated with
  inadequate experience of the MoH with Bank projects. Mitigation measures, included capacity building of
  staff and recruiting an independent consultant engineer to supervise implementation (PAD, paragraphs
  24 and 25). Even with mitigation measures, the overall risk was rated as High at appraisal (PAD, page
  26). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance (discussed in section 10).

  There were modest shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. The original time frame was unrealistic, given that
  infrastructure activities in settlements required community participation and infrastructure works could
  only commence three years after project effectiveness. This necessitated extension of the closing date.
  Although the risk associated with the weak implementation capacity was recognized at preparation, the
  mitigation measures (such as the capacity building of the implementing agency) were inadequate, and
  this contributed to delays in the early years of implementation. Having noted this shortcoming, the
  combination of interventions and activities were pitched well to the development challenge and the team
  was in a position to act on these.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Seventeen missions were held during the implementation period of nearly eight and half years. The ICR
 (paragraph 87) notes that each supervision team was accompanied by a Lead Specialist to provide
 strategic advice. The Bank engaged additional specialists to help in addressing issues (for instance, the
 road failure in one county), The continuity of leadership was more or less maintained. Although there were
 five Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the project lifetime, three of these changes were in the first three
 years of implementation, and most of the supervision was done under two TTLs based in the region for the
 rest of the project period. The continuity of leadership and location of the most task team members in the
 field aided in close engagement with county governments. The Bank proactively worked with the team in
 addressing safeguards challenges and preparing emergency response to the COVID -19 response
 activities. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) held on May 19, 2014, provided an assessment of
 progress, identified implementation challenges and recommended measures for addressing them.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's results framework was realistic and the key outcome indicators - the number of people with
 access to all season roads and access to improved drainage, the number of people with secure tenures
 and the number of direct beneficiaries (including women beneficiaries), were straightforward and
 measurable, and the targets set at design, were for the most part, reasonable.

 The PCU at the central level and the PCTs at the sub national level, were responsible for data
 collection through surveys at the national and subnational levels (PAD, paragraph 59). The M&E
 design envisioned collecting gender-disaggregated data on living conditions in informal settlements through
 surveys.



b. M&E Implementation
  The county level teams were responsible for providing county level data to the national Project
  Coordination Unit (PCU). Regular site visits and inspections were held by the Bank team for monitoring
  data collection. The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that counting became more refined and accurate as
  implementation progressed. The quarterly reports shared with the Bank were consistent with the
  independent beneficiary assessment and the Bank's validation and verification exercises. At completion,
  the M&E team provided verifiable project data disaggregated by settlement and type of infrastructure.
  The surveys once before the project commenced and once at completion were conducted as envisioned
  at design.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was used for monitoring project performance. It was also used for: (i) briefing
  ministerial policy makers and heads of government departments: (ii) designing Ministerial Performance
  Contracting regimes: and (iii) reporting under the Presidential Delivery Unit and the electronic Project
  Monitoring Information System. (ICR, paragraph 73). It is not clear if the M&E was used as a basis for
  reallocating the budget or of policies impacting on the project.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank safeguard
  policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):
  Cultural Property (OP/BP 4.11): and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 30).

  Environmental Assessment and Cultural Property. An Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) was prepared at appraisal to address environmental issues. As part of the ESMF,
  procedures were developed to address cultural property issues (PAD, paragraph 79). The ICR (paragraph
  57) notes that the ESMF was amended to accommodate COVID - 19 response activities (such as through
  providing protective equipment, sanitation facilities and ensuring social distancing).

  The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that Environmental and Social Impact Assessments prepared across project
  counties, were approved by the National Environmental Management Agency (NEMA). The ICR (paragraph
  80) notes that the although the performance of the PCT was uneven in the initial years, it improved in the
  latter years. However at project closing, many of the drainage networks built by the project were clogged by
  solid waste and wastewater, as residents had yet to work out a mechanism to collect solid waste to maintain
  the upgraded infrastructure. As indicated in section five above, there were five fatality cases, which took
  place between 2015 and 2018. An Action Plan was subsequently developed and implemented. As of project
  closing, one fatality case was resolved, three of the fatality cases were in court, one with the insurance
  company and one still in dialogue with the contractor. The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that the PCT is
  committed to resolving these pending cases by enforcing the contract obligations until the affected families
  are compensated. The ICR does not report any cultural property issues.

  Involuntary Resettlement. Since the sub-national level sub projects were to be identified based on
  demand, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared at appraisal to address issues pertaining to
  compensation for land acquisition and loss of assets of project affected people (PAD, paragraph 80).
  According to the ICR (paragraph 79), there were about 30,000 Project Affected Persons (PAPs) under
  component three activities and about 18,000 PAPs under component two activities. Excepting for three
  settlements where alternative land was required for resettling 82 households, all displacement was within
  the settlement. In three settlements where alternative land was required, alternative land had been
  identified and resettlement of PAPs was ongoing when the project closed. According to the team, the
  resettlement activities were to be completed by the end of November 2020.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. An assessment of the MoH and of the sub-national level agencies was
  conducted at appraisal. The financial management risk was rated as substantial at appraisal and an action
  plan was prepared to address financial issues (PAD, paragraph 68). There was compliance with financial
  management guidelines (ICR, paragraph 84). The quarterly financial reports and annual audit reports were
  submitted in a timely fashion and audits were unqualified.

  Procurement. A procurement assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the procurement risk
  was substantial, due to the lack of experience of the MoH and the sub national agencies with Bank
  procedures. The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that there were cases of unsatisfactory performance of


                                                                                                Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



   supervision consultants, leading to delays in the completion of the works contracts during implementation.
   These were eventually resolved and the team clarified that there were no cases of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were some unintended negative impacts. In some settlements, the improved drainage financed
   under the project, affected people living downstream due to flooding. Further, demand for housing in
   upgraded settlements triggered increase in house rents. The beneficiary survey conducted for the project
   indicated that, informal settlement beneficiaries were edged out of the rented houses due to the
   unaffordability of rents.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. Design for informal settlements projects needs to be flexible for accommodating the
tenure regularization process. In this project, many informal resettlements did not allow the project
interventions to conform to conventional planning standards without displacement. Flexible
standards had to be adopted to minimize displacement. Such flexibility should be captured in the
country's planning instruments, such as establishing Special Planning Area (SPA) which allow for
flexible standards.

2. Planning for post-construction maintenance of infrastructure needs to be addressed prior
to interventions. In this project, provisions for adequate maintenance of infrastructure
were identified as an ongoing issue during supervision. The lesson is that discussions on the cost of
operating and maintaining infrastructure and services need to take place during project preparation,



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)



in order to establish clear institutional arrangements for operation and maintenance of the
rehabilitated infrastructure assets.

3. A realistic time frame is required that is line with the scope of project
activities. Infrastructure investments in this project could only commence after community
engagement. The original time frame was unrealistic, given the time required for commencing
infrastructure activities based on community participation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project was the second of three projects focused on informal settlements in urban areas in Kenya. As
  noted in the beneficiary survey, some of the project activities affected settlements in downstream settlements.
  Given that informal urban settlements is a growing concern in many countries in Africa and Asia, it would be
  useful to incorporate this lesson, and other lessons from this project in an assessment comparing the
  experience of similar projects in other countries.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and provides a candid analysis of the problems encountered in the tenure regularization
process. The theory of change presented in the ICR helps the reader to understand how the ratings have been
achieved. The information provided in the Borrower ICR (Annex 6) contains useful information. The ICR is
consistent with the guidelines and draws useful lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

One minor problem is the length of the ICR. The main text of the ICR at 25 pages is ten pages more than the
recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR would have benefitted from better editing and eschewing repetitions
throughout the text.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
KE-Informal Settlements Improvement Proj (P113542)




                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
