     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022210

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P163559                                     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 South Sudan                                 Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1860                                   31-Jul-2019                                            50,243,624.03

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 04-May-2017                                 31-Jul-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                          50,243,624.03                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Keith Robert A. Oblitas      J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson          IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project objectives of the Emergency Food and Nutrition Security Project (EFNSP) were: (a) to provide
   food and nutrition support for the protection of lives and human capital of eligible beneficiaries; and (b) to help
   farmers re-engage in agricultural production in selected drought-affected areas in South Sudan (Grant
   Agreement: 2017).




                                                                                                       Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



   For the purpose of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved in Section 4 of this review, it will be
   parsed into two distinct objectives as follows:



   Objective 1: To provide food and nutrition support for the protection of lives and human capital of eligible
   beneficiaries.



   Objective 2: To help farmers re-engage in agricultural production in selected drought-affected areas in
   South Sudan.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   Component 1. Support to Human Capital and Livelihoods Protection (estimated costs at appraisal- US$42.0
   million; actual costs at project completion- US$41.0 million).

   The component sought to increase access to food for vulnerable households, protect mothers and children,
   and prevent negative coping activities by poor households. Sub-components were: (a) support to
   Unconditional Food Transfers to eligible beneficiaries to prevent hunger-related deaths and livelihood
   erosion; and (b) support to Integrated Management of Nutrition to meet urgent nutritional requirements of
   children under the age of five, pregnant women, and lactating mothers.



   Component 2. Support to Re-engagement in Crop and Livestock Production (estimated costs at appraisal –
   US$7.5 million; actual costs at project completion- US$7.5 million).

   Helping farmers affected by drought to re-engage in crop and livestock production by: (a) supporting crop
   production by helping farming households with seeds, tools and training to grow more food, and: (b)
   supporting livestock production to improve livestock health among pastoralists and agro-pastoralist
   communities.



   Component 3. Support to Project Implementation Arrangements (estimated costs at appraisal - US$0.5
   million; actual costs at project completion US$0.8 million).



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



   Financing the administrative costs of the project Implementation Unit (PIU), including financial management,
   procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and management, monitoring, reporting and evaluation
   of project activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project Costs and Financing

   The Emergency Food and Nutrition Security Project (EFNSP) was financed wholly by a Grant of US$50
   million (also considered the project cost), from the IDA Crisis Response Window. There were no co-
   financers, and any informal government contributions have not been estimated.

   Dates.

   EFNSP was approved on May 4, 2017, and closed on July 31, 2019, the original closing date. The project
   implementation period was two years and 3 months. The bulk of disbursements for Component I were made
   in the first year of the project.

   Restructuring

   There were no changes in objectives, components or monitorable indicators, and no other significant
   adjustments. There were no restructurings.

   Implementing Agencies

   For South Sudan its representative was the Ministry of Finance and Planning. The
   Government's Implementing Agency was the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, with most field
   activities implemented by three United Nations agencies: the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the
   World Food Program (WFP), and the United Nations International Childrens Fund (UNICEF).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


The South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition Security Project (EFNSP) was a rapidly prepared
response, designed as an emergency operation, to address extreme food shortage and limited agricultural
production capacity in South Sudan, one of the poorest countries in the world.

The food shortage had built up over time but reached crisis proportions in 2017 after a severe drought in
2016. Prolonged internal conflict over much of the previous decades, and further conflict after South Sudan
became independent in 2013, had left the country with minimal productive capacity and a population

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



destitute by almost any measure. The situation became significantly worse from 2013. Trade disputes
limited exports of oil, the Government’s largest source of revenue. Estimated GDP per capita fell from
US1,111 in 2014 to less than US$200 in 2017. And the consumer price index increased by 480 percent
from February 2016 to February 2017, largely due to increases in food prices. By 2016, an estimated 83
percent of the country’s population was living below the poverty line.

Increasing agricultural productivity has been a key objective for South Sudan over decades, but little
progress has been made. Years of conflict and widespread displacement have destroyed the base
(markets, roads, institutions, and the technical knowledge of farmers), for agricultural growth. Thus, the
country’s annual cereal production gap, which had been 220,000 metric tons in 2014 rose to 500,000 tons
in 2016. Most farmers produced less food than they needed.to feed a household.

The Bank’s response to the crisis was within its overall strategy for South Sudan, as elaborated in the
Country Engagement Note for the Republic of South Sudan (2017). Government’s strategy document was
the South Sudan Development Plan, which is consistent with the Bank strategy. Both documents
highlighted two objectives. First, the humanitarian objective of urgently increasing access to food, especially
for the most vulnerable (the poor, women, and children). And second, an agricultural development
objective; to expeditiously increase the capacity of farmers to improve agricultural productivity, thereby
tackling Sudan’s food shortage at its source.

The project was a direct response to both objectives, each with a corresponding component. The first
objective was to “provide food and nutrition support for the protection of lives." This was the immediate
humanitarian goal – urgent provision of food, very different from the development goal of the second
objective - "to help farmers re-engage in agricultural production" (through increasing
agricultural productivity).

One perspective of the dual nature of the project would be that the two thrusts do not mesh in terms of time-
frames and the technical skills required for implementation. Improving productivity might be considered too
long-term, not fitting the short duration of an emergency operation. Also, the development actions might
take attention and skills away from the humanitarian activities. Notwithstanding, for EFNSP, the choice was
made to tackle both objectives.

In South Sudan’s case the inclusion of both objectives was appropriate. The food crisis was both immediate
and structural. South Sudan is unusually bereft of every infrastructure that would enable improved
agricultural productivity. Even farmers’ knowledge of agriculture, has been eroded by disrupted activity due
to the conflict. Leaving out the development component would simply be maintaining South Sudan’s
incessant food crisis and reliance on external assistance to mitigate the food deficit. In the event, the
development part of the project was fully implemented in most activities, complementing the achievements
of the humanitarian part of EFNSP.

Thus, both of the project's objectives, taken together, were relevant: (i) they were fully consistent with the
Bank's and the Government's strategies; (ii) were evident needs given the urgency of providing food to help
alleviate an extreme food shortage; (iii) there was need to enable farmers to re-establish productive
agriculture and reduce vulnerability to future natural disasters; and (iv) the two objectives were
complementary, responding to both the immediate challenge to alleviate the food crisis, and the
fundamental need to increase farm productivity to be independent of future emergency food assistance.




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



               EFNSP's objectives were Substantially relevant to Government and Bank development strategies for South
               Sudan


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             Provide food and nutrition support for the protection of lives and human capital of eligible beneficiaries.


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change.

                             Humanitarian aid through both general and targeted food and nutrition programs was the main goal of the
                             project, comprising 90 percent of actual project costs. Food distribution was the responsibility of the WFP and
                             UNICEF agencies working together. According to the ICR (para 9) the project's primary beneficiaries of the
                             food distribution program at the start of the project were households facing "food consumption gaps that were
                             reflected by above usual acute malnutrition" defined as Phase 3 (ICR, para 7) of the Integrated Food Security
                             Phase Classification (IPC) developed by the Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS). In general,
                             people in five states in South Sudan (Northern Bahr El Ghazal, Unity, Upper Nile, Jonglei and Eastern
                             Equatoria) were assessed as the most qualified "primary beneficiaries." Eligible beneficiaries were
                             identified using Integrated Rapid Response Missions (IRRMs) in vulnerable states and communities
                             to determine the extent of food insecurity facing individuals based on those in IPC Phase 3. The ICR noted,
                             however, that the implementing agencies "had the flexibility to (i) change target areas as per the emerging
                             needs, and (ii) shift from geographical targeting to vulnerability based targeting" (ICR, paras 9 and 71).

                             Outputs (information presented below for Objective 1 was based on the ICR, Table 3 and Annex 1)

                             The primary objective was to provide food and nutrition support for the protection of lives and human capital
                             of eligible beneficiaries. Based on this criterion to broadly define the target group, the project focused on
                             providing food insecure individuals with two or more meals per day.

                                        268,000 individuals received direct food support enabling them to consume two meals per day, which
                                         was seven percent more than the targeted 250,000 individuals.




                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



More focused outputs, (targeted to particular groups) relating to the nutrition of children, women and their
health, were about 90 percent of targets (70 percent for access to sanitary services). Such targeted
assistance included:

      107,000 children received supplementary food in the intended quantities, 89 percent of the targeted
       120,000 children.
      74,000 pregnant or lactating women received supplementary food, 93 percent of the targeted 80,000
       women.
      170,000 individuals gained access to sanitary services (access to soap and water, safe drinking water,
       latrines, and health and nutrition education), about 71 percent of the targeted 200,000 individuals.

Outcomes

Against its primary objective "to provide food and nutrition support for the protection of lives and human
capital of eligible beneficiaries", Objective 1 was achieved. Based on the data recorded under "Outputs"
above, the number of beneficiaries attributable to the project was 11 percent above the target for the project
which was nearly fully achieved in the first year of the project, half the total project period. The number of
individuals receiving two meals/day or more was 7 percent above the target.

The efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated by this review as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Help farmers re-engage in agricultural production in selected drought-affected areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change

 The second component of the project, which implemented actions in support of Objective 2, comprised a
relatively small part of project costs - about 10 percent - but it had particular significance - tackling the base of
South Sudan's food crises which was the low and variable agricultural productivity. In the short
implementation period of the project, actions had to be practical and relatively straightforward for farmers to
take on, for instance, seeds for crop varieties with short-term growing cycles and better yields.. With respect
to management, especially of procurement which needed to be efficient, FAO provided the needed
support. Farmers in drought-affected areas were the target beneficiaries for this objective

Outputs (information presented below for Objective 2 was based on the ICR, Table 3 and Annex 1)

The first challenge for this project was to reach households in drought-affected areas. The actual number of
families helped to re-engage in agricultural production was close to 32,000, above the target of 30,000
households. Other achievements (outputs) contributing to the main objective included:


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)




                                  The amount of seeds and planting materials distributed was 453 metric tons (50 percent more than
                                   the target of 300 metric tons).
                                  855,000 animals were vaccinated, more than four times the targeted 200,000 animals.
                                  60,000 farm tool kits were distributed - six times the targeted 10,000 farm kits.

                            Outcome

                            As shown above, output achievements under Objective 2 exceeded targets for all the monitored actions, With
                            respect to the project's overarching goal – the PDO indicator was the "number of households supported to
                            resume crop and livestock production." The households which were helped to re-engage in crop and
                            livestock production in drought affected areas was 31,800. This achievement was 6% above the targeted
                            outcome of 30,000.households.

                            The Efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated by this review as Substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Quantitative Outcomes. For both objectives, intended actions were achieved, exceeding the scale
                            planned, and in turn, the outcomes exceeded targets. This review therefore rated the achievement of
                            Objectives 1 and 2 as Substantial.

                            In addition to the achievements of Objectives 1 and 2 the ICR reported on the total number of beneficiaries
                            and the proportion of all beneficiaries who were female.

                                  A total of 642,000 beneficiaries are reported to have received various forms of assistance or support
                                   from this project. This was 11% more than the project target of 580,000 beneficiaries.
                                  58% of beneficiaries were female compared with a target of 50%



                            Overall Qualitative Outcomes. The ICR also stresses that the project generated qualitative benefits
                            attributable to the project that were also considered in the assessment of benefits, namely: (a) saved lives
                            and avoidance of severe health issues; (b) increased social cohesion; (c) the re-emergence of markets for the
                            sale and purchase of assets; (d) long-term benefits from improved nutrition and education; and (e) benefits
                            associated with indirect economic impacts of capital accumulation (para 92). The value of these benefits was



                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



  not quantified in the ICR but the benefits listed are typical of the results that have been acknowledged for
  similar projects.

  The project's performance was achieved in the face of considerable hazards and operational impediments
  due to the incessant internal conflicts in South Sudan throughout the project's implementation. Flexible and
  judicious project management (e.g. choice of operational locations, timing of activities, and informal village
  interactions with conflict combatants contributed to the achievement of most project targets though it did not
  completely resolve all the problems and challenges.

  Nevertheless, despite limited evidence on outcomes, both objectives exceeded their targets, and secondary
  benefits were arguably significant, This review has rated the project's Overall Efficacy as Substantial.




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis.

As is frequently the case in humanitarian aid projects, an economic rate of return was not calculated at appraisal
or in the ICR for component 1 of the project. Various difficulties imposed by the nature of the project - such
as rapid preparation and implementation, leaving little time for monitoring impacts; measurement difficulties for
impacts on health and nutrition; and the impact of conflict; and other variables – preclude calculation of an
overall project economic rate of return. For component 2 (more comparable to a conventional investment
project than component 1) an ERR was estimated at appraisal and found to be 22 percent. However,
component 2's share of actual project costs was only about 8 percent, limiting its relevance to a cost-benefit
analysis for the project-as a whole. In this case cost-effectiveness and implementation efficiency were more
relevant yardsticks:

Cost-Effectiveness

Total costs at project closure amounted to US$45.4 million, 91 percent of the project costs estimated at
appraisal. Achievements were 610,406 beneficiaries from the humanitarian assistance program (component 1),
11 percent more than the 550,000,000 beneficiaries targeted at appraisal. For Component 2 (reengagement in
agricultural production), achievements (31,800 participants) also exceeded the planned 30,000 participants.
Thus, with project costs lower than costs estimated at appraisal and actual achievements greater than these, the
project was more cost-effective than envisaged. Given their experience in food distribution it not surprising that
all the agencies employed techniques to be cost-effective in this project. It was surprising, however, that the
ICR did not explore the experience of two of these agencies concerning actual costs per beneficiary of the
distribution of food and agricultural tools.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



Implementation Efficiency

The project got off to a fast start, with 89 percent of disbursements made in the first year. Retroactive financing
of US$14.7 million facilitated the fast start. Other factors were the procurement and disbursement systems
designed for the project. Funding from the World Bank went directly to the three agencies, which enabled rapid
procurement without delays from the Government procurement and disbursement systems. Finally, strong
performance of the three agencies was a critical factor for the speed and quality of the project's achievements.
According to the ICR, the WFP reduced costs by improving road and river corridors and removing illegal check
posts with the support of government authorities. WFP also reduced its reliance on air transport from 35 percent
in 2017 to 7 percent in 2019. In addition, it expanded storage capacity in South Sudan by 27,000 mt and
deployed 124 mobile storage units in hard to-reach locations to position supplies ahead of the rainy season.
Strategies aimed at increasing the use of road and river transport and reducing air transport entailed cost
savings of 85 percent for the transport of food (para 33).

Overall Efficiency

The project’s cost effectiveness was satisfactory and, with targeting efficiently achieved, and nearly 90 percent
of disbursements made in the project’s first year, implementation efficiency was excellent. Based on EFNSP’s
strong performance in terms of cost-effectiveness and implementation efficiency, the project's Overall
Efficiency was rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project responded to a crisis-situation – a major food deficit, with prospects for an even greater food
security crisis if there were further erosion in South Sudan’s human and physical infrastructure. Faced with this
situation, urgent provision of food and its efficient distribution was a clear priority. There was also a need to help
farmers hit by drought to recover their productive capacity so that the nation could grow more food and reduce
dependency on imports and aid. Thus, the two thrusts of the project – the “humanitarian” urgent supply of food
(Objective 1), and the “development” assistance to farmers (Objective 2) were both relevant. The efficacy of the
project's achievements was substantial. The scope of food distribution exceeded targets and the number of

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



farmers re-engaging in agriculture also reached its goal. The project was cost-effective and implemented
expeditiously. Efficiency was therefore rated Substantial.

With relevance, efficacy and efficiency all substantial this review concluded that the project had minor
shortcomings and this review has therefore rated its Overall Outcome as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

South Sudan's extreme climatic conditions, such as severe droughts and extensive flooding, make cultivation
and farm investments inherently risky. Frequent droughts leave families below subsistence levels and highly
vulnerable to further stress. Locusts and other pest infestations add to the risks of growing crops, and ticks
as well as a number of of livestock diseases play havoc among cattle. Any continuation of South Sudan’s
long-standing internal conflicts would add further to rural uncertainties and investments. Roads are few and
they are to a large extent often in in disrepair, and the government has low institutional capacity. In this
highly challenging physical and institutional environment, continuing any development initiative is difficult.



The project’s agricultural initiatives could continue but would likely need intensive support and advisory
services, not guaranteed in South Sudan’s encumbered economy. The humanitarian aid program was not
intended as an investment operation – only as emergency provision of food and some services. With that
completed, the limited institutional infrastructure that was strengthened to handle future food aid distribution
is likely to erode. Continued development aid, including from the Bank, would be beneficial. It is noted that a
rural development project is currently being prepared by the Bank. However, despite such initiatives, given
the climatic and security uncertainties noted above, risks for EFNSP’s development outcome are High.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  Project preparation was expeditious, taking less than four months. As an emergency response project,
  speed of delivery was in itself a key element in the project’s quality at entry. The project stood on firm
  ground. Its’ relevance was anchored in the Bank strategy for South Sudan, and chronic food shortages
  had reached crisis dimensions. The project and its objectives responded to this. The task team had the
  knowledge to create a detailed project design providing clear guidance for project implementation. The
  two-pronged approach proved appropriate and manageable.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



  The decision to use experienced UN agencies as the project implementers, rather than government,
  brought in their higher technical capacity and a more streamlined management, particularly for
  procurement. A weaker aspect was M&E design, which could have been broader based to monitor
  qualitative as well as quantitative results. Overall, however, quality at entry was Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Due to prolonged conflict and lack of access to the field, supervision by the Bank was largely virtual. The
 Bank team collaborated well with Government and the three UN agencies and was able to facilitate the
 action plan and completion as scheduled. This included achieving the monitoring indicators in the Results
 Framework (ICR Annex 1). With the Bank task team leaders limited to two over the project period,
 continuity in leadership was helpful. The project performed as planned and to schedule. Approval to
 closure took 26 months in line with the original closing date at appraisal. Nearly all implementation targets
 were achieved or exceeded. The Bank team and the diligence of the UN agencies in implementing the
 project were a key factor in these achievements, operating under particularly difficult circumstances. This
 review rates the quality ESFNSP supervision as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 All three implementing agencies were to undertake M&E of activities under their responsibility, reporting to
 the Project Implementation Unit in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security. They provided quarterly
 progress reports for Government and the Bank to contribute to implementation support and general
 supervision.

 Information on project progress for the ICR’s Results Framework was collected comprehensively, but
 nearly all the information was related to physical achievements (e.g. number of project beneficiaries,
 amount of farm tools). Quantitative and qualitative information on outcomes - such as the project's impact
 on yields of the higher quality seed; improvements in welfare; and the degree to which targeted benefits



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



 reached the intended beneficiaries - was not provided. although for a short-duration project quantitative
 outcomes are not easy to achieve

 Thus, while M&E design for an emergency project is not typically expected to cover anything but the most
 basic and easily measured information; addition as feasible of several key qualitative indicators would have
 added greater understanding of achievements of the project’s broader objectives. Rapid rural appraisal,
 village meetings, discussions with key informants or other means, are amongst the options that might have
 provided a quickly determined indicative assessment of the project’s broader outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  The agencies traced and reported progress against the project’s development objectives. M&E
  procedures differed between the agencies, although overall, in spite of security impediments, the key
  physical data intended for monitoring was collected.



c. M&E Utilization
  The quarterly progress reports were used by all parties (the agencies, Government, and the Bank) for
  decision making on project implementation, although as observed above, information was limited to
  physical progress. The ICR comments that the M&E information might also have been used to “refine
  project implementation,” although this is not elaborated.

  Summarizing M&E as a whole, coverage was thorough for physical data, but this was not matched by
  quantitative and qualitative data on project outcomes. Nevertheless, the M&E systems designed and
  managed by the three UN agencies, collected data as required by the legal agreements with the Bank.
  Any shortcomings were apparently not detected by Bank supervision missions. However, given the very
  difficult circumstances in which this emergency project was implemented, the quality of M&E is rated
  Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environment

   The project was classified as category B and triggered the following safeguards: Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); Pest Management ((OP/BP 4.09); and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). An Environmental
   and Social Management Framework, and an Integrated Pest Management Plan were prepared as guidance
   documents, although both were delayed. Several environmental issues were addressed, amongst them,
   disposal of wastes, and safety procedures for livestock husbandry. There were some implementation



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



   issues: the company hired to manage the safeguards performed unevenly; and the ICR reported that some
   safeguards documents were incomplete.

   Social

   The ICR advises that social cohesion was enhanced by the project through wide-based community
   consultation including indigenous peoples who were members of the project implementation committees
   and input distribution committees. Divisions and sources of tension within and between communities were
   improved by such collective decision making and related actions. The ICR also noted that "Although the
   grievance response mechanism (GRM) was effectively addressing the concerns and resolving issues
   among the beneficiaries, proper documentation was weak) (ICR, para 60).

   Despite some shortcomings, the ICR concluded that: "The overall environmental and social safeguards
   compliance was adequate" (para 58).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial.

   Financial covenants were complied with and audit reports were timely and unqualified. However, there
   were two shortfalls in financial management: the intended computerized accounting system was not
   utilized; and there were gaps in the financial management manual (ICR para 61).

   Procurement

   Procurement and related disbursements were expeditious, substantially due to the direct handling of
   procurement and disbursements by the implementing agencies. All procurement activities were treated as
   prior reviewed under the enhanced procurement measures for Sudan’s emergency food program. No
   procurement issues were noted (ICR, para 62).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Efficiency rating raised to
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Satisfactory              substantial due to cost-
                               Satisfactory
                                                                              effectiveness, expeditious

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



                                                                              implementation, and compliance
                                                                              with expectations on efficiency
                                                                              for an emergency project.
                                                                              The Bank enabled a broadly
                               Moderately                                     successful project performance
Bank Performance                                    Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory                                   amidst considerable
                                                                              implementation constraints.
                                                                              While there were moderate
                                                                              shortcomings in M&E design
                                                                              and implementation, overall
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Substantial
                                                                              M&E performance complied with
                                                                              the legal requirements for this
                                                                              emergency project.
Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

 Based on the project experience, the ICR listed seven lessons. This review considers that the
following five lessons drawn from the ICR (with some adaptations) emerge as potentially relevant to
future similar emergency projects:

1.   An emergency response project can lay the foundation for a longer-term development program.

EFNSP comprised both a ‘humanitarian’ operation (urgent provision of food for short-term mitigation
of famine), and a “development” operation" helping farmers who had suffered seriously from drought
to ‘re-engage’ in agricultural production. Food provisions were the kernel of EFNSP, as typical in a
food-crisis response project. The inclusion, however, of the development component met the need
to help farmers become self-reliant. Food provision provided an immediate palliative, but the
development part gave follow-on benefits not long after, The lesson is that a forwards looking
approach to a food crisis – by helping farmers to become self-reliant - can reduce a country’s
chronic food deficit and dependence on external assistance.

2. In crisis response projects, implementation by non-government agencies rather than
government institutions may be appropriate when the agencies have greater capability - speed
rather than capacity building would generally be paramount.

The lesson from this project was that implementation of the project by three competent UN agencies
– FAO, WFP and WHO – with extensive experience with food distribution and basic rehabilitation of
farming in South Sudan, were able to start and carry out the operation effectively at a fast pace on
behalf of a government with very weak implementation capacity in a large country

3. With a flexible approach, rapid preparation need not preclude an effective, more socially
responsive project outcome.

The emergency project was prepared in less than four months, yet the lesson is that several design
adjustments were successfully made while the project was being implemented - such as choice of


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



beneficiaries on a vulnerability basis rather than by location, and improving targeting to the most
needy.

4. Tailored procurement procedures and capable staffing are particularly important in an
emergency project.

The humanitarian aid part of the project was disbursed within a year, and the development part by
project closure. The lesson is that implementation by established UN institutions was possible
because their procurement guidelines were in line with Bank guidelines, hence prior review was not
needed, and management of procurement was under the control of qualified, experienced and
competent agencies.

5.   M&E design can include reasonable means of assessing impact of an emergency operation.

The M&E system effectively monitored achievements against the project’s physical targets. This
was a notable success given the conflict situation and severe logistical challenges facing
the gathering of data. However, all monitoring data were in output terms. While M&E is not the first
priority for an emergency operation, some understanding of the real outcome and impact of the
project would have been informative. The lesson is that a small sample survey, or even anecdotal
information obtained through structured conversations, could have provided greater, understanding
of beneficiary views, the impacts of project actions, and the way forward..



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  As part of a multi-project/several-countries review of Bank experience with emergency response projects.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is a thoughtful review and provides issues-oriented discussion of the achievement of the project.
Discussion is placed within overviews of the difficulties of providing food and social services as intended. The
Results Framework contains candid and well written explanatory notes and follows standard OPCS guidance,
systematically comparing achievements against appraisal targets. The analysis, while providing data on the
project's achievements and its efficiency, would have been strengthened by some international
comparative data on food distribution costs, and qualitative measures of achievements/impacts of the programs
or an explanation of their absence during project implementation The ICR did, however, provide some useful
lessons.




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      South Sudan Emergency Food and Nutrition (P163559)



A future project may be approved in 2021, and it would have been informative to have had at least a brief
comment on this in the ICR, factored into the discussions of risks to development outcome as this would have
provided greater reflection on risks and design for this operation.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 16 of 16
