     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022191

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P102627                                      IN: Bihar PRI

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                        Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51600                                    31-Dec-2017                                          56,476,128.38

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Sep-2012                                  30-Dec-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             84,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              69,000,330.23                                                0.00

 Actual                                          54,176,808.29                                                0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Soren Kirk Jensen             Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is to support Bihar's capacity to promote and strengthen inclusive, responsive and
   accountable Panchayat Raj Institutions ("PRIs") in selected Project Districts across the state (Financing
   Agreement, Credit Number 5160-IN, p. 5).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was initially structured around five components.

   Component 1: Panchayat Sarkar Bhawan: This component involves construction and making functional
   Panchayat Sarkar Bhawans (local administration buildings) in approximately 300 Gram Panchayats (village
   councils) . After restructuring the component was split in two subcomponents. Component 1(a) Construction
   of 330 Panchayat Sarkar Bhawan (PSBs); (b) Making functional the existing 330 PSBs constructed by the
   Government of Bihar. Cost: Estimated at appraisal: US$50m; after restructuring: US$65m; information on
   amounts disbursed by component at project closing (actual cost) were provided in local currency (INR) and
   approximate values in US$ to US$49.1 million.

   Component 2: Capacity building for Panchayati Raj Institutions: This component builds panchayats’ core
   institutional competencies to empower them to achieve essential development outcomes. The component
   also engages communities and citizens, through training, mobilization, and the media, to participate in local
   governance and to hold panchayats accountable. This component had two subcomponents on: a)
   institutional strengthening, building the core institutional capacity of panchayats, including in basic
   administrative, planning and financial management capacity; and, b) nurturing development-oriented
   panchayat leadership and local initiatives in the following areas: natural resource management, nutritional
   status of women and children, quality of drinking water, and village sanitation. After restructuring,
   component 2 was retained but natural resource management was dropped as a focus area. Cost: Estimated
   at appraisal: US$ 27.5m; after restructuring US$ 32.5m; approximated actual cost (see above) was US$2.4
   million.

   Component 3: Strengthen State Government capacity to manage a gradual decentralization and
   empowerment process through: a) the establishment of a regulatory framework for PRIs; b) monitoring of
   panchayat finance and performance; c) capacity building curriculum development; and, d) expanded annual
   audit coverage. After restructuring, component 3 was retained but focused on a, b and d as capacity
   building activities were covered under component 2. Cost: Estimated at appraisal US$ 2.5m; after
   restructuring: US$ 7.5m; approximated actual cost (see above) was US$0.5 million.

   Component 4: Panchayat Performance Grant to reward panchayats with exceptional performance on
   inclusiveness, responsiveness and accountability. After restructuring the component was dropped. Cost:
   Estimated at appraisal: US$ 20m; after restructuring: 0; and at project closing: 0.

   Component 5: Project Management and Coordination. The implementation agency for the project, the Bihar
   Gram Swaraj Yojana Society (BGSYS) had four critical roles. It functioned as a catalyst for the Government
   of Bihar’s vision for empowering PRIs, provided technical support, coordinated activities and had fiduciary
   responsibility. After restructuring this component was retained. Cost: Estimated at appraisal: US$15m; after
   restructuring US$ 15m; approximated actual cost (see above) was US$4.1 million.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost, Financing and Borrower Contribution:

   The original total project cost was budgeted at US$120 million. World Bank financing consisted of US$84
   million (70%) and the borrower contribution was US$36 million (30%). World Bank financing was revised to
   US$ 69,000,330 and borrower financing to 0, reducing the total project cost to US$ 69 million. The revised
   World Bank financing corresponds with the reported cancellation of US$15 million, accrued due to
   exchange rate gains, at the second restructuring on April 30, 2019. Amount disbursed was US$56,476,128.
   According to the project team, the underspend of roughly US$12.5 million was due to – (i) disallowances by
   the auditor that could not be recertified by the project; (ii) release of the retention money against the security
   deposits; (iii) both BGSYS (Bihar Gram Swaraj Yojana Society) and LAEO (Local area engineering
   office) were unable to furnish expenditure details because of the lockdown during the months of March-May
   as a result of COVID 19.

   Dates:

   The Project was approved on September 27, 2012 but only became effective on August 21, 2013 due to
   changes in senior government counterparts and slow progress on approving posts critical to the
   implementation of the project. Subsequently it underwent three Level 2 restructurings.

       1. The first took effect on June 15, 2016, and included a revised results framework (PDO indicators
          reduced from seven to three and revised with more specific targets), revised and dropped
          components (most significantly, component 4 on performance grants was entirely dropped and a
          new implementing agency was introduced), funds were reallocated, disbursing arrangements were
          changed and the project closing date was extended by 18 months to June 30, 2019.
       2. The second restructuring took place on April 30, 2019 and involved a cancellation of US$15 million
          of the credit due to exchange rate gains.
       3. The third restructuring was affected in June 2019 and extended project closing by an additional six
          months to December 30, 2019.

   Only US$730,000 was disbursed prior to the first restructuring in 2016. Almost all project finance was
   disbursed in the final eight months from April to December 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Given the extension of project implementation over more than seven years this project traversed three
World Bank-supported country strategies (CAS FY2009-2012, CPS FY2013-17 and CPF FY2018-22). The
project is rated in relation to the country strategy in effect at the time of the last restructuring (June 2019,
after which the majority of the finance was disbursed.



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



               Despite an impressive trajectory of growth and poverty reduction in recent years (the percentage of people
               living in extreme poverty dropped from 46 to 21 percent in the two decades up to 2011) significant gaps in
               service delivery persist and public-sector institutions are often inefficient and unaccountable. PRIs form a
               central core of public sector institutions at state and local level. The PDO therefore had considerable and
               continued relevance to the country conditions, with improving the agility, performance and responsiveness
               of India’s Public Sector Institutions at the core of the current CPF, as is strengthening the efficiency,
               accountability, governance, and quality of service delivery (CPF FY2018-2022, p. 2). The institutional
               strengthening supported by the project is expected to improve service delivery. Given the size and diversity
               of India, the focus on Bihar state was pertinent. It is one of India’s poorest and most populous states with
               relatively high growth rates presenting an opportunity for sustained poverty reduction if governance and
               service delivery can be improved simultaneously (CPF FY2018-2022, p. 9) . Considerable capacity
               constraints and diminishing interest in the decentralization agenda at the outset of the project were critical
               development challenges to PRIs making their projected contribution to service delivery in Bihar. The ICR
               suggests that the project was “ahead of its time” (ICR p. 30, page references are to the PDF version of the
               ICR). The current CPF articulates the importance of investing in state capabilities to address the
               implementation challenge. WBG's approach to strengthening local public sector institutions in rural areas
               includes an expanded role for the Panchayat Raj Institutions in public service delivery, particularly in the
               area of public financial management (CPF FY2018-2022, p. 26-27). The PRIs are also seen as important in
               addressing India’s gender gap, as women have considerable voice in local institutions (CPF FY2018-2022.
               p. 32).

               The PDO was also well aligned with development objectives of both the Government of India and the state
               government of Bihar. The former follows a strategy of state building that encompasses strong commitment
               to strengthen Gram Panchayats (GPs). At state level, the Chief Minister promoted a vision of “Government
               at your doorstep” which relied on strengthened GPs. The project was based on Bank’s continued dialogue
               with the Government of Bihar over the past six years.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             More Inclusive Gram Panchayats

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was that the construction of purpose-built operational PSBs; undertaking community
                             engagement through training, mobilization, and the media; and strengthening panchayats’ core institutional
                             competencies would lead to greater inclusion of women and other vulnerable people as well as more
                             responsive and accountable GPs. The term vulnerable people refer mainly to members from scheduled
                             castes and scheduled tribes (SC/ST) that are officially designated groups of people in India as defined in the

                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



Constitution of India. SCs primarily comprise groups of people who were previously considered
‘untouchables’ and are often economically and socially marginalized; and live in extreme poverty. STs
comprise groups of people who, in highly generic terms, can be described as dwelling in compact areas,
following a community way of living, in harmony with nature, and having a uniqueness of culture, distinctive
customs, traditions and beliefs which are simple, direct and non-acquisitive by nature (description adopted
from Reimeingam, M (2013): Journal of North East India Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1, Jan.-Jun. 2013, pp. 1-17).

The PDO indicator, women participating at regular Gram Sabha meetings in project GPs, increased from a
baseline of 96 to 330 by project closing, fully achieving the target. This increased participation also included
SC/ST members, which were part of the original target group for inclusion. The intermediate results indicators
of: Number of new Panchayat Sarkar Bhawan constructed, and number of functional project GPs with newly
constructed Panchayat Bhawans, both targeted at 330, increased from a baseline of 0 to 271 and from 0 to
330 respectively by project closing. Moving the GPs to dedicated offices, and making the structures and
spaces gender-friendly, provided a comfortable and safe space that facilitated inclusion. Three intermediate
indicators on: a) constitution of standing committees, b) regular meeting of standing committees to discharge
their statutory functions and c) systematically recording attendance in project GPs, all targeted at 330, were
also fully met at project closing against baselines of a) 96, b) 19 and c) 0, respectively.

Additional evidence for the objective being met is provided through a methodologically robust, survey-based
joint assessment (by BGSYS and the Bank) looking at the extent to which the construction of local
government offices equipped with staff, furniture, fixtures, and other peripherals, helped build inclusive
institutions. This survey is of central importance in evaluating the efficacy of the project due to shortcomings
in the revised results framework (discussed below) which implied that some objectives did not have results
indicators, or the connection was not obvious. The survey provided evidence of increased inclusiveness due
to improved location of PSB offices (previously meetings often took place the residence of the President of
the GP), better accessibility and greater gender-friendliness of the PSBs. For the latter, 93% of respondents
said that the project GPs were gender friendly against 33% in non-project GPs. The survey assessment does
not state whether respondents to this question included both men and women (who might have different
perspectives on gender friendliness). The ICR concluded that the project contributed towards women
empowerment as they “…can now participate regularly and articulate their demands from local
representatives without fear of ill-treatment” (ICR, p. 19).

Standing Committees were constituted and performing their mandated duties, with data captured by the Gram
Panchayat Management System (GPMS) of location, date and time of official meetings. However, the ICR
does not indicate whether or not decision-making was made increasingly by Standing Committees.

The results chain for inclusion, as well as the results indicators, is relatively convincing. Participation of
women in the regular Gram Sabha was recorded in the minutes of the Gram Sabha meetings. The ICR
argues compellingly that the outputs and intermediate outcomes in terms of built and functional Panchayat
Sarkar Bhawans (PSBs) with much safer and gender-friendly structures was critical to the participation of
women in Gram Sabha Meetings. Yet measuring this effect is challenging since newly constructed PSBs
were completed close to project completion, so there was little time for them to have had an effect. On the
other hand, the project supported making another 330 PSBs operational and, although these offices did not
have as gender friendly features as the ones financed by the project, the fact that meetings took place in an
official, dedicated space strengthened the participation of women, even before the effects of the newly
designed PSBs could be realized. This was complemented by other project financed activities such as
community engagement through training, mobilization, and the media, and strengthening panchayats’ core


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



institutional competencies contributing towards documented achievements. Thus, there is credible evidence
that project outputs led to the achievement of the inclusiveness outcome.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
More responsive Gram Panchayats

Rationale
There is no results indicator for this objective. There are intermediate indicators measuring capacity building,
which are steps towards increased responsiveness. One intermediate results indicator is the number of
trained Project Elected Representatives (ER) . It seems plausible that training of ERs would contribute
towards improved levels of attendance and more responsive service delivery. The target was fully achieved
having increased from a baseline of 236 to 330 by project closing (ICR, p. 37) but this is insufficient to
conclude the objective was met. The two intermediate results indicators on Standing Committees, assessed
above, also had indirect relevance and achieved their targets.

Better evidence that capacity building translated into improved responsiveness is provided through the
survey-based joint assessment, using the following indicators: (i) availability of functionaries at the GP office;
(ii) availability of application forms and RTPS facility; and (iii) visits required for submission of a service-
specific application. Delivery of services by GPs was defined in the assessment as the “…direct, facilitation,
and beneficiary selection services that come under the mandate of Gram Panchayats.” (ICR p. 81). The
survey was inconclusive on (i) and (ii) with minor differences in the availability of dedicated officials and
application forms between project and non-project GPs. On (iii) the survey indicated project impact as there
was a marked difference between project and non-project GPs in the ability to submit applications for various
documents (birth certificate, death certificate, pension scheme forms, etc.) during the first visit.

The ability to use newly constructed PSBs as temporary Covid-19 isolation centers has been a key,
unintended benefit (see Section 10c, below). However, the results measured are only initial steps towards the
aspirational notion of responsiveness envisioned initially.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
More accountable Gram Panchayats

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



                            The results indicator that "project GPs disclose annual plans, annual budget, statement of accounts and
                            progress reports" increased from a baseline of 50 to 330 by project closing, fully achieving the target. The
                            indicator of "regular meetings of GPs focusing on program planning and budgeting" increased from a baseline
                            of 96 to 330 by project closing, fully achieving the target. A number of intermediate results indicators also
                            point to progress toward the intended objective:

                            - Project GPs preparing annual plans and monitoring implementation, baseline 96, actual achieved at
                            completion: 330
                            - Strengthened capacity of vigilance committees (VC) on subject matters, baseline 0, actual achieved at
                            completion: 330
                            - Financial management capacity of GPs is strengthened, baseline 0, actual achieved at completion: 330
                            - Project GPs producing consolidated annual financial statements, baseline 96, actual achieved at
                            completion: 330
                            - Coverage of GP annual audit, baseline 96, actual achieved at completion: 330

                            These PDOs and intermediate results indicators (ICR p. 36-38) provide evidence of the achievement of the
                            objective with a plausible link to Bank support provided to project GPs.

                            The joint BGSYS/Bank survey produced strong additional evidence of impact on (i) the number of visits
                            required to obtain mandated services requested (ii) time required for issuing certificates, job cards and
                            pension schemes and (iii) services provided locally. While more work is needed to achieve a fuller sense of
                            accountability, the results achieved in project GPs are important steps and can be plausibly associated with
                            the achievement of the accountability outcome.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the rating of the efficacy of the project is based on achievement of results framework targets. Despite
                            some limitations in the articulation of the results chain and results framework especially the connection
                            between the PDO and the results indicators, especially in relation to measure responsiveness in objective 2,
                            there is evidence of the project delivering results. In addition, to get a fuller understanding of achievements in
                            project GPs vs non-project GPs, survey results were also considered.

                            To an extent, these different pieces of evidence provide a level of triangulation confirming achievement of
                            objectives. Only the number of new PSBs built fails to meet the target. Achievements are in line with the
                            detailed definitions of inclusiveness, responsiveness and accountability in the PAD, and are generally linked
                            to project support. However, because PSBs newly constructed by the project were not completed until close
                            to project completion, it is not yet clear to what extent the new features embodied in them will contribute to the
                            desired achievements.



                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



  Had it been feasible, a pre-project survey would have allowed a comparison between pre- and post-project
  perceptions.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD stipulates that an Economic and Financial Analysis is “not applicable” to the project (PAD, p. 12). The
ICR contains a relatively detailed efficiency analysis in annex 4 where it is argued that rate of interest could not
be assessed before the complete functioning and utilization (in terms of better accessibility of basic services) of
this infrastructure, however, a gross estimate of a potential 15 percent economic rate of return or higher is put
forward based on “learning from the project” (ICR p. 42).

While the project was substantially delayed this did not increase the cost of the project, primarily since the
recipient benefited from exchange rate gains (the Indian Rupee depreciation 23% of against US$ between July
2012 and December 2019). After project restructuring (explained below), implementation was efficient,
especially given the relative complexity of the target of constructing 330 PSBs in rural areas within a relatively
short timeframe. 59 PSBs (18%) were not finished at project closure and taken over by the state government.
The restructuring undertook a number of corrections to the project which increased efficiency substantially, such
as identifying a new implementing agency, the Local Area Engineering Organization. The efficiency analysis
presents an interesting figure plotting DO/IP ratings and disbursements against the restructurings, clearly
illustrating the important impact of restructuring on the efficiency and overall performance of the project. It would
have been valuable to add data on the construction and equipping of PSBs on the same chart, in order to better
connect the results achieved to construction of new PSBs.

The project made good use of innovative tools such as e-Project Management System (e-PMS) online software
that captures information about construction activities providing status of construction activities at different sites
as well as independent third-party verification and quality audit, regular field visits to construction sites and
follow up on compliance with recommendations. Initiatives such as CoST, the Infrastructure Transparency
Initiative (CoST) recommends the use of similar assurance processes to improve infrastructure governance,
seek efficiency gains and strengthen value for money of public infrastructure investments. The shortfall in the
number of PSBs constructed is may have been higher without this close follow up


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated as high as the project remained pertinent to the current CPF, government policies and
strategies both in its thematic and geographical focus. Efficacy is a marginal substantial based on substantial
achievement of the objective of more inclusive Gram Panchayats, modest achievement of the objective of more
responsive Gram Panchayats, and substantial achievement of the objective of more accountable Gram
Panchayats. The main issue with the efficacy rating is that the results framework and parts of the resulting
evidence is weak. The impact on gender is strong and convincing which carries a substantial rating of the
inclusiveness objective. The efficiency of the project was substantial as the delays faced did not result in higher
cost to the project. After restructuring, which represented reasonable adaptations, the project picked up pace
substantially with complex outputs delivered in a relatively timely manner. Given shortcomings in evidence
provided for the achievement of project outcomes the rating is rounded down to moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Any development outcome that relies on infrastructure faces an inherent risk of that infrastructure not being
operated as intended or adequately maintained. For example, the achievement of the gender-based
objective is partly based on infrastructure such as separate toilets and breastfeeding rooms. Should these
facilities be used for other purposes or fall into disrepair it would according to the logic of the project have the
potential to undermine its results. While the ICR indicates that the government will take over construction of
PSBs and that the ones built as part of the project are becoming a model across Bihar for construction
financed by the state (ICR, p. 16), a reversal of this commitment, or technical or financial constraints should
lead to the gender friendly model not being followed, would compromise the gender-based objective. It is
also important that government uses good practices in procurement, as demonstrated by this project, as well
as the innovative use of the e-pms and the third-party verification mechanisms, to minimize risk to
sustainability.

There is a risk that full rollout of the GPMS will be further delayed by the delay in approving GP accounting
rules, which would compromise monitoring of project-supported and future achievements. Furthermore, if the
achieved level of disclosure of annual plans, annual budget, statement of accounts and progress reports was
to diminish, it would negatively impact on the increased level of responsiveness and accountability.




                                                                                                         Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had a high level of relevance and had the right aspirations to address the development
  challenges associated with the functioning of the GPs. However, an initial delay of almost one year
  followed by lack of progress in implementation until a substantial restructuring of the project in June 2016,
  show the preparation of the project was lacking, given its level of ambition. The project had an excessive
  number of result indicators, absence of baseline data and poor assessment of the capacity of the Bihar
  Construction Department (BCD) to carry out the construction of the PSBs. Also, the BGSYS was initially
  understaffed and poorly equipped to initiate implementation. After restructuring BGSYS was strengthened
  with more staff and a new implementing agency was identified that was capable to swiftly initiate
  construction and deliver the required outputs. The ICR does not explain how this agency was identified
  and why it was not engaged at the outset. According to the ICR, the US$ 20 million performance grant
  component was entirely dropped at the request of the state government because of lack of capacity to
  monitor and evaluate performance on the ground. Quality-at-entry was weak despite the availability of a
  PHRD grant of US$ 565,000 to finance project preparation that was extended in October 2008 (Letter,
  October 7, 2008: PHRD Grant No. TF 092825 – IN, Preparation of Bihar Panchayat Strengthening
  Project). The rating given to quality-at-entry is consistent with the early ISRs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The initial restructuring of the project was highly successful in that it provided adjustments to allow
 implementation to begin leading to a project that was moderately satisfactory in achieving development
 impact in most of areas, particularly on gender. This intervention was the result of attentive supervision.
 The ICR describes the situation after the restructuring as a total turnaround with significant progress in all
 areas (ICR p. 28). The evidence provided by the ICR supports this claim with significantly more AMs (three
 between 2007 and 2014, none between 2014 and 2016, increasing to seven between 2017 and 2019)
 (ICR, p. annex 6, p. 47). The ratings provided by ISRs started to slowly improve from unsatisfactory in
 throughout 2014 – 2016, to moderately unsatisfactory in 2017 and eventually reaching moderately
 satisfactory in April 2018 (ICR, p. 2-3). There was also attention to fiduciary aspects, environmental and
 social safeguards.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design had room for improvement both before and after restructuring. The project initially had
 seven indicators that were difficult to measure and presented without baseline data. The ICR mentions
 additionally that the environmental and social safeguards during initial stages were “extremely weak” (ICR
 p. 26). While restructuring improved the PDO-level indicators (ensuring they were measurable, achievable
 and time bound), the causal link between the PDO and the remaining PDO-level indicators was not always
 clear (see efficacy section above). In the results chain (ICR, chart 1, p. 11) the original wording of the PDO
 on Panchayats becoming responsive, inclusive, and accountable is erroneously inserted as an “underlying
 assumption”. This confuses the results framework as the central objectives of the project clearly cannot be
 an underlying assumption. Finally, the PDOs as defined at inception (PAD, Annex 1, p. 7) were much
 broader than could be reasonably expected in project GPs.

 The Task Team acknowledged that the PDO was set high and did not feel there was scope to change it
 once the project was underway, since would require complex renegotiation with the client. There was some
 urgency (also from management) to disburse funding so that the country (and specifically the state of
 Bihar) would not lose out on IDA financing (India has graduated to low middle-income status and is
 transitioning out of IDA).



b. M&E Implementation
  As noted, baseline data was collected with significant delay in 2018. Indicators were measured by “social
  mobilisers”, as reported in the ICR. The weaknesses described above were to an extent corrected
  through use of the survey of beneficiary perception referred to in Section 4. The monitoring system for the
  construction work was real time and made good use of the e-pms and third-party verification
  mechanisms. Due to delays in the construction of project PSBs, it was difficult to measure the
  contribution of new features to achievement of the PDO. No Mid-Term Review was carried out. Instead,
  and in line with advice from management, detailed AMs were prepared to review and monitor
  progress. The use of a Third-Party Quality Audit Agency from the second part of 2018 added to the
  quality of M&E.



c. M&E Utilization
  Utilization of the M&E framework was reasonable. Data was collected on a regular basis in the field and
  channeled back to decision-makers. The second and third restructurings (project extensions) were
  informed by monitoring activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as Category B and triggered both environmental and social safeguard policies of
  the Bank: OP/BP 4.01, Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, respectively.
  It was assessed that the project would not have any significant adverse and/or irreversible environmental
  impact. BGSYS was assigned responsibility for compliance with the environmental and social safeguard
  policies of the project (PAD, p.45-46).

  An environmental assessment (EA) study was undertaken by the Government of Bihar at appraisal stage
  and an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was developed as an outcome of the EA study and
  subject to a consultative process and disclosed on the same website. Environmental safeguarding during
  project implementation focused primarily on avoiding negative impacts related to the selection of land
  parcels and construction of new PSB infrastructure.

  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared by Government of Bihar consistent with all
  applicable laws and policies of the Government of Bihar and World Bank (PAD, p. 15). The draft RPF was
  discussed at a stakeholder workshop and disclosed on the website of the Department of Panchayati Raj,
  Government of Bihar in 2011.

  The ICR points to delays in monitoring compliance with the Environmental and Social Management Plan
  during the construction of the PSBs but does not report any impacts during project implementation. These
  seem to have been avoided mainly due to PSBs being constructed on government land and identification of
  encumbrance-free land that also met EMF criteria. The ICR does not make reference to findings of
  monitoring reports. The initial restructuring which led to dropping of natural resource management did not
  lead to a new assessment.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Pressure to disburse assigned IDA funds was a significant factor in the project being restructured rather
  than closed after a number of years of inactivity. As indicated, this restructuring was successful and led to
  moderately satisfactory outcomes. After the cancellation of US$15 million as a result of exchange rate
  gains, only 82 percent of the US$69 million available was disbursed by project closure. Borrower financing
  was reduced to zero in the revised project. There is a lack of clarity in relation to these figures as different
  currencies are used in different documents with USD, XDR and INR at different times. The relevant Bank
  staff indicated that the government contribution was not annulled. Despite significant efforts it has not been
  possible to clarify these discrepancies.

  The ICR refers to delayed submissions of internal audit reports and project audit report by the LAEO and
  complications in funds flow, accounting, reporting, and auditing mainly due to dissimilar financial
  management systems of BGSYS and LAEO.

  It was only possible to obtain a breakdown of actual project cost by component in local currency (INR)
  which due to currency fluctuations makes it difficult to reconcile with the amounts originally budgeted. The
  Senior Finance Management Specialist of the project indicated that component specific expenditure is not
  captured in the system.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project resulted in a number of unintended positive outcomes. While not contributing directly to the
   project outcome, the approach to planning, monitoring and finishing the new PSBs as transformational
   infrastructure, including the use of e-PMS (and potentially third party verification), has been adopted as a
   model for all capital projects across the Panchayat Raj Department. This is a significant contribution as the
   State of Bihar has and continues to invest in this type of structures with domestically mobilized resources.
   The BCSYS has been transformed from an understaffed, poorly managed, high turnover agency to a
   resource and capacity-building center for the Panchayats of the whole state which will continue working to
   sustain and build on the results achieved by the project.

   The newly constructed PSBs have turned out to be of great use as temporary isolation centers after the
   outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic, especially for migrant workers in Bihar. The buildings were physically
   functional in terms of toilets, water, and electricity and hence providing the basic necessities and hygiene
   required for quarantine over longer periods of time.

   The project does not seem to have produced any negative unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest
                                                                                   The ICR is very clear about the
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial
                                                                                   shortcomings of the project.

12. Lessons

Lessons in the ICR are condensed and augmented by IEG. The first lesson aims to catch the
essence of a number of recommendations in the ICR. The second is an IEG lesson that builds on
one of the identified shortcomings of the project. The third lesson is an amalgamation of at least
three lessons from the ICR along these lines.

1. Flexibility and adaptation to context and problem. When implementation delays threaten the
achievement of results, proactiveness, adaptation and flexibility in restructuring and implementation
is of central importance to bring the project back on track. In the case of this project, the initial PDO,

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



results framework and operational design did not sufficiently take into account the scale of the
challenge, the capacity constraints, and the poor governance context in Bihar. Future operations
need to calibrate their expected outcomes and results framework against the situation on the ground
both in terms of capacity, previous experiences, political economy constraints and the specific
problem it seeks to address but must also remain flexible, adaptive and innovative in implementation
to overcome unforeseen challenges and to achieve unexpected results. An example of the latter is
the ability to use newly constructed PSBs as temporary Covid-19 isolation centers. The provision of
toilets, water, and electricity was originally thought of as a way of enhancing more inclusion of
women and other underserved citizens. In the event, design features have been in some cases
repurposed to provide the basic necessities and hygiene required for quarantine, especially for
migrant workers temporarily unable to return to their homes.

2. Innovative and tailored tools and approaches are needed for difficult contexts. During
implementation of the project it was determined that the level of ambition of the PDO was too high
and that comprehensive strengthening of the inclusiveness, responsiveness and accountability of
the Panchayat Raj Institutions was overly ambitious. Yet a survey showed some positive results in
this regard. The IEG finds that a challenging context does not necessarily imply that governance-
focused projects cannot be delivered. Success depends on the tools and approaches applied, which
should be relatively innovative, simple, engaging and tailored to the context. For example, the
construction of the PSBs could have been subjected to a greater level of transparency and citizens
engagement in the design and construction of the buildings, which would have made them more
transformative. This would have complemented innovative mechanisms already applied such as the
e-PMS, other ICT tools and the third-party verification and quality audit. The project could have been
more innovative in this sense and sought to identify approaches to strengthening transparency and
accountability in the public sector or built budget literacy. Embracing such approaches is critical to
make governance-oriented reforms harder to reverse and more sustainable.

3. Ownership, continuity of senior management and staff and capacity-building are central
to the success of governance reforms, even when outside the direct control of the Bank. In
the case of this project, IEG finds that expanding the notion of ownership by proactively engaging
stakeholders in early discussions about projects and partnership frameworks could broaden and
deepen ownership, creating demand from outside government. Making projects problem-driven and
focused on addressing real issues can help retain commitment alongside intensive capacity building,
technical assistance and mentoring all tailored to the local context. Continuous capacity building and
training increases learning and application, especially when there is high turnover of staff.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The results achieved in project GPs are important first steps, but when the ICR was prepared, it was too early
  to measure the link between some key aspects of support such as newly constructed PSBs with new features,
  and achievement of PDO. In addition, more work is needed to achieve the fuller, aspirational sense of


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Bihar PRI (P102627)



  inclusiveness, responsiveness and accountability stated in the PAD, and it would be useful to assess how
  much of this has taken place at a later stage.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, sheds light on the challenges faced. Although it makes a strong case for the choices
made to bring the project back on track, this is done in a reasonably balanced manner. Complemented with a
frank interview with the Task Team, it provides sufficient evidence to inform the rating of the project. Perhaps
more attention to the consequences of the bar being set too high in the initial project design could have been
helpful. Information on project finances was difficult to untangle as there were major discrepancies between
figures provided on actual disbursements in the ICR Data Sheet and in Annex 3. According to the Task Team
those figures are not comparable. Only local currency figures were available for the actual cost of the project by
component (based on amounts actually disbursed) which were later provided in approximate US$ figures. The
ICR is very candid in its criticism of the original results framework but not as forthcoming with assessing the
limitations of the post-restructuring results framework. The evidence provided from the joint BGSYS Bank
survey makes it clear that the original PDO was met to an extent while also pointing to the confusion in the
results chain where the PDO was essentially downgraded to an assumption.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
