     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022184

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P101415                                    SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47370,IDA-57310                        30-Sep-2014                                        101,715,750.18

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Jun-2010                                31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            55,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           104,870,196.22                                               0.00

 Actual                                       102,896,861.99                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Fernando Manibog             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) were:

   (i) to improve effective road management and maintenance, both at national level and in urban areas:
   and (ii) to improve public urban transport in the Greater Dakar Area (GDA).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



   The PDOs were not changed when the Additional Financing (AF) was approved for the project on October 13,
   2015.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  13-Oct-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 9 - 13).

   1. Support to interurban road infrastructure development. This component provided financing for: (a)
   Technical Assistance (TA) to the road sector agencies: and (b) infrastructure investments. The estimated
   cost at appraisal was US$39.0 million (financed by IDA). Of this, US$3.0 million was for TA activities, and
   US$36.0 million for infrastructure investments. The revised estimate with AF was US$84.0 million. The
   actual cost was US$90.7 million.

   a. The TA activities included: (i) strengthening the institutional framework for defining technical
   standards, the regulatory framework for road laboratories, and the reorganization of the Experimental
   Research Center for Equipment Studies (CEREEQ); (ii) strengthening the Autonomous Road Maintenance
   Fund (FERA); (iii) capacity building of the Directorate of Land Transport (DTT) for modernizing vehicles and
   driver's license registration and implementing a road safety pilot program; (iv) capacity building of the Road
   Management Agency (AGEROUTE); and (v) capacity building of the Infrastructure General Directorate
   (DGI) in the areas of strategic planning, axle load control, and road technical standards.

   b. Investments for rural and interurban roads upgrades in the Grand Niayes region. Activities
   included: (i) rehabilitation of the Route Nationale 1 (RN1) between Rufisque and Bargny (a four-lane inter-
   urban road, and a main link between the Grand Niayes region and the GDA); and (ii) upgrading the
   Pompiers bus terminal.

   The scope of this component was expanded with Additional Financing (AF). These activities were added: (i)
   construction of a new 69 kilometer (km) road section from Lampoul to Grandiole; and (ii) paving of 30 km of
   urban roads through the "high intensity labor-based method" (HILM). According to the clarifications provided
   by the team, HILM is a training/employment strategy used in transport projects to involve beneficiaries
   (often youth/women, but sometimes community level local organizations). As part of the contract, the
   company building the infrastructure trains an agreed number of beneficiaries in some technical aspects, and
   hires them as part of its labor force.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



  2. Capacity Building for developing public transport services in the GDA. The estimated cost at
  appraisal was US$7.8 million (financed by IDA). The revised estimate with AF was US$11.8 million. The
  actual cost was US$7.7 million.

  Activities in this component included: (i) TA to the Executive Council for Urban Transport in Dakar (CETUD)
  for managing the public transport system and for preparing a framework for linking the Dakar Mass Transit
  Company (DDD) with small suburban train (PTB) operations. (The estimated cost appraisal for this sub-
  component was US$5.9 million); (ii) TA for preparing a pilot Bus Rapid Transport (BRT) system and feeder
  minibus facilities, and for developing the existing minibus leasing system. (The estimated cost at appraisal
  for this subcomponent was US$1.9 million). The other activities in this
  subcomponent included: preparing urban mobility improvement operations in the cultural park area around
  the Dakar Central Railway station, support for monitoring air quality in Dakar, and financing mass
  transport studies:

  The scope of this component was expanded by AF to include TA for detailed engineering studies of the pilot
  line of a BRT system.

  3. Support to implementation, coordination, monitoring and evaluations (M&E). The estimated cost at
  appraisal was US$3.2 million (financed by IDA). The revised estimate with AF was US$4.2 million. The
  actual cost was US$3.8 million.

  This component provided project management support through: (i) training AGEROUTE and CETUD staff
  for preparing financial and technical audits; (ii) M&E support; and (iii) financing information and
  communication activities.

  The project had a Project Preparation Advance (PPA), and provision for financing contingencies. The
  estimated cost at appraisal was US$5.0 million. The actual cost was US$0.5 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$97.0 million. The revised estimate of the project cost
  with Additional Financing was US$147.0 million. The actual cost was US$102.9 million,

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$50.0 million, and US$5.0 million from
  the Pilot Crisis Response Window. AF of US$50.0 million was approved on October 13, 2015. With this, the
  total Bank financing for the project was US$105.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$102.9 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution for the original project was estimated at US$42.0
  million. According to the clarifications provided by the team, the government provided US$4.0 million as
  counterpart funding for the original project. The team clarified that the remaining US$38.0 million was for the
  fleet renewal, which was not part of the financing agreement. There was no borrower contribution for the AF
  project.

  Dates. The original project approved on June 1, 2010, became effective on December 29, 2010, and
  was scheduled to close on September 30, 2014. The original project closed three years behind schedule on




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



   October 31, 2017. AF was approved on October 13, 2015. The closing date for the AF project
   was December 31, 2019. The AF project closed as scheduled.

   Other changes. The project was restructured thrice. This included two Level 2 restructurings and one Level
   1 restructuring.

   These changes were made through the first Level 2 restructuring on June 24, 2014.

         An activity - the upgrading of the Pompiers interurban bus terminal - was cancelled, as an interurban
          bus terminal (Gare des Baux Maraichers) was built by the government, in the Dakar suburb of
          Pikine. Hence, upgrading the Pompiers terminal was no longer a priority for the government. The
          funds allocated for this activity was reallocated for constructing additional km of roads in Niayes.
         The closing date of the original project, was extended from September 30, 2014, to October 31,
          2017 for completing the ongoing activities, that were subject to delays in the initial years of
          implementation.

   These changes were made through a Level 1 restructuring on October 13, 2015, following the AF for the
   project.

         The project scope was expanded to include additional activities (discussed in section 2d), and new
          indicators were added to monitor the added activities.
         The closing date for the AF project was set at December 31, 2019.

   The following change was made through the second Level 2 restructuring on February 26, 2019.

         This restructuring was intended to finance 100% of the remaining contracts with IDA funds. As
          stated in the AF Agreement, the government was to finance 25% of the added activities through
          counterpart funding. These funds were not available, due to the country's constrained fiscal
          situation. The IDA funds were hence reallocated to ensure that the already contracted activities
          were completed before the closing date (ICR, page 11).

   Split rating. A split rating was not applied, as the project became overall more ambitious.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Average Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth of 5% percent had
contributed to reducing poverty from 68% in 1994-1995 to 51% in 2005-2006. Growth before appraisal was
however fueled by public investments and remittances from workers employed abroad. There was little
economic diversification, and limited job creation in the private sector. Alleviating transport sector
bottlenecks was important to the government strategy of accelerating economic growth. Alongside this, the
population is concentrated in the west of the country, including the Greater Dakar Area (GDA), which
accounted for 25% of the population. In Dakar, over 75% of the daily person-trips are made by the public
transport system. The continued growth in the number of commuters has led to a significant increase in

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



travel times, which has been worsened by poor traffic management methods, aging public transport
vehicles, lack of intermodal coordination, inadequate regulations to govern the provision of services, and
poor road conditions due to insufficient maintenance. Addressing urban sector issues is hence important to
the government strategy.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were relevant to the government's strategy articulated in the
Accelerated Growth Strategy (AGS), and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) for 2006-2010. The
PRSP recognized the importance of the transport sector for supporting pro-poor growth through: (i) lowering
costs of services: (ii) local employment generation: (iii) impact of better managed public transport modes,
especially minibuses: and (iv) a stronger role for Dakar as the driver of national growth. The importance of
the sector was also articulated in the government's Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE) from 2012 onward. This
plan highlighted the need for improving access to economic infrastructure in value chains. The
government's priorities were enunciated in the two Letters of Transport Sector Policy for the 2010 -2015
period and the 2016 -2020 period (provisional), and the Policy Letter for Urban Mobility in Dakar (2015-
2020). The ICR however provides no details on the progress made on the commitments made in the three
Letters of Transport Sector policies.

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, they were relevant to two
of the three pillars of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2007-2010. The first pillar, focused on
growth, productivity, and wealth creation: The PDOs were consistent with the pillar, which placed emphasis
on rural and urban connectivity and mobility through investments in urban roads and mass transport
systems. The PDOs continue to be relevant to two of the three focus areas of the Bank's current Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020 - 2024: (i) boosting competitiveness and job creation through
private sector-led growth: and (ii) increasing resilience and sustainability, in the context of growing risks.
The PDOs were consistent with Pillar 2.1 of the CPF, which aimed at "improving digital and physical
connectivity at the national and regional levels".

The Bank has executed several road projects in Senegal and urban projects in the GDA.
The Second Transport Sector project (PST2), that closed in 2007, had in addition to improving 69% of
the road network, supported the government's efforts to increase the funds channeled to the Road
Funds for addressing maintenance needs. However, studies conducted under the PST2 identified a
US$400 million backlog in road maintenance needs, further confirming the need for improving the
management of Road Funds. The Urban Mobility Improvement Project (UMIP) that closed in 2008,
supported the urban transport sub-sector, in areas pertaining to traffic management and improving delivery
of transport services.

The PDO was overly ambitious, however, given that the outcomes of the prior UMIP project were not
realized, and the Independent Evaluation Group's (IEG's) Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR)
had rated the overall outcome of UMIP as Unsatisfactory. The project moreover had a very complex design,
involving too many diverse components and lacking strategic prioritization, given that this project sought to
start with the next stage of transport sector or modernization, when the institutional, the regulatory and
sector financing had failed in previous projects. While taking into account that to date there is no secure
basis for funding road maintenance activities that is required for preventing deterioration of the road assets
build under the prior projects, the project's objectives are responsive to strategic priorities and their
relevance is rated as substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                To improve effective road management and maintenance, both at national level and in urban areas.

                Rationale
                Theory of change. The causal chain between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical, and
                the intended outcomes were measurable. Road investments (upgrading the road section in Grand
                Niayes, rehabilitating RN1 between Rufisque and Bargny, and paving urban roads), were aimed at improving
                their condition. Capacity building activities aimed directly at institutional strengthening of specific road
                agencies (such as, the Autonomous Road Fund Agency (FERA), the Experimental Research Center for
                Equipment studies, Directorate of Road Transport, and Directorate of Land Transport). These activities were
                likely to improve road sector management under the assumption that strengthening
                FERA's capacity would contribute to providing a secure basis for funding road maintenance activities. These
                activities were causally linked and were expected to achieve the PDOs, hence the development outcomes
                were attributable to the project's interventions.

                Outputs (ICR, pages 14 - 20).

                TA was provided for the following activities as targeted.

                      Preparation of regulatory texts on licensing of road laboratories and training the staff of the
                       Experimental Research Center for Equipment Studies (CEREEQ).
                      To the Directorate of Road Transport (DTR) for modernization of vehicles and registration of driver
                       licenses through digitalization of driver licenses and car registration documents. These activities were
                       intended to reduce the processing time for transport documents.
                      A pilot program of road safety activities. This included publication of educational traffic
                       regulations, a communication plan on road safety, preparation of the national road safety plan
                       (adopted in 2012) and regional road safety plans (adopted in 2014), and an awareness campaign on
                       15 schools with 1,835 pupils and 400 youth groups.
                      Training the engineers of the Directorate for Road Transport (DR) on project
                       management, Geographic Information System (GIS), and environmental management. TA was
                       provided to the DR for: (i) developing the National Roads and Motorway Master Plan for 2015-2030 for
                       urban and rural roads and highways: and (ii) developing a quality assurance plan for road works in
                       Senegal.




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)




      TA was provided for evaluating the country's Third Policy Letter (LPST) for 2010 -2015, and
         developing the fourth LPST for 2016- 2020.The ICR does not however provide a concise assessment
         of the Bank's role and contribution on the Transport Policy letters.

The following investment activities were for the most part completed, as targeted.

      173 km of roads were rehabilitated in the Grand Niayes area. This was 11 km more than the originally
         planned 162 km.
        1,875 km of the RN1 road section between Rufisque and Bargny was rehabilitated. The ICR
         (paragraph 33) notes that this section was one of the main roads linking the Grand Niayes region with
         Dakar and its suburbs. This road segment is also the only interurban road, currently linking Dakar and
         its suburbs to neighboring countries (Mali, Mauritania and the Gambia). The ICR notes that this road
         was seriously damaged due to a combination of factors, including poor quality of prior rehabilitation
         works, heavy traffic to Mali because of the Ivorian crisis between 2010 and 2011, and lack of axle load
         control on freight carrying vehicles.
        26.7 km of urban roads were paved in Dakar suburbs, as compared to the target of 30 km. The ICR
         (paragraph 34) notes that the targets were reduced, due to the issues associated with counterpart
         funding (discussed in section 5).
        607 youth in the community, of which 23% were women, were trained in the techniques of
         paving under the High Intensity Labor-based method (HILB), as compared to the target of 600. 500 of
         the people who were trained, were hired to work on work sites. Wages paid to the youth during the
         implementation of the HILB program reached US$600,000, exceeding the target of US$400,000.
        In addition to the above, 1,310 temporary jobs at the work site were created, exceeding the target of
         1,000 jobs. It is not clear if the jobs are expected to continue.
        173 km of rural roads were rehabilitated at closure, exceeding the target of 162 km.
        A study on diversification of sources for funding road maintenance activities, for the Autonomous
         Road Maintenance Fund (FERA), was completed. (FERA's budget for funding road maintenance
         activities currently comes from the Special Tax on Petroleum Products (STPP), and from government
         contribution).

Outcomes.

      The PDO indicators were to reduce travel time on the project-intervened areas. The travel time on the
       selected road sections (Rufisque - Bayak - NottoDiogo - Lompoul), dropped from 211 minutes at the
       baseline in 2015, to 150 minutes at closure in October 17, 2019. This exceeded the target of 153
       minutes.
      Travel time on the road section (between Lampoul - Grandiole), dropped from 202 minutes in 2015, to
       80 minutes in 2019, exceeding the target of 100 minutes.
      Roads in good/fair condition, as a share of the total classified road network, increased to 71.3%. This
       exceeded the target of 60%.
      900,607 people directly benefitted from project activities. This exceeded the target of 726,000. 50.4%
       of the beneficiaries were women, as compared to the target of 50%. The ICR (paragraph 32) notes
       that the number of beneficiaries was higher than targeted, due to the 11 km of additional roads that
       were rehabilitated to connect Leona, a populated town on the way to Saint-Louis and its market in
       Potou, the biggest in the area and located 1.5 km from the main road.


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)




      The project target of raising CFA Francs (XOF) 57.7 billion for the road maintenance budget was not
       realized, with FERA only receiving 11 billion XOF from the government. The ICR (paragraph 38) notes
       that typically FERA collected the Special Tax on Petroleum Products (STPP), directly from the Central
       Bank for maintenance purposes. In 2019, the government changed the law in the face of fiscal
       constraints, and decided to directly collect the STPP, and then allocate the budget to FERA.
      The road maintenance budget to FERA coming from STPP, never exceeded 54% of the of the overall
       maintenance budget, as compared to the target of 80%.

In sum, given that most of the outcomes were realized, with the exception of the road maintenance budget
and the share of STPP in that budget, the relevance of this objective is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To improve public urban transport in the Greater Dakar Area (GDA).

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were clear
and logical. Capacity building of the road sector agencies in GDA sought to improve the capacity of the Dakar
Urban Transport Council (CETUD) to manage the public transport system, and included the following
activities: preparing a framework for linking the Dakar Mass Transit Company (DDD) with small suburban
trains, preparing a pilot Bus Rapid Transport system and feeder minibus facilities, supporting air quality
monitoring in Dakar and developing the existing minibus leasing system. These activities were aimed
specifically at improving the delivery of public transport services. The outcomes of these activities were likely
to contribute to the long term development outcome of increasing urban mobility in Dakar and thereby
supporting national poverty reduction.

Outputs (ICR, pages 21-23).

      TA was provided to the CETUD for organizing, regulating and developing urban transport services in
       GDA. The staff of CETUD were trained as targeted. The ICR however provides no details on how the
       CETUD's capacity and value-added contributions have evolved over its entire existence and across
       previous Bank-supported projects.
      A leasing scheme allowing fleet renewal of public transport buses, managed by private operators, was
       financed by the government. The number of minibuses entered in the fleet renewal
       operation, increased from 505 at the baseline in September 30, 2009, to 1,405 in May 2015. This
       exceeded the target of 1307. The reimbursement rate for the leasing mechanism reached the target of
       98%.
      17 minibus operators were trained on aspects such as, the organization of urban transport, accounting
       and financial management, technical management of vehicles, managing the public transport network,
       and human resource management. 1,380 agents were trained (including 298 agents from the Dakar

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



                                   Mass Transit Company (DDD), 63 drivers from the Small Suburban Trains (PTB), 331 drivers from the
                                   Urban Transport Financing Association (AFTU) and 671 bus fare collectors. There were no targets for
                                   this indicator.
                                  TA was provided to the Air Quality Managing Center (CGQA) for developing a database and
                                   framework for monitoring air quality in Dakar as targeted. The project also financed the following
                                   acquisitions for CGQA: (i) six stations for measuring urban pollution and air quality: and (ii)
                                   equipment for measuring automobile and industrial emissions. Three agents of the CGQA were
                                   trained in the use of measuring instruments.
                                  TA was provided for preparing the Dakar Bus Rapid Transit Pilot project, through introducing mass
                                   transit solutions.

                            Outcomes.

                                  The project activities were expected to contribute to the preparation of the Urban Policy Letter. The
                                   Urban Policy Letter for Dakar, financed by the project, was approved on July 27, 2015, by the
                                   Ministry in charge of Land Transport Infrastructure and Connectivity, and the Ministry in charge of
                                   Economy, Finance and Planning. This Policy Letter presented the strategies and policies for
                                   a sustainable transport system based on five pillars: (i) better integration of urban development
                                   planning with transport system planning: (ii) developing a multimodal transport network: (iii)
                                   improving traffic and parking management: (iv) strengthening the institutional framework: and (v)
                                   securing financial resources. The ICR (paragraph 42) notes that implementation of the actions for
                                   urban mobility in Dakar, presented in the Policy Framework ,are ongoing.
                                  According to the clarifications provided by the team, the recommendations of the policy letter were
                                   incorporated in Senegal's Emergence Senegal Plan (PSE). The team also clarified that the Bank is
                                   financing the ongoing Bus Rapid Transit Project (BRT), and that other financiers are involved in other
                                   projects that derived from the Transport Policy Letter.

                            In sum, although TA outputs were achieved, quantitative measures signaling actual improvements in public
                            transport in GDA were not evident; moreover, adoption of the Transport Policy Letter by itself is not a
                            measure of improvements in urban transport. Hence, the achievement of PDO 2 is rated as modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The key outcomes were largely realized, although the project did not achieve the road maintenance target.
                            While the adoption of a Transport Policy Letter by itself is not a measure of improvement in urban transport,
                            the initial application of some of its provisions could eventually lead to improvements in urban transport. On
                            this basis, overall efficacy is rated as substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. Economic analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure, for activities associated
with road investments, using the Highway Development and Management Model (HDM-4). These activities
accounted for 80% of the appraisal estimate, and 88% of the actual cost. The methodology entailed a cost-
benefit analysis. The costs included the costs of construction, rehabilitation and maintenance costs. The
quantified project benefits were assumed to come from time savings on the rehabilitated roads. Other benefits,
such as benefits due to air quality improvements, noise reduction, and reduction in road accidents were
identified, but not quantified. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate at closure was US$26,253, as
compared to the NPV of US$22,150 at appraisal. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
slightly higher at 22%, as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 20.3%.The ex post EIRR is however contingent on
the assumption that adequate funds would be allocated for road maintenance activities to prevent deterioration
of roads rehabilitated under this project.

Administrative and Operational Issues. The delays in preparing technical studies (due to the procurement
delays) led to the extension of the closing date for the original project by three years, which increased
supervision costs. Following the AF for the project, there were significant delays in the completion of the
Lampoul - Grandiole road, and activities associated with paving roads, due to issues associated with counterpart
funding. These issues were resolved with the project restructuring in 2019, with only 11% of the paving in Dakar
being cancelled. Savings realized in the award of contracts, allowed the project to construct additional roads on
the Grandes Niayes road. While the closing date for the original project was extended, the AF project closed as
scheduled.

In sum, despite moderate operational shortcomings, efficiency is rated as substantial, in view of the economic
justification for the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    80.00
 Appraisal                                                20.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    88.00
 ICR Estimate                                             22.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is substantial. Overall efficacy is rated as
substantial, as the key outcomes were largely realized. Efficiency is substantial. As per the OPCS
guidelines, the above ratings would lead to a satisfactory outcome. However, this review concurs with the
assessment of the ICR (paragraph 55), that since the project did not achieve the road maintenance budget
target, which has a negative impact on sustainability, the appropriate overall outcome rating is moderately
satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk. There is no secure basis for funding road maintenance activities, both on the
national roads, and on the roads paved in the GDA. There is the risk that without adequate arrangements for
funding road maintenance activities on national roads, the project benefits could be undermined, even in the
immediate period after project closure. And without a proper long-term maintenance strategy, there is the risk
that the national roads built under this project could become obsolete and unsustainable. Likewise, roads in
the GDA, which falls under the responsibility of the communities and mayors, require appropriate funding,
and organization at the sub national level to ensure that they are adequately maintained.

Government commitment. There is a real risk that the roads rehabilitated under this project could be
undermined, due to the lack of government commitment for allocating adequate resources for maintaining
the road assets of the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project preparation drew on the experience from prior Bank-financed projects in Senegal (the Second
  Transport Sector Project, and the Urban Mobility Improvement Project). The lesson incorporated at
  design, included combining physical investments with capacity building activities to ensure
  sustainability. (PAD, paragraph 42). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including risks associated
  with the government's uncertain commitment to provide adequate funds for maintaining roads, issues
  with counterpart funding, and the ability of the local government of GDA to address urban mobility
  issues. The mitigation measures incorporated at design, included oversight of the Road Fund and Road
  Agency boards, and adoption by the government of a Transport Policy Letter as a condition for project
  effectiveness. With these measures, the project risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



  19). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance, were appropriate
  (discussed in section 10).

  There were shortcomings at Quality at Entry. One, delays in preparing technical studies led to delays in
  the initial years of implementation, which contributed to the extension of the closing date for the original
  project. Two, there were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 10a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Sixteen implementation supervision missions were held during the project lifetime. However, the frequency
 of the missions was uneven, with only one mission between 2011 and 2013 for the original project (due to
 a combination of factors, including pre and post election period in the country and delays in processing and
 approvals at the Project Implementation Unit and national levels), and three missions in the last year. The
 formal missions were supplemented by regular videoconferences. Although there were four task team
 leaders during the project lifetime, the continuity of leadership was more or less maintained, as three of the
 task team leaders were involved in the project from the preparation stage. The supervision team included
 multidisciplinary specialists, and this aided in providing guidance along the way, in areas like management
 of works contracts and the High-Intensity Labor Based method. The supervision team aided in addressing
 the issue of lack of counterpart funding, through the Level 2 restructuring. The project's supervision
 was substantially strengthened in the latter years, with the location of the co-task team leader in the
 country. The support provided by the team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
 section 10).

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory, in view of the shortcomings at the
 Quality at Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The three key outcome indicators - reduced transport cost on selected routes inside the Grandes Niayes
 area, road network condition in the project zone, and the number of direct project beneficiaries, were



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



 measurable, and appropriate for monitoring project performance, with respect to the first objective. These
 indicators had baseline data.

 There were however some M&E design shortcomings. One, there was a disconnect between the wording
 of the PDO and the indicators chosen for its measurement. For instance, the assessment of the
 effectiveness of road maintenance was chosen at the national level, although project activities only focused
 on some intervention areas. With regard to the key outcome for the second PDO - the adoption of a
 transport policy letter, while the adoption of a transport policy letter could possibly lead to an improvement
 in urban transport, it was not sufficient measure for improving urban transport.

 The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that some indicators were not tracked, as soon as the target was met for the
 original project. For instance, the number of passengers using urban transport was not tracked, with the AF
 for the project. Tracking this indicator through time, would have given a better picture of the evolution of
 passengers using urban transport. While the transport policy was adopted when the original project closed,
 there was no indicator to monitor whether the chosen policies were applied during the project lifetime.

 The National Road Management Agency (AGEROUTE - Senegal), and the Dakar Urban Transport
 Authority (CETUD) were responsible for collecting the data for monitoring project performance. The M&E
 design envisioned monitoring of specific outcomes through periodic surveys (PAD, paragraph 57).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that despite the shortcoming in M&E design, the indicators were properly
  filled in throughout the project.

  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) used Microsoft Excel to track the various indicators. A
  more appropriate M&E system could have been used to assess the implementation of
  activities. According to the clarifications provided by the team, while periodic survey were used to monitor
  indicators for the original project, the indicators were not periodically measured through surveys for the
  AF project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used as a checklist during implementation for monitoring performance, relative to the
  baseline. The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that a dedicated M&E specialist was recruited only in the
  second year of implementation. This contributed to systematic delays in reporting and problems with the
  quality of M&E reports.

  In sum, given the shortcomings in M&E design, and the delays in having a M&E expert in the early
  stages of the project, overall quality of M&E is rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (Partial Assessment) project, under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01); (ii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and (iii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (paragraph 77) notes that the
   environmental and social impacts of the project were expected to be minimal and site-specific (such
   as, improper waste management, and noise pollution during construction). An Environmental and Social
   Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted, and an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) was prepared and publicly disclosed, to address environmental and other issues pertaining to
   Physical Cultural Resources (such as due to "chance finds") at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 78). The ICR
   (paragraphs 81 and 82) notes that there was compliance with environmental safeguards and safeguards on
   physical cultural resources.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 75) notes that a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
   was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 83) notes that during implementation,
   a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared to identify the affected population, and that the RAP was
   implemented in the project areas. The ICR also notes that the displaced populations were informed of their
   rights, and were properly compensated during implementation. According to the ICR (paragraph 92), 185
   people identified as affected by the project (including 20 women), were compensated from government
   resources, for a total amount of approximately US$433,000. Twelve complaints registered through the
   Grievance Redress Mechanism were resolved when the project closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment was conducted at appraisal to assess the financial management
   capacity of AGEROUTE- Senegal. The financial risk was rated as substantial for a combination of factors,
   including governance issues, political interference, and implementation delays due to the involvement of
   multiple government entities. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included institutional
   arrangements involving the stakeholders, and recruiting an independent external auditor. With these
   measures, financial risk was rated as modest at appraisal (PAD, page 67). The ICR (paragraph 87) notes
   that financial management was deemed to be satisfactory during implementation. Financial reports were
   submitted in a timely fashion, and the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. An assessment of the procurement capacities of the implementing agencies (AGEROUTE
   Senegal and CETUD) was conducted at appraisal. The agencies had implemented prior Bank-financed
   projects, and hence familiar with the Bank's procedures. The procurement risk was rated as moderate at
   appraisal (PAD, paragraph 68). The ICR (paragraph 85) states that procurement delays, due to the non-
   availability of needed experts, contributed to the slow start of the project in the initial years. However, these
   were rectified through appropriate measures; for example, contract management made it possible to stop
   works that was not progressing, and give them to more efficient companies. The ICR (paragraph 86) notes
   that the procurement team quickly adapted to the new system that was put in place to ensure


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



   transparency, i.e., the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), and by the closing
   date, all activities were completed in STEP.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. Given that sustainability of the road assets is contingent upon road maintenance, a proper
road maintenance strategy is required. In this project, budgeting for road maintenance fell short of
the requirements, due to the government's budget constraints. The lesson from this project is that
where road maintenance is concerned, alternative lending instruments or triggers in a future lending
operation, may need to be considered.

2. While counterpart funding can signal government commitment, its adequacy and
timeliness can have an impact on implementation. Implementation of activities in this project
were subject to delays due to lack of counterpart funding. The lesson from this project is that issues
relating to counterpart funding need to be carefully considered in the country context.

3. Stakeholder capacity building is particularly required in urban road projects, in countries
where urban roads are the responsibility of sub-national agencies. The lesson from this project
is that where communes and cities are responsible for road maintenance, capacity building of the
beneficiaries can allow for a qualified local workforce to take care of road maintenance.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SN-Transport & Urban Mobility (FY10) (P101415)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and provides a detailed overview of the project. It candidly discusses the issues
pertaining to government funding for road maintenance activities, and counterpart funding. The ICR contains a
theory of change that helps the reader to understand how the ratings were reached. The ICR draws good
lessons from the experience of implementing this project. The ICR appropriately rates overall outcome as
moderately satisfactory, given that the road maintenance target was not reached.

The ICR is unduly long (with the main text of the ICR at 30 pages, almost twice the recommended length of 15
pages). The ICR could have been more tightly written, and to the extent possible, the photographs in the text
could have been inserted as part of an annex.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
