     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022214

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P114236                                      BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec.

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                 Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H5210,IDA-H9740,TF-17447                30-Jun-2016                                        108,204,516.74

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Dec-2009                                 29-Nov-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              40,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                               40,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         108,237,929.76                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson                J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the financing agreement for this Agricultural
   Productivity and Food Security Project (PAPSA), was "to improve the capacity of poor producers to increase
   food production and to ensure improved availability of food products in rural markets".

   For the purpose of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved in Section 4, this Review will parse
   the PDO into two objectives, namely:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



   Objective 1: Improve the capacity of poor producers to increase food production;

   Objective 2: Ensure improved availability of food products in rural markets.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving food production (Original allocation: US$26.7 million; Actual: US$68.7 million).
   This component aimed at improving food production through two complementary sub-components: 1.1:
   matching grants; 1.2: community works which supported the adoption of high-performing technology
   packages for improved productivity by poor households, including support for crop production, animal
   production and fish farming;

   Component 2: Improving the availability of food products (Original allocation: US$5.4 million; Actual:
   US$17.20 million). This component helped to strengthen stakeholders' capacity to manage the variability of
   food supplies at the local and national level, through four complementary sub-components:

   2.1: Investment support for improving post-harvest management through 3 types of interventions: (i)
   disseminating improved technologies to reduce post-harvest losses, including improved grain storage
   facilities and triple bagging; (ii) supporting multifunctional platforms to facilitate the adoption of food
   processing equipment; and (iii) reinforcing improved small-scale food processing units managed principally
   by women's groups in rural areas;

   2.2: Development of warrantage * mechanism in food surplus areas, which also enabled access
   to microfinance;                                                                    * Warrantage is an
   inventory credit system in which microfinance institutions provide credit, using stored grain as collateral,
   similar to a warehouse receipt system (ICR, footnote 4).

   2.3: Support to community storage; and

   2.4: Reinforcing market information systems.

   Component 3: Institutional development and capacity building (Original allocation: US$7.1 million;
   Actual: US$25.70 million). This component reinforced the capacities of key institutions directly involved in
   implementing PAPSA, including: (3.1): building the capacity for extension; (3.2): strengthening agricultural
   input supply; (3.3): strengthening capacity for producer organizations; (3.4): supporting the monitoring and
   evaluation (M&E) activities of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



   (i) Project Costs: The total project cost at approval was US$ 39.2.0 million (PAD). The actual cost at
   project closing was US$111.60 million (ICR, Annex 3, which reflects some small exchange rate differences).
   The difference was due to an increase in project financing to expand the scope of project activities,
   involving all 3 components, especially component 1 (to increase food production). Corresponding outcome
   and output targets were revised upwards and achieved, and were surpassed in some cases.

   (ii) Financing: At approval, the IDA credit was US$40.0 million. During implementation, there were two
   project restructurings in the form of two additional financings:(AFs), namely in 2014, a Trust Fund
   contribution from GAFSP for US$37.1 million; and in 2018, an additional IDA credit of US$35.95 million.

   Borrower Contribution: At approval, the Borrower counterpart contribution was supposed to have been
   US$14.0 million. However, Government counterpart funding became zero (on paper), because the
   envisioned counterpart expenditures were paid directly by Government, and included: office rent, water and
   electricity; and salaries of project staff.

   (iii) Dates: The project was approved on December 10, 2009, and became effective July 28, 2010. The
   original planned closing date was June 30, 2016; the actual closing date was November 29, 2019. A Mid-
   Term Review (MTR) was carried out in July, 2013.

   (iv) Restructuring: As noted above, the project was restructured in 2014 and in 2018. The first
   restructuring was in conjunction with Additional Financing (AF) from the Bank's Global Agriculture and Food
   Security Program (GAFSP) and IDA, which together enabled the scaling up of project activities. The
   restructuring: revised most targets upwards, reduced the target for grain storage from 25,000 tons to 10,000
   tons; updated disbursement profiles to reflect reallocations among the 3 components and disbursement
   categories; and extended the project closing date from June 30, 2016 to June 30, 2018. A second
   restructuring in 2018 extended the closing date from June 30, 2018 to November 29, 2019, and revised
   some end-of-the project targets.

   Since the PDO was not changed, and amendments to most PDO indicators raised the level of
   ambition. The only lowering of ambition was the reduced target for grain storage. Consequently it was not
   considered necessary to conduct a split rating of outcomes in this review.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were "to improve the capacity of poor producers to increase food production and to
ensure improved availability of food products in rural markets". The project objectives and components
demonstrated high relevance by: (a) addressing strategic elements of the Government's national and
agricultural strategies; and (b) supporting the implementation of the Bank's country strategies. The
discussion of the relevance of the project's objectives to Government and Bank strategies that follows is
based to a large extent on the evidence in the ICR in paras. 3 - 5, and paras. 25 - 27. The project's
objectives remained relevant during the entire implementation period.

Government Development Strategy:


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



(a) National Rural Development Strategy (SDR, 2003) highlighted the need to strengthen national food
security. Three of the seven strategic pillars of the SDR prioritized agriculture and food security, namely: (i)
increasing, diversifying, and intensifying crop, livestock and forestry and fishery production; (ii) reinforcing
links between production and markets (primarily domestic ones); and (iii) increasing and diversifying income
sources;

(b) National Program for the Rural Sector (PNSR, 2008- 2013) had the objective to contribute to
sustained food and nutrition security, strong economic growth, and poverty reduction, building on the
SDR. The PNSR planned to ensure better coverage of food needs and improve nutritional outcomes by
promoting agricultural intensification through irrigation, input use, and market linkages for agro-silvo-
pastoral production. The PNSR was the framework for operationalizing the National Strategy for
Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development (2011-2015), as well as providing the reference
framework for all strategies, policies, and plans related to agriculture, animal resources, water, fisheries and
the environment;

(c) National Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development: 2011-2015 (SCADD).
PNSR provided the framework for operationalizing the SCADD, with respect to the agrarian sector, and its
key subsectors;

(d) National Plan for Economic and Social Development (2016-2020) (PNDES): At the time this project
(PAPSA) closed, its objectives remained aligned with the Government's PNDES. The second pillar of
PNDES, human capital development, prioritizes the development of a productive and resilient agro-silvo-
pastoral and fisheries sector that would be more market-oriented and based on core principles of
sustainable development. Strategic Objective 3.1 of the PNDES states: "....sustainable development of
productive and resilient agro-silvo-pastoral, wildlife, and fish farming sectors, with a greater market
orientation." The PNDES strategy prioritizes key elements of the PAPSA, namely: irrigation, access to
inputs, equipment and agricultural finance, promoting agricultural and agro-food
entrepreneurship, improving resilience of the sector to hazards, strengthening market linkages, and
mitigation of and adaptation to environmental impacts; and

(e) PNSR II: 2016 - 2020 operationalizes the PNDES throughout the agricultural sector. PAPSA remained
aligned with and supported interventions under all six pillars of PNSR II, including: (i) food and nutritional
security; (ii) access to markets, to be achieved through competitive agro-silvo-pastoral, fisheries, and
wildlife sectors; (iii) environmental governance; (iv) water, sanitation and living environment; (v) land tenure
security and strengthening of human capital in the rural sector; and (vi) capacity building and coordination.

World Bank Assistance Strategy:

(a) The World Bank's Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) of FY10 - 12 had a strong alignment with the
Government's SDR and SCADD (ref. above), emphasizing the role of agriculture as a source of shared
growth, increased employment and reduced income risks in rural areas. With the Government carrying out
several strategic measures to address the impacts of the food crisis, PAPSA was aligned with the CAS and
the Government's strategy by providing relevant support to poor producers to increase their food production
and market their produce, and helping to lay the groundwork for stronger national food security systems in
the medium to longer term; and

(b) The Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF: 2018 - 2023) had objectives and interventions of
PAPSA that remained highly relevant at closing of PAPSA. Those interventions were designed to promote


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



               inclusive growth and shared prosperity throughout the country through three high-priority intervention areas,
               supported by PAPSA, namely: (i) accelerate sustainable private sector led-growth for job creation; (ii) invest
               in human capital and social protection systems; (iii) strengthen governance, and (iv) support citizen
               engagement. Objective 1.1 of the CPF for the first intervention area was to "improve agriculture productivity
               and agribusiness value chains in targeted areas" (para. 56), which was fully consistent with PAPSA's PDO
               and activities.

               To summarize, the project development objective (PDO) supported achievement of the aspirations of poor
               farmers to produce food crops more efficiently; and help meet the needs of poor consumers through
               increased food supplies by improving farmer access to markets throughout the year. Accordingly, the
               project contributed to securing short and long-term food supply and hence meeting the food demands of
               poor consumers. This made the PDO highly relevant to the welfare of both food producers and consumers
               which together would potentially improve national food security.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1: To improve the capacity of poor producers to increase food production


                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC): While the project's design included a Results Framework (RF), the
                             project appraisal did not develop a theory of change/ToC to explicitly describe the results chain that would
                             show how the project's inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes and eventually final outcomes would be
                             achieved. Accordingly, a ToC was reconstructed in the Implementation Completion Report/ICR for
                             PAPSA (see ICR, Figure 1, p. 7). Overall, this ToC is sound and consistent with the ICR's analysis. The
                             institutions that facilitated the achievements of outcomes implied in the ToC were the relevant National and
                             Regional Chambers of Agriculture, which played key roles in coordinating the roles of the four participating
                             ministries and their local entities.

                             Outputs

                             (a) Irrigation: PAPSA's efforts to expand irrigation, especially to produce horticultural crops, met with
                             limited success. The project provided a total of 825 hectares under irrigation, compared with a project target
                             of 2,000 ha. This shortfall was due to several factors outside the control of the project (e.g. unforeseen price
                             increases for construction materials and technical factors such as soil erosion);



                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



(b) Crop production: The project supported key activities involving the generation and dissemination of
improved technologies, and farmer training activities, which enabled PAPSA beneficiaries to increase their
crop yields and production levels (ref. outcomes, see below).

(i) Erosion control. The project supported erosion control activities on 16,341 ha., directly benefiting 27,500
farmers growing key food crops (sorghum, maize, millet, cowpeas, and other crops);

(ii) Compost pits. The project supported farmers to construct 15,626 compost pits, with the capacity of 3.5
MT per unit to produce high-quality organic fertilizer to restore or improve soil fertility without depending on
purchase of chemical fertilizers. The project provided construction equipment and technical support, and
farmers provided the labor to develop the units. The impact assessment study cites other studies confirming
the role of composting in improving soil health and land productivity. The ICR cites 112,142 farmers (51%
women) benefited from the project-supported lowland rehabilitation and erosion control activities;

(c) Fish Production: The project made good progress in promoting increased fish production and in the
development of fish farming services. The project invested in capacity building and input provision
(fingerlings and feed) for fish farmers. The project also completed construction of 13 weighing centers and 3
fish input shops to support fish farming in the project area. During the last 2 years the project introduced a
matching grant scheme for entrepreneurs to develop fish ponds.

(d) Warrantage System: PAPSA introduced an innovative warrantage system, with multiple benefits of
expanding producers' storage options, availability of food in the markets (although not explicit in the PAD and
ICR), and expanded access to finance, mainly to enable expanded food production:

(i) Training: 1,879 farmers received training on how the warrantage system operates, and 574 warrantage
arrangements were supported;

(ii) Storage: The project built 67 storage facilities for producers to aggregate their harvested produce, and
thereby enable these farmers to comply with the warrantage requirements. Producers stored 18,808 MT of
their production, surpassing the end-of-project target by 39%;

(iii) Credit: PAPSA signed an agreement with financing institutions to facilitate producers' participation in the
warrantage system/loans; accordingly, producers were able to access FCFA 1.4 billion in credit from
microfinance institutions based on farmers' guaranteed grain stocks. The PAPSA impact assessment study
also shows that the credit obtained by participating farmers was invested in income-generating activities and
also for meeting family key social needs (schooling and health care expenses).

(iv) Producer prices: The PAPSA Impact Assessment Study (2019) shows that the warrantage supported by
PAPSA provided additional income to participating farmers through receiving higher prices for their produce,
compared with the prices received by farmers who did not participate in the Project's warrantage system;

(d) Innovation Platforms: The ICR presents evidence that PAPSA supported 5 innovation platforms for key
food crops which helped to increase the availability of produce in the markets and improved coordination of
the participants in the platform (10,154 farmers, including 51% women). The ICR cites 2 collaboration
protocols totalling FCFA 384 million between the project and each of the innovation platform management
committees. The funds were used to finance activities in the platform action plans, including production, post-




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



harvest and processing activities (with farmer contributions of 25% and project matching grants for the other
75%).

(e) Strengthened institutional capacity of public and private service providers to farmers: Regional
Agricultural Chambers (RCAs) in the project area received direct support from PAPSA, including training and
equipment, which enabled the RCAs to deliver improved extension services to beneficiary farmers. PAPSA
trained 9,140 public and private service providers, exceeding the target of 8,500.

(f) Electronic Voucher Distribution System: PAPSA successfully piloted the first electronic distribution
system for inputs in Burkina Faso, and unveiled the potential of using ICT to promote agricultural
development. For the first time, PAPSA used an e-voucher system to distribute seed and fertilizer, reaching
69,095 farmers for the 2019 growing season. This effort involved the partnership of various actors, whereby
the e-voucher system was piloted over 2 seasons and covered 6 of 13 regions of the country (for more
details, see Figure 2 of the ICR).

Outcomes (information based on the ICR, paras.29-35, and Annex 1).

(a) Crop Productivity: Yields and production of selected food crops in the PAPSA target zones - both
lowlands and in areas under sustainable land management - increased significantly, and can be attributed
largely to the PAPSA interventions as explained in the ICR, para. 32: (e.g., crop yield increases for cowpeas
(70%), maize (48%) and rice (46%). The project strengthened farmers' capacity and supported technologies
that contributed to increased production for selected crops in the target areas. For example, the project
impact assessment/PIA report (2019) and project's final report (2020) showed the following (although
attribution is not entirely clear):

(i) Community-based lowland development. PAPSA developed 10,978 ha. of lowlands using a highly
intensive community labor approach. The development of lowlands, coupled with the increased use of
fertilizer and seed of improved varieties provided by PAPSA, increased yields and production of priority crops
(ICR, Figure 2), and also made important contributions toward national production levels (e.g. an increase of
8 - 10% to national paddy production);

(ii) Results based on the project M&E data. Due to the project-supported technological packages and
capacity strengthening of beneficiary farmers, the ICR stated that they significantly increased their yields and
production, which contributed to achieving the national production targets for selected crops. Based on the
project's M&E system, it documented large increases in yields in the PAPSA project area for cowpea, maize
and rice (71%, 48.5%, 45.6%, respectively), compared with a 20% target yield increase set at appraisal;

(iii) National statistics. Although the attribution to PAPSA is not clear, the ICR noted that national production
of key food crops was 5.85 million MT, whereas the target set by PAPSA was 5.79 MT, an achievement
representing an increase of about 1.0%. The ICR Figure 3 shows the average yields in PAPSA-supported
areas compares favorably with average yields at the national level.

(b) Fish Production. Fish production was curtailed because the fingerling production center at Bazega was
not rehabilitated and construction of a new center at Yakouta was not achieved, due to the country's
insecurity context. Nevertheless, increased total fish production attributable to the project at the end of the
project was 560 MT, slightly higher than the target of 540 MT.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



(c) Warrantage System. PAPSA introduced an innovative warrantage system, with multiple benefits for food
producers and consumers.

(i) Producer prices. The PAPSA Impact Assessment Study (2019) shows that the warrantage provided
additional income to participating farmers through receiving higher prices for their produce, compared with the
prices received by farmers who did not participate in the project's warrantage system (ICR, para 36);

(ii) Benefits for consumers. According to the Bank project team the PAPSA impact assessment study
concluded that the warrantage system resulted in an increased storage duration and reduced post-harvest
losses up to six months, compared to one month without the project intervention; strengthened the market
information system/cereal stock exchange, and cereal commercialization by cooperatives; and improved on
food security for beneficiaries compared with non-beneficiaries based on the WFP-FAO Food Consumption
Score.

(d) Innovation Platforms. The project's final report shows the 5 platforms generated revenue of FCFA1.6
billion from agricultural products sold in rural markets (ICR, Table 2).

(e) Strengthened Institutional Capacity of Public and Private and Service Providers to
Farmers. Together with the government extension services, RCAs have been instrumental in delivering
trainings to farmers on different technologies, and thereby contribute to increased productivity.

(f) Electronic Voucher Distribution System:. The ICR concluded that the e-voucher system piloted under
PAPSA resolved several key challenges with the Government's previous input distribution system, especially
challenges related to the efficiency of distributing public funds. The e-voucher system also catalyzed the
private sector in the fertilizer industry of Burkina Faso (ICR, para. 43). Overall, the enhanced electronic
inputs system contributed to increased productivity, as part of objective 1.

Based on the outputs and outcomes achieved, and claimed by the ICR to be largely attributable to the
project, this review rates the efficacy of those achievements as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2: "To ensure improved availability of food products in the rural markets"


Rationale
Theory of Change: An explicit theory of change/ToC for achieving this second objective was partially included
in the draft ICR, aside from the overall ToC for the Project. The elements of the ToC for this second objective
include: (a) an increase in the quantity of incremental production stored through the project-supported
warrantage scheme in the project area; (b) increase in milk collected in the milk processing unit (UTL); (c)
various key outputs, including: number of warrantages formed; number of farmer trained in post-harvest
handling; number of cereal cooperatives strengthened; restructuring of 298 marketing cooperatives; improved

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



market information system; number of milk collection centers constructed. the relevant processes which
would lead to the "improved availability of food products in rural markets; identifying clearly who are supposed
to be the key actors in the marketing process, and how they were supposed to function collaboratively (e.g.,
use of free markets, cooperatives, government regulatory functions, traders, the relevant platforms, and
presumably, a combination of these various processes/mechanisms were supported by the project, see ICR,
p. 36-40).

Below is a summary of key evidence on both outputs and outcomes together based on information provided
in the ICR with respect to the progress toward achieving Objective 2 (based on the ICR, paras. 36 - 43; the
Impact Evaluation Report, pages: 36-40, 82). Note that the warrantage system, the expanded role of the
Regional Agricultural Chambers (RCAs) and the electronic voucher system fit better as activities to help
achieve Objective 1. Nevertheless, these interventions also contributed to Objective 2 given the emphasis in
the PAD and ICR on the role of these 3 mechanisms to provide farmers with enhanced incentives to produce
more food. It is therefore noted below that these mechanisms also contributed to "ensuring availability of food
products in rural markets".

Outputs and Outcomes:

(a) Warrantage System: See the reference to the warrantage system in connection with the achievement of
Objective 1, while also recognizing the more direct contribution of the warrantage system to the achievement
of Objective 1 compared to Objective 2;

(b) Livestock-based production and incomes: The project activities listed below were financed by the
project. They were financed by the project and generated additional income from livestock, through project
support for milk collection, animal fattening and poultry production.

(i) Milk collection centers. The project built 30 centers that collected 7 million liters of milk, well above the
project target of 5 million liters, and enabled milk producers to earn an additional income, and also contributed
to improved quality of milk available in rural market;

(ii) Genetic improvement. 3,396 cows were artificially inseminated, which was well below the project target of
9,000 (about 33%), due to the nomadic nature of livestock in the project area;

(iii) Livestock fattening. A total of 1,704 beneficiary farmers supported by PAPSA initiated livestock fattening
businesses, which enabled the additional production of 69,248 head of cattle and sheep in 3 regions;

(iv) Poultry Vaccinations: PAPSA contributed to a significant increase in vaccinations of poultry against
Newcastle disease in project areas, resulting in a large increase in coverage (from 26% in 2014 to 53% in
2018). Accordingly, the project's contribution represents 66% of the total increase at the national level in
livestock vaccination coverage.

From the ICR, it is not clear to what the extent increased livestock production (milk and beef) generated by
the project contributed to the objective of an "improved availability of food products in the rural markets".

(c) Innovation Platforms: Similar to the warrantage system, the innovation platforms contributed more
directly to Objective 1, and contributed indirectly to objective 2, through promoting production increases of




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 23
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



                            food commodities which could contribute to decreased food prices at the retail level and to increased food
                            availability. However, the ICR does not provide clear evidence.

                            (d) MIS: With PAPSA support for establishing a market information system (MIS). It was possible to monitor
                            the increase of food availability in rural markets, although, the ICR made no explicit reference to the results of
                            tracking prices for "food products in rural markets". The ICR did, however, make reference to the MIS
                            providing regular market price information (para. 39), but the ICR was not clear on whether the reference was
                            for retail or wholesale prices. The MIS stated there were 67,553 market actors receiving bids on 1.1 million
                            MT of cereals and non-timber forest products, sale offers on 1.1 million MT, and concluded transactions on
                            0.477 million MT of cereals and forest products. The project MIS was restructured in 2019 to become more
                            digital and include more commodities in the marketplace platform.

                            (e) Increased Incomes and Enhanced Resource Management: The ICR presents evidence that PAPSA
                            contributed to more sustainable sources of income and wildlife resource management for people living near
                            protected areas (ICR, para. 40). The project supported development of non-timber forest products and
                            implemented sustainable development plans for wildlife protected areas, generating FCFA 504 million for
                            these local populations, which exceeds slightly the target of FCFA 500 million. Also, the project introduced
                            the use of civil drones to monitor wildlife in protected forests to help safeguard income from tourism, and
                            thereby, at least indirectly, contribute to access to food by enabling beneficiaries increased incomes from
                            tourism.

                            (f) Support to Regional Agricultural Chambers (RCAs), which included a countrywide network,
                            enabled their members to collect information on weekly food prices (wholesale and retail prices), and to
                            support the MIS with respect to the achievement of Objective 2.

                            (g) Electronic Voucher Distribution System: As stated above, this component/activity is more directly
                            linked to objective 1, while also, providing an indirect contribution to the achievement of Objective 2.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR presents evidence (ICR, Table 1) that the core 5 targets for the PDO indicators were achieved, and
                            in some instances, significantly surpassed them by PAPSA's closing date, notwithstanding the
                            shortcomings/delays in infrastructure development, especially involving irrigation. In summary, the project
                            made overall good progress with respect to key targets for Objective 1, including: (a) increased crop yields
                            and production of key food crops; (b) expanded fish production; (c) enabled additional income generation for
                            livestock producers; (d) expanded the capacity/affordability of consumers to access food; (e) developed
                            a warrantage system which expanded producers' storage options and access to finance; (f) expanded role of
                            cereal marketing cooperatives; (g) established an MIS that became a useful tool to track and promote
                            improved food product availability in rural markets. While the ICR provided some evidence toward


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



  meeting the second objective of ensuring improved availability of food products in rural markets, the project
  impact study (2019) and the Bank project team provided additional information and documents to help
  support a conclusion of good progress towards achieving Objective 2. In addition, there are 3 key aspects
  which the project contributed toward Objective 2, including: the project's direct support to strengthening
  marketing cooperatives, including the restructuring of 298 marketing cooperatives; establishment of a market
  information platform; and linkages with the state-owned agency managing food security stocks.

  It is noted that the project experienced shortcomings in meeting key targets for irrigation and horticultural
  commodities, which also were linked to the second objective, through reduction of some food availability in
  local markets, due to various reasons cited in the ICR.

  There is an important aspect of the project design affecting the efficacy and sustainability of the project
  objectives. Other country experience highlights the importance of including several key elements in an
  integrated manner: strengthening the agricultural research system and prioritized agenda; improving systems
  for generation and dissemination, including adequate funding and strong linkages between agricultural
  research and extension systems. Some of these key elements were supported directly by PAPSA, coupled
  with an on-going parallel Bank-supported project (e.g., West Africa Agricultural Productivity
  Program/WAAPP) as part of helping to lay the project's envisioned "foundations for increased food supply
  and its availability", thereby contributing to the efficacy of the design with respect to meeting the project
  objectives in a sustainable manner.

  Later during implementation, the project used the innovation platforms to expand the dissemination of
  improved technologies (ICR, para. 38), and also the PIU signed several MOUs with the National Agricultural
  and Environmental Research Institute (INERA). Also, the separate and parallel regional WAAP was
  addressing more explicitly the agricultural research agenda in Burkina Faso.

  In summary, and also elaborated by the Bank's Project team, and the project's impact evaluation study
  (2019), the project was implemented in a broader context, with the support of other relevant Bank-financed
  projects and programs in Burkina Faso and the Region, which were contributing to increased agricultural
  productivity and increased food supplies in local markets (PAPSA, AF, PAD, paras. 14,51, 72 and Annex 1),
  Accordingly, the overall efficacy rating is "substantial".



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project demonstrated substantial efficiency, based on a sound methodology which applies
several evidenced-based tools, as presented in the PAD (paras. 55-61, and Annex 9), and in the ICR (paras. 45-
49, and Annex 4).

The findings of the ex-post EFA presented in the ICR followed two complementary approaches: an economic
and financial analysis of the project, and an analysis of project disbursements and expenditures. The analysis
of the project's efficiency in the ICR is complemented by a comprehensive Project Impact Evaluation Study/IES


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



carried out for PAPSA (IES, November, 2019). Below is a summary of the main results of the analysis of this
project's efficiency. .

Economic and Financial Analysis/EFA:

The ICR states that two EFAs (at appraisal and AF stages) conducted during the life of the project, together with
the EFA at the ICR stage, concluded that PAPSA was economically and financially viable. Below is a summary
of these results (with further details presented in the ICR (paras. 45 - 49, and Annex 4).

(a) EFA in PAD: the efficiency analyses focused on the financial analysis of representative farm models, and
economic analyses, to generate returns on "without" and "with" project scenarios, including: returns on family
labor; returns on producers' investment; gross profits; internal financial rates of return, using financial and
economic prices, and sensitivity analysis on various key parameters. The EFA for the design/approval phase
(2009) focused on the financial analysis of investment models supporting agriculture (cereals and cowpeas)
and livestock (poultry and milk production), under Component 1 (increased food production). No specific models
were defined for activities under component 2; instead their benefits were included in the analysis of component
1 activities by estimating reductions in post-harvest losses and increased prices at the producer level (based on
"best guess", rather than using a model). The economic internal rate of return (EIRR), estimated at appraisal,
considering only component 1 costs and incremental benefits, was estimated at 46.6%, and a net present value
(NPV) of US$111 million The sensitivity analysis highlighted the importance of crop yields (e.g., reduction in
crop yields of 20% would lower the EIRR from 46.6% for Objective 1 to only 9%).

 (b) EFA at the additional financing stage (AF, 2014): It analyzed 13 investments, including irrigation, the
addition of the initial phase interventions to develop lowlands and restore degraded land through erosion control,
livestock interventions, honey production and processing, and storage of cereal crops. The benefits of the AF
were estimated using data on the achievements of the project to date (2014). The resulting NPV was $44.1
million and an EIRR of 16.8%.

(c) EFA at ICR: The ICR followed a methodology similar to that used in the PAD, with various adjustments to
reflect actual conditions and updated assumptions. It did not include an assessment of component 3, and also
included and excluded an assessment of the environmental benefits (which was not included in the PAD). The
ICR included an assessment of the environment benefits and impact as part of the overall economic
benefits/EFA, using greenhouse gas (GHG) accounting methods detailed below:

(i) Ex-ante carbon-balance tool (EX-ACT. This tool, developed by FAO, was used to estimate the economic
value of the GHGs mitigated as a result of the PAPSA interventions. Based on the EX-ACT analysis total
reductions in carbon emissions and increases in carbon sequestration arising from PAPSA are estimated at
618,614 tons of CO2 equivalent over 25 years, corresponding to 24,745 tons of CO2 equivalent annually (ICR,
para. 48).

(ii) Environmental impact. The project's environmental impact contributed significantly to its economic
benefits. The ICR estimated the monetary value of the GHG balance, and added this value to the economic
benefits (using WB guidelines for estimating the shadow price of carbon, using a low and high shadow price of
carbon). The annual average of the low and high shadow price was used to calculate the project's overall
economic benefits. Also, the ex-post/ICR EFA used a 6% discount rate, as suggested by WB guidelines when
including environmental benefits; the previous 2 EFAs (see above) excluded environmental benefits, and
assumed discount rates of 12% and 10%, respectively).



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



According to the ICR, when the environmental benefits are taken into account, using the average carbon
shadow price, the estimated ex-post EIRR is 26.4%, with a NPV of US$88.6 million. If these environmental
benefits are excluded, the ICR estimated an EIRR of 19.8 %, and a NPV of $69.9 M --- well below the ex-ante
EIRR of 46.6%, and closer to the EIRR estimated at the appraisal of the Additional Financing/AF, equaling,
16.8% (para. 49).

Overall, and notwithstanding various assumptions used in the PAD and ICR, the results of the efficiency
analysis in the ICR provides assurance that the resources allocated to the PAPSA Project were economically
justified. The inclusion of the benefits from the project's environmental interventions also reconfirms their
important efficiency benefits.

(2) Implementation Efficiency

(a) Disbursements. The ICR states that delays in disbursement under PAPSA were "significant" (ICR, para. 47),
when considering the original closing date. By the end of 2018, the project planned to reach a disbursement of
100%. However, by the end of 2018, disbursement was only 74%, because some project activities had not been
completed -- most notably, irrigation investments. With the extension of the closing date (from June 2018 to
November 2019), the project had disbursed 99.6 % of IDA resources and 96.8 % of the GAFSP funds when the
project closed

(b) Expenditures. Although the project reallocated significant shares of resources from Components 1 and 2 to
Component 3 at the time of restructuring, mainly to support capacity building for extension and advisory
services, the activities for Component 3 was significantly overspent (174%). While it is difficult to assess
explicitly the efficiency benefits of component 3, it is likely that component 3 contributed to the overall efficiency
and incremental benefits of the project (e.g., via improved extension services and resulting productivity
increases, which was documented in the Project's IES, 2019). Activities for "strengthening agricultural input
supply delivery systems" had the lowest level of expenditure (12%), compared to the allocated amount.. At
completion, expenditures related to "public service delivery" only slightly exceeded the budget allocated at
restructuring (105%).



Overall this review assess the efficiency of PAPSA as Substantial




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                    27.40
                                                                                          Not Applicable

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



                                                                                       0
ICR Estimate                                                26.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on the ratings of the project's relevance (High), efficacy (Substantial), and efficiency (Substantial) the
overall outcome for PAPSA is rated "Satisfactory".

In summary the rationales for the ratings of the 3 core elements mentioned above were as follows:

(i) Relevance of Objectives: A "high" rating reflects the project's sound design and alignment with the
Government's national and sectoral development strategies and with the Bank's country assistance
strategy/country partner frameworks (ref. Section 3.0 in this review, aimed at contributing to: increased food
productivity and production levels; improved availability of food products and food security.

(ii) Efficacy: A "substantial" rating reflects: this review's assessment of the project's solid achievement
of Objectives 1 and 2, as evidenced in the ICR. The project was supported by several other regional programs
and operations (e.g., WAAPP) to consolidate and strengthen the sustainability of this project's achievements.

(iii) Efficiency: A "substantial" rating is justified, based on the available evidence on the rate of return of a
number of activities in the project presented in the ICR, as well as efficient implementation,
despite disbursement delays, and several other shortcomings beyond the control of the project, most notably
with respect to the irrigation sub-component.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is modest risk to sustaining the expected and realized outcomes of the Project as outlined above.

While the ICR identified key challenges to ensure the achievement and sustainability of the project's benefits,
the ICR did not prepare an explicit sustainability action plan which could serve as a useful instrument for the
Bank's agricultural team in Burkina Faso, also, in the context of a relatively large agricultural sector portfolio.
Further discussion with the Bank's project team revealed that the Bank has provided, and continues to
provide, strategic financial and technical support to consolidating and sustaining the project's objectives,
including a subsequent (from 2017 onwards) Bank-supported Development Policy Operation/DPO and an
Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project (PReCA) also provided support to further consolidating
and scaling-up the e-voucher system, warrantage schemes, access to microfinance, as part of providing
increased support to expanding the role of the private sector to sustain these initiatives.

The ICR (para 79) noted some of the main project outcomes which need close monitoring and possible
follow-up support by the Bank's agricultural team in Burkina Faso, building on the on-going support provided

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



by PReCA, include: (a) strengthening the newly established water user associations and irrigation
committees for the irrigation schemes, when completed; (b) sustaining agricultural research and extension;
and (c) continued role of the private sector to sustain the mechanisms introduced by the project for
promoting improved marketing efficiency by the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The quality at entry for this project is rated Moderately Satisfactory by this review, for the following main
  reasons:

  (a) The project's design was relevant to addressing key contemporary challenges facing the agricultural
  sector, especially the low agricultural productivity. The design was strongly aligned with Government and
  Bank national and sectoral strategies (ICR, para 76). The project activities were aimed to address short-
  term food needs arising in 2008, in the context of a pattern of chronic stagnating productivity and rapid
  population growth, while also contributing to developing more sustainable food security systems over the
  longer term;

  (b) However, according to this review, the project's design missed an opportunity to strengthen the
  agricultural research system to generate a sustainable flow of appropriate agricultural technologies
  suitable for smallholders, coupled with stronger linkages with the agricultural extension system,
  notwithstanding that the project did provide limited support to strengthening the extension
  system, including the role of the innovation platforms.

  (c) The project design embedded the project in the existing government implementing institutions, which
  helped to secure ownership and contribute to strengthened systems and implementation capacities, while
  also establishing a PIU which would help streamline and enhance vital interagency coordination;

  (d) While the M&E design was generally sound, it did not foresee the complexity of the necessary M&E
  system and the capacity requirements needed to make it work from the outset. Accordingly, the
  generation of data and functioning of the system were delayed because of the extent of recruitment and
  training needed in the national PIU and the implementing agencies to ensure a functional and effective
  M&E system;

  (e) the pre-selection of WFP as a service provider for the inputs voucher scheme did not materialize due
  to the failed procurement arrangement by the technical operator company, which resulted in delayed
  implementation (ICR, para 76).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)




b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision is rated satisfactory by this review for the following reasons:

 (a) The World Bank team, including an active role of the Bank's country office staff, carried out regular
 implementation support missions, at least twice per year (and for a total of 18 missions over 9 years). The
 Bank supervision missions mobilized relevant expertise required to support implementation of PAPSA,
 across all 3 components, as well as compliance with safeguards (ICR, para. 76);

 (b) The mid-term review in 2013 generated valuable assessment information to help guide the restructuring
 carried out in 2014 (although it did not involve a major restructuring);

 (c) Each implementation support mission generated a constructive Aide Memoire and corresponding
 Implementation Support Reports/ISRs, which provided accurate and candid assessments of progress and
 identified key issues that required priority attention, and which were used to monitor agreed follow-up
 actions;

 (d) The multiple implementation ministries/agencies (4 line ministries, the National Chamber of
 Agriculture/NCA and Regional Chambers of Agriculture/RCA in 13 regions) designated permanent focal
 points/persons for the project, who facilitated and tracked the implementation of its activities, and reported
 on/validated the results achieved, on behalf of their respective institutions. This arrangement also enabled
 the project to promote greater integration and sustainability of project activities within each Ministry/agency
 (although the extent of progress on integration and sustainability is not clear from the ICR);

 (e) Given the importance of the M&E system, and the initial delays, the Bank's PAPSA's team was active
 and successful in supporting and holding Government accountable to address the challenges and
 operationalize a functional and usable M&E system;

 (f) The Bank team supported the achievement of a functional and adequate financial management (FM)
 system throughout implementation;

 (g) The Bank team worked closely with the relevant Government officers to untangle procurement issues
 which delayed some contracts and project implementation, and which were resolved, thereby enabling
 better implementation;

 (h) Supervision missions established a good quality operational dialogue and working relationship with
 Government (at various levels), which also was instrumental in enabling the mobilization of additional funds
 from IDA and GAFSP (which almost doubled the initial financing);

 (i) Based on guidance from WB experts, the Bank's and Government's project teams were able to take
 appropriate steps to cope with growing political insecurity in Burkina Faso by geo-referencing sites, using
 civil drones and training staff to use Geo-enabling initiative for Monitoring and Supervision/GEMS.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall the M&E design was sound for the following reasons:

 (a) during appraisal, the PAPSA team developed a results framework/RF, albeit without being underpinned
 by a theory of change, implementation arrangements and roles, which together provided the basis for
 designing a functional M&E system and arrangements;

 (b) The Bank and Government teams also prepared a Project Implementation Manual, which clarified the
 roles and responsibilities of the participating technical institutions and the M&E arrangements;

 (c) These tools also were used to develop annual work plans and budgets, with corresponding and
 supporting M&E system, involving the various agencies/entities at national and local levels. The National
 and Regional Chambers of Agriculture were responsible for collecting M&E information, and providing it to
 the PIU for compilation (ICR, para. 64);

 (d) However, at the design and appraisal stages the Bank teams did not adequately assess the limited
 capacities within the relevant agencies responsible for implementing M&E to identify relevant capacity
 building needs, and most importantly, to devise and support appropriate capacity building actions.



b. M&E Implementation
  (a) Due to the M&E design challenges outlined above involving weak institutional capacities and
  experience, PAPSA encountered difficulties in implementing the designed M&E framework/system
  immediately following project effectiveness. The ICR states that throughout the first four years of project
  implementation, the participating institutions, especially at the local level, faced problems in compiling
  essential information and reporting on project achievements: "the main issues were insufficient capacity
  to collect and report project data and inadequate monitoring of investments in the field by the
  deconcentrated technical services" (ICR, para. 65);

  (b) These M&E challenges led the Bank to intensify its focus on M&E, and to provide additional
  implementation support, eventually enabling the project to improve and move ahead with a more
  functional M&E system. These improvements, with Bank support, included: improved yield estimates; two
  intermediate results studies (2010-14 and 2015-16); acquisition of software for M&E (DELTA) and data
  analysis and processing with improved programs (SPHINX iQ2 (from 2017); training of the M&E team in
  the use of software and methods for project impact evaluation; contracting out and completing a
  project impact evaluation study (2019);




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports that throughout implementation, but especially in the last two years, PAPSA routinely
  generated and used information from the Project's M&E system to help guide operational decisions. For
  example:

  (a) the GIS localization of project investments made it possible to monitor more closely progress in
  implementation;

  (b) the General Directorate of Sectoral Studies and Statistics/DGESS at each Ministry involved in
  implementation periodically conducted field visits to project activity sites and provided technical advice
  for improving project M&E activities. The ICR also reports (ICR, para. 67) that the participating ministries
  used the Project's M&E information to inform their decisions;

  (c) the Bank's PAPSA Project team used the findings of the M&E system as inputs for two subsequent
  Bank operations (DPO and PReCA, as cited above), which also provided avenues for the Bank to
  promote sustainability of various strategic interventions (especially involving expanded role of the private
  sector and a strengthened extension system).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   PAPSA was rated as a Category B project due to the scale of potential environmental impacts, and
   triggered the Bank's Operational Policy (OP/BP 4.01) on Environmental Assessment, Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The ICR concluded that the execution and
   compliance of environmental safeguards under PAPSA were satisfactory. All other project safeguards
   instruments were also prepared in full compliance with WB and national safeguard policies, based on
   extensive consultations. The Project supported the implementation of three sound safeguard measures (see
   ICR, para. 69), implemented compensatory measures and conducted environmental monitoring of activities
   in the field. Nevertheless, a key safeguard management shortcoming was the absence of an environmental
   safeguard specialist within the PIU at the beginning of implementation of the project, which delayed the
   nationally coordinated implementation of safeguard measures.

   PAPSA's implementation complied with the requirements for social protection, including the formulation,
   approval and public release of a Resettlement Policy Framework (for the initial project phase, and updated
   in 2014 for the AF). Prior to the AF, the Bank conducted a social audit in 2014, and confirmed the project's
   compliance with all the Bank's safeguard policies to that point. During implementation of PAPSA, more than
   300 simplified environmental and social safeguard studies were conducted, reflecting the project's
   achievements and priority given to complying with the safeguard requirements (ICR, para. 70).




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  During preparation, the financial management (FM) risk was rated moderate. Accordingly, the project
  developed and implemented a FM action plan to ensure the PIU would have the capacity and systems for
  sound FM of the project. During implementation, the overall FM performance of the project was rated
  moderately satisfactory. The ICR rated the FM risk to be Substantial. The main FM constraint encountered
  during implementation was the resignation of the Project Financial Management Specialist during the last
  year of implementation. Rather than recruiting a replacement, the Project Manager opted to engage the
  consultant services of a former Project FM specialist. Various FM delays resulted (preparation/submission
  of unaudited financial reports, regular PIU designated account). With Bank support, the PIU FM work
  caught up. Financial audit reports were received mostly on time, all without qualifications, and accordingly,
  no ineligible expenditures were recorded during implementation (ICR, para. 73).

  Procurement:

  Procurement, as foreseen at appraisal, proved to be a major challenge during implementation, given the
  project's national coverage, the nature of project investments (especially infrastructure), and the number
  and fragmentation of implementing agencies mentioned above (four line ministries, National and Regional
  Chambers of Agriculture). The low capacity of local entrepreneurs and complexity of the national
  procurement system are recognized constraints affecting all donor-funded projects in Burkina
  Faso. Accordingly, it was appropriate that the project included in the M&E system an indicator to monitor
  the management/execution of contracts; in the event the project was able to achieve the target of 80% of
  contracts which were "successfully managed/executed". This achievement was achieved by the
  PIU because it was adequately staffed with a senior procurement specialist throughout implementation.
  The ICR reports that procurement for PAPSA proceeded in line with WB procedures. Post procurement
  reviews were conducted on a regular basis, and recommendations were adequately implemented. The ICR
  concluded that procurement performance for PAPSA was rated as Moderately Satisfactory, due to delays
  from the lengthy authorization processes within the national system and delays in completing various
  contracts. There was no mis-procurement recorded in the ICR (para. 75).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR highlighted 4 other positive impacts arising from the project. It needs to be recognized there are
  challenges to demonstrate clear attribution to the PAPSA project. The nature of these benefits are
  highlighted below (with further details presented in the ICR,paras. 52-55, and supported by evidence
  collected in the Project's Impact Evaluation Report, 2019).

  (1) Gender Benefits: The ICR presents evidence which shows that project activities provided direct
  benefits to large number of women, enabling them to increase their household incomes from agriculture.
  The project provided benefits to about: 260,000 women, representing about 30% of the estimated direct
  beneficiaries; 120,000 young people, representing about 14% of the total beneficiaries. The ICR presents
  the shares of benefits accruing to women, according to project intervention: 52% from developing low land
  agriculture; 41% from warrantage activities;65% from pig farming; 39% from poultry production; 61% from
  sheep fattening.



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



   (2) Institutional Strengthening: With the project being implemented by four national ministries and
   deconcentrated local entities, these arrangements enabled the strengthening of these entities, while also
   strengthening coordination arrangements for other programs/projects in the agricultural sector. The ICR
   draws a significant conclusion: "the project has provided a template for empowering government technical
   services by providing support through a PIU rather than displacing or bypassing government
   services." (para 82).

   (3) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing: The project mobilized additional financing for the rural sector
   through several approaches, including: (a) piloting successfully the first electronic distribution system of
   inputs, through an e-voucher system, which opened opportunities for the infant private sector to play its
   role in importing and distributing inputs. The digital technology facilitated the participation of private firms
   and lifted the burden on the government to invest public funds for a private good, and thereby to enable
   reallocation of funds in the provision of public services, and also for Government to focus on regulatory and
   quality assurance interventions; (b) successful introduction of the warrantage system, by providing loan
   guarantees to microfinance institutions based on stored commodities, enabled those institutions to allocate
   in loans amounting to FCFA 1.4 billion to participating farmers; and (c) the matching grant approach
   encouraged investments in small and medium enterprises in the project area. Each of these mechanisms
   offer the potential for being scaled-up, and thereby further expanding the role of the private sector in
   promoting agricultural development. The recommendation made in the ICR is for the Bank agricultural
   team in Burkina Faso to follow up more systematically in its operational dialogue with Government, and
   possible follow up actions.

   (4) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: The project's design and M&E findings, including the
   Project's Impact Evaluation Study, presented information which concludes that PAPSA made "positive
   contributions to beneficiary incomes and food security", vis-a-vis the "without PAPSA scenario". The
   recommendation made in the ICR is for the Bank agricultural team to use its other on-going and proposed
   projects to build on and scale-up the relevant approaches and interventions which succeeded in PAPSA,
   with a view to scaling-up and sustaining these incremental income and poverty reduction benefits. This
   follow up Bank support is observed through two Bank-supported operations, as cited above: the DPO and
   the on-going PReC Project.



d. Other
   Not Applicable



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                                                                    The ICR actually shows a rating
                                                                                    of "moderately satisfactory"
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    (ICR, para. 77). This rating is
                                                                                    justified given the shortcomings


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



                                                                                   identified in the project's design
                                                                                   at appraisal.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR lists six lessons arising from the project (para 80-83), of which this review has chosen 4 as
being most useful for similar projects. Based on available information arising from the project's
implementation, IEG suggests two additional lessons which were stimulated by this review.

The ICR highlighted in a sound manner 4 strategic lessons, as summarized below.

Lesson 1: Scaling-up a warrantage system can enhance access to finance for
smallholders and improve food supplies to rural markets. This project supported warrantage
arrangements to stabilize the supply of basic food in local markets while also providing an
opportunity for farmers to access microfinance loans, guaranteed by warranted cereal stocks.
During project implementation, farmers mobilized loans totalling FCFA1.4 billion, which offered them
the means to pay for vital family needs (e.g. children's school fees/expenses) and investments in
their agricultural activities/enterprises). Also, in a Sahelian country like Burkina Faso, with only one
rainy season, food storage at all levels is an important food security tool for managing climate
shocks and building community resilience against climate change. The lesson from this project is
that scaling-up this initiative requires explicit and appropriate policies and regulations to govern the
warrantage or warehouse receipt system, to ensure quality infrastructure to minimize postharvest
losses, as well as capacity building among farmers in post-harvest storage strategy and among
warehouse managers to ensure regular food supplies in rural markets at competitive prices
while also covering storage costs.

Lesson 2: An E-Voucher System can encourage the private sector to expand its participation
in input distribution in the agricultural sector. The introduction of an E-Voucher System in this
project (the first in Burkina Faso) contributed to a strong foundation for the growth of the fertilizer
and seeds industries, driven by a more competitive private sector. The lessons arising from this
experience include the need to: (a) establish timely advance planning of the e-voucher operation; (b)
compile a reliable and complete potential beneficiary database; (c) strengthen or change distributors
for better control of the platform; (d) strengthen awareness campaigns for producers on the various
aspects of the operation; and (e) communication to farmers on eligibility criteria for participation in
the input voucher system (especially seed and fertilizer) in conjunction with a warrantage system.

Lesson 3: Strengthening Government's collaborative capacity can provide improved delivery
of support services to farmers: The project provided a sound template for empowering
government technical services to provide support services through a PIU. The ICR identifies key
elements which PAPSA promoted to achieve this approach namely: (a) adherence to performance-
based management for the participating government institutions; (b) strengthening the staff capacity
of implementers (using project funds); and (c) motivating and incentivizing them to meet project




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



targets in service delivery. The lesson is that these elements were successful in this project and
could be successfully applied other similar projects;

Lesson 4: Multi-stakeholder innovation platforms, driven by private sector actors can lead to
improved value chains. The project supported innovation platforms as a means to: (a) expand the
role of private sector actors in value chain development; (b) ensure compliance with regulations to
ensure farmers deliver products which comply to a standard that the private sector can process and
sell on domestic and international markets; and (c) improve agricultural processing and
enhance coordination of value chain actors. The lesson is that farmers and processors need to
produce products which meet the standards established in national and international markets;

There one additional lessons arising from this ICR review, as follows:

Lesson 5: Importance of Financing the Strengthening Agricultural Research System and
Research-Extension Linkages: An assumption of the project, as implied in the PAD (and the ToC
in the ICR) is that there will be a national agricultural research system with the required capacities
and effectiveness to generate and sustain appropriate technologies on an on-going basis, especially
suited for smallholder needs, coupled with strong and explicit research-extension linkages, to ensure
high levels of farmer adoption. Experiences from other countries which aim to promote expanded,
competitive and sustainable food production and market supplies highlight the importance of
including explicit support for these 2 key elements, which were not included in the PAPSA design,
although recognizing that there was a parallel project providing support to the agricultural research
system in Burkina Faso (WAAPP). Therefore, there may have been a "missed opportunity", by
relying entirely on the WAAPP, which also was trying to cover other countries, while also some
aspects of the research system were addressed to some extent during implementation. The lesson
is that Bank teams can use the results from past and on-going agricultural research and extension
projects in a country (as relevant) and include research and extension modules new projects to
continue to strengthen and scale up agricultural technological advances in contemporary
operations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well written, analytical, including a very thorough EFA analysis, candid, results-focused, and
most sections were supported by relevant evidence (aside from the evidence regarding achievement of
objective 2), including inputs from a comprehensive Project Impact Evaluation Study (2019) which provided
timely inputs and evidence-based information for the ICR. Finally, the ICR derived sound lessons from the
project..




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Agricultural Productivity & Food Sec. (P114236)



In the ICR's Theory of Change for PAPSA there were two key elements which were addressed only partially, in
terms of their contribution to a comprehensive explanation of the generation of the expected project
outcomes. They were:

(a) Agricultural Research and Extension: The ICR was not clear on the extent to which there was other non-
Bank support (especially via the PReCA Project, and through the WAAPP) that strengthened agricultural
research and extension which were implicitly assumed in the design of the reconstructed Theory of Change for
PAPSA; and

(b) Marketing: There was no evidence of marketing arrangements/mechanisms (such as cooperatives or
marketing associations) to facilitate the increased and sustained flow of food to the rural markets. Clarifications
and evidence regarding enhanced marketing arrangements were, however, provided in a separate
communication to IEG from the Bank project team.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 23
