     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022235

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P118064                                     UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Uruguay                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81830                                  28-Feb-2018                                           42,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jul-2012                                 31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              42,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               42,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           42,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Victoria Alexeeva             Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the sustainability of the Borrower by improving the
   reliability and resilience of its water supply and sanitation systems, enhancing its efficiency, and strengthening
   its management capacity (Loan Agreement dated December 11, 2012, Schedule 1; Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) para. 14). The Borrower was OSE (Obras Sanitarias Del Estado) - the National Water
   Supply and Sanitation Company of Uruguay.



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



   For the ICRR, the PDO has been parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To increase the sustainability of the Borrower (OSE).

   The efficacy would be assessed on the basis of achievements under the sub-objectives of (I) improving the
   reliability and resilience of the water supply systems of OSE; (ii) enhancing the efficiency of OSE; and (iii)
   strengthening the management capacity of OSE.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Sep-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Investing in Reliable Water Supply Infrastructure (appraisal cost US$22.20 million; revised
   cost following restructuring US$33.10 million; actual cost US$35.65 million)

   This component was to finance construction, expansion and rehabilitation of water facilities. Sub-
   component 1: Aguas Corrientes Intake Structure and Electrical Systems: Construction of a new water
   intake structure and carrying out of improvements to the electrical system of the water pump at the Aguas
   Corrientes water treatment plant (WTP). The system design capacity would be 15,000 m3/hour. Sub-
   component 2: Construction of two WTPs in the cities of Durazno and Treinta y Tres. (PAD paras. 18 to
   21).

   Component 2: Managing Water and Energy More Efficiently: (appraisal cost US$37.50 million; revised cost
   at restructuring US$37.50 million; actual cost US$31.30 million)

   This component was designed to finance activities to support OSE's flagship Non-Revenue Water (NRW)
   and Energy Management Programs. Sub-component 1: Non-Revenue Water Reduction: (i) Establishment
   of Districts of Measurement and Control (DMC) in Montevideo, Paysandú, Mercedes, Rivera, Salto, and Las
   Piedras-La Paz. (ii) Activities to strengthen institutional support for NRW reduction across Uruguay
   including: (a) establishment of standardized procedures for construction of water connections; (b) carrying
   out capacity building activities for OSE staff; (c) carrying out of annual evaluation workshops; and (d)
   provision of technical assistance to strengthen the NRW program. (iii) Carrying out of nation-wide
   improvements to OSE's metering system including (a) replacement of micro and macro meters; (b) carrying
   out a pilot program to test automated micrometers; and (c) establishment of a telemetry program. Sub-
   component 2: Energy Management: (i) Development of an Energy Management Plan (EMP) for OSE. (ii)

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



  Replacement of pumps and underperforming equipment. (iii) Acquisition of monitoring equipment and
  hardware. (iv) Capacity building activities for OSE staff including a training program for energy efficiency.
  (PAD paras. 19 to 24).

  Component 3: Preparing for the Future: Management, Planning and Risk (appraisal cost US$11.10 million;
  revised cost following restructuring US$4.20 million; actual cost US$0.95 million financed from the Bank
  loan)

  This component was to finance management, planning and risk assessment activities to improve OSE's
  social reach, environmental management and economic efficiency. The advances made by OSE were to be
  captured under the BMEI jointly formulated by OSE and the Bank Project team. Sub-component
  1: Corporate Management: (i) Establishment of an asset management program. (ii) Design and
  implementation of a logistics management model. (iii) Design and implementation of a knowledge and
  innovation management model. Sub-component 2: Risk Management and Planning: Support to OSE for
  developing a Long Term Strategic Plan including: (i) Carrying out a review of OSE's mission and vision
  statements. (ii) Carrying out of a strategic analysis of risks and operations. (iii) Development of risk maps.
  (iv) Carrying out of a climate vulnerability risk assessment. (v) Development of contingency plans for
  droughts and floods. (vi) Development of Water Safety Plans. Sub-component 3: Environmental
  Sustainability: (i) Provision of technical assistance to strengthen the UGA. (ii) Development of a sludge
  master plan. (iii) Development of a comprehensive strategic wastewater plan. (iv) Establishment of a water
  quality and quantity monitoring program in selected watersheds. (v) Implementation of a hydraulic and
  water quality management program at the Laguna Del Sauce watershed. (PAD paras. 25 to 28).

  Component 4: Knowledge Sharing and Project Management Activities: (appraisal cost US$2.0 million;
  revised cost following restructuring US$0.90 million; actual cost US$ 0.65 million financed from the Bank
  loan).

  This component was to finance: (i) Support for project management, supervision and engineering activities;
  (ii) Carrying out of external and internal dissemination of project results and major accomplishments; (iii)
  Carrying out of knowledge sharing activities with particular emphasis on South-South exchange. (PAD para
  29).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$84 million (PAD para. 8). During the project
  restructurings, the total cost was revised to US$75.70 million and there were reallocations among the
  components. The actual cost at project completion was US$66.76 million (as reported in the ICR Data
  Sheet). However, there are some discrepancies in the total project costs (US$68.55 million) as estimated
  from the costs of the project components reported in the ICR (Annex 4 Table 4.1). The significant reduction
  in project cost, as compared to the appraisal estimate, was due to cost reductions under Component 2 (due
  to dropping of two of the targeted cities for NRW reduction) and Component 3 (due to dropping of some
  activities and the carrying out of others by OSE utilizing its own financial and staff resources).

  Project Financing: The project was financed through an IBRD loan in the amount of US$42 million to OSE
  with the guarantee of the national government (PAD para. 8). It was fully disbursed.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



Borrower's Contribution: The contribution agreed at appraisal was US$42 million (PAD para. 8). The actual
contribution was US$24.76 million (as reported in the ICR Data Sheet).

Dates: The project was approved on July 5, 2012 and closed on December 31,2019 with the original closing
date extended by 22 months.

Restructurings: The project had three restructurings.

First Restructuring (September 2016): (Restructuring Paper, Section C. Proposed Changes and Annex 1
Results Framework). This was a Level II restructuring. There was no change in the PDO. The restructuring
followed a period of a downturn in the national economy which affected the GoU's finances and also had an
adverse financial impact on OSE. Consequently, a number of the originally planned activities were reduced
in scope or re-defined to align them with OSE's available funds. The rationale for the changes was: (i)
modifying some indicator targets to better align them with ongoing implementation progress; (ii) improving
methodology to more accurately calculate energy savings and recovery of non-revenue water (NRW) (PDO
level indicator); (iii) correcting baselines; and (iv) adjusting formulation and definition of some
indicators. Specific changes to indicators and targets were the following:

      Revision of the PDO indicator "NRW recovered by reducing real (physical) and apparent
       (commercial) losses" to "cumulative volume of NRW recovered under the project (m3)" defined as
       the sum of the water recovered each year for each of the systems supported under OSE's NRW
       program.
      Revision of the calculation methodology for the PDO indicator "reach a satisfactory level in BMEI" to
       adjust it based on implementation experience. In the process 20 of the original sub-indicators were
       removed and 15 were added based on alignment with agreed activities and outputs to be
       undertaken under the project.
      Revision of calculation methodology, and hence baseline and targets, for PDO indicator "energy
       saved in systems where the project is being implemented". The target value was reduced from
       37,983 MWh to 13,640 MWh.

Changes in the project's components were the following:

      Component 1: Increase in the allocation from US$22.2 million to US$33.1 million since the contract
       prices came in higher than planned.
      Component 2: Scope reduced. Dropping of the planned activities for (i) NRW reduction at two sites
       (Mercedes and Paysandú) and (ii) acquisition of the monitoring equipment and software related to
       energy conservation measures.
      Component 3: Scope reduced including dropping of some activities and substitution by others as
       follows: Under Sub-component 3.1, dropping of the establishment of the knowledge and innovation
       management model and replacing it with capacity building activities for ozonation. Under Sub-
       component 3.2, development of risk maps, carrying out of a climate vulnerability assessment and
       development of contingency plans were moved to be implemented under the Water Safety Plans
       (WSPs) for each drinking water plant. Under Sub-component 3.3, (i) Dropping of the establishment
       of a water quality and quantity monitoring program and implementation of a hydraulic and water
       quality management program for the Laguna del Sauce watershed from the project scope because
       they were being developed by the National Water Directorate in collaboration with OSE (ICR para.
       21); (ii) Dropping of the development of a comprehensive strategic wastewater plan because new
       priorities (protection of Rio Santa Lucia watershed) were emerging and straining OSE's sanitation

                                                                                               Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



            unit and its budget (ICR para. 21). Some activities were planned to be carried out under OSE's own
            budget.

   Second Restructuring (July 2017): (Restructuring Paper, Section C. Proposed Changes): This was to
   enable the extension of the closing date from February 28, 2018 to December 31, 2019 to allow time for
   completion of three contracts for the Treinta y Tres WTP, Montevideo NRW system, and Rivera NRW
   system.

   Third Restructuring (February 2018): (Restructuring Paper, Sections II and III. Proposed Changes) This
   was a Level II restructuring. Modifications were made to indicators related to NRW in the project supported
   systems. The revisions in indicators and targets were:

         Revising the end target for the Montevideo system to reflect the drop of activities in two lots.
         Dropping the indicator for the Las Piedras-La Paz system to reflect the lack of impact in La Paz.
         Modifying indicators in the Rivera and Salto systems to reflect expected impact in those systems.
         End targets for two PDO indicators "cumulative volume of NRW recovered under the project (m3)"
          and "energy saved in systems where the project is being implemented" were modified to reflect
          extension of the closing date and thus the additional gains under these indicators.
         The target for energy saved in systems implemented under the project was increased
          to 20,780 MWh from 13,640 MWh established under the first restructuring.

   A split evaluation is not applied as (I) the PDO was not changed during implementation; (ii) the revision of
   the PDO indicator reflected the use of an improved methodology to more accurately calculate energy
   savings and non-revenue water reduction volumes, and (iii) most of the adjustments to indicators and
   targets made during restructurings were to better align them with project activities and outputs based on the
   implementation experience.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Access to potable water and adequate sanitation systems in Uruguay is high
with 100 percent of the population having access but reliability of water supply can be affected by
vulnerability to floods and droughts. OSE provides 98 percent of the urban population with household
connections and continuous access to potable water, sewerage services to 43 percent of the interior of the
country, and treats 60 percent of the wastewater collected. The population not served by OSE has
adequate access to water supply (wells) and sanitation (septic tanks). Governance instruments for the
water sector include a Water Law, water quality regulations administered by URSEA (Energy and Water
Services Regulatory Unit), and guidelines under the National Plan for Integrated Water Resource
Management. OSE is regarded as one of the most advanced water and sanitation utilities in the region.
However, there is scope for further strengthening of its management and operations. The main challenges
faced are in respect of: (i) improvement of resiliency and efficiency of infrastructure; (ii) capacity to plan for,
and manage, risk, including the impact of floods and droughts; (iii) improvement of operational efficiency
particularly reduction of non-revenue water (NRW) and high levels of energy consumption; and (iv) further
strengthening of management capacity in the areas of corporate management, environmental stewardship,

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



               and strategic planning. Towards this end, OSE had prepared and started implementing a Five Year
               Strategic Plan (2012 to 2017) with three pillars: (i) investing in reliable infrastructure; (ii) improving
               operational and commercial efficiency; and (iii) strengthening utility management (PAD, paras. 1 to 12). The
               OSE Sustainable & Efficient Project was aligned with these objectives.

               Alignment with Country Partnership Strategy: The project development objective is consistent with the latest
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) that was prepared in December 2015 and covers the period FY2016
               to FY2020. The CPF supports the Government of Uruguay (GoU) priorities reflected in the GoU's Five Year
               Budget Plan which includes an emphasis on protecting the environment with a special focus on water
               resources (CPF para. 40). The CPF includes three strategic pillars out of which Pillar 1 focuses on building
               resilience to economic and weather vulnerabilities. The CPF states that, based on the GoU's requests, the
               proposed support under the CPF will be focused on strengthening the efficiency of expenditures, improving
               selection and implementation of investment projects, and supporting state-owned enterprises (SOEs) (CPF
               para. 48). The CPF recognizes that improving efficiency in water use and addressing wastewater
               challenges are key challenges (CPF para. 58). The CPF specifically includes the project as an ongoing
               intervention under Pillar 1 (Building Resilience to Shocks), Objective 1 (increase the Efficiency of Public
               Investment and Strengthen the Efficiency of Selected SOEs) (CPF Annex 1).

               Alignment with national priorities: The project development objective is consistent with the GoU's priorities
               as reflected in the Five Year Budget Law that focuses on eight key objectives, one of which is protecting the
               environment, with a special focus on water resources. The GoU has prepared a National Plan for Integrated
               Water Resource Management (ICR para. 2) under which availability of reliable and high quality water
               resources plays a central role. The CPF states that the World Bank Group (WBG) will promote resilience of
               water related sectors to climate variability and climate change by supporting the GoU's plans for Integrated
               Water Resources Management and Development (IWRMD) (CPF para. 58).

               Prior Experience in the Sector: The Bank has been involved in the water and sanitation sector in Uruguay
               since 1988 and has financed a number of projects, including the OSE Modernization and Systems
               Rehabilitation APL Phase 2 project which included a number of components to strengthen OSE's
               management and operations. These aimed at improving OSE's transparency, accountability, operating
               efficiency, and attention to clients. The OSE Sustainable & Efficient Project built on the base established
               and results achieved under the earlier projects, with particular focus on addressing the issues mentioned
               above in this section.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Sub-Objective 1: Improving resilience and reliability of OSE's water supply systems

                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)




Rationale
The efficacy of the project is best assessed based on achievements under the following sub-objectives,
parsed out to emphasize progress across the various aspects of the theory of change: (i) improving the
resilience and reliability of the water supply systems of OSE; (ii) enhancing the efficiency of OSE; and (iii)
strengthening the management capacity of OSE.

The theory of change (TOC) was that the construction of a new water intake of capacity 15,000 m3/hour at
the Aguas Corrientes Water Treatment Plant (WTP) together with a supporting force main and equipment
improvements in pumping stations would provide OSE with stand-by water intake capacity to supplement its
existing capacity of 30,000 m3/hour. The existing capacity was assessed to be insufficient in case of
unfavorable weather and climate events which could result in water supply service interruptions during OSE's
planned or emergency maintenance activities. The additional intake capacity set up under the project would
provide greater resilience to OSE's operations by increasing the redundancy margin (from 0% to 30%) and
help OSE maintain a higher level of service by increasing the reliability of OSE's supply of drinking water to
the population without significant interruptions. The two new WTPs at Durazno and Treinta y Tres would
replace two existing WTPs that were (I) located in areas that were subject to flooding and (ii) operating with
equipment and facilities in major need of improvement. The two new WTPs would be located in areas that
were not subject to flooding and thus add to OSE's resilience to unfavorable weather and climate events. The
WTPs would have new and modern equipment, which would increase the reliability of OSE's water supply
operations in the two cities. In addition, installation of new equipment (pumps, motors, electrical systems) at
selected OSE sites outside Aguas Corrientes would help further increase reliability of OSE's operations in
delivering drinking water to the population. However, while the activities being undertaken were clearly linked
with the PDO, the PDO outcome indicators adopted (number of beneficiaries benefiting from the rehabilitation
works under the project and the number of piped water connections benefiting from the rehabilitation works
under the project) were not directly linked to the concepts of improved resilience and reliability to be
addressed under this sub-objective.

Outputs: as reported in the ICR (Annex 1 Results Framework and paras. 34 to 37):

      New water intake point (capacity 15,000 m3/hour) constructed and in operation at Agua Corrientes
         WTP
        New WTP (capacity 700 m3/hour) constructed and in operation in Durazno city
        New WTP (capacity 450 m3/hour) constructed and in operation in Treinta y Tres city
        10 electric motors installed and in operation at Aguas Corrientes WTP
        New equipment (pumps, motors, electrical systems) installed and in operation at selected OSE sites
         outside Aguas Corrientes (original target 251; revised target at restructuring 51; actual 51;
         achievement 20% of original target, 100% of revised target)

Outcomes: as reported in ICR (Annex 1 Results Framework)

      Number of people benefiting from rehabilitation works under the project (original target 1.86 million;
       actual 1.86 million; achievement 100%)
      Piped household water connections benefiting from rehabilitation works under the project (original
       target 433,900; actual 433,900; achievement 100%)



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



Assessment: The targets in relation to outputs and intermediate results were largely met. In terms of the
indicators adopted under the project, the outcomes were met, pointing to a substantial achievement of
improved water supply systems. However, the indicators used do not fully capture the PDO aspects of
resilience and reliability. The outcome indicators - number of piped water household connections and number
of people benefiting from the rehabilitation works under the project - have only an indirect relation to the more
encompassing concept of resilience to external shocks. This is acknowledged in the ICR (para. 72). The
reliability target was not formulated in terms of hours of continuous water supply or reduced time for repairs
and maintenance. The ICR reports (para. 38) that, based on beneficiary surveys in Durazno and Treinta y
Tres, 97 % and 89% respectively of the sampled population expressed satisfaction with the water supply
service. However, the ICR does not include a discussion of the observed impacts of the project investments
in terms of demonstrating greater resilience and reliability.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Sub-Objective 2: Enhancing the efficiency of OSE

Rationale
The two key areas identified for increasing efficiency were Non-Revenue Water Reduction (NRW) and Energy
Management. In regard to NRW, the TOC was that the efficiency improvements would best be accomplished
by utilizing a District of Measurement and Control (DMC) approach that would initially be introduced in six
selected cities (with the objective of expansion to other areas in Uruguay). The DMC program would require
support for institutional strengthening as well as for equipment financing. Institutional support measures would
include: (i) establishment of standardized procedures for construction of water connections; (ii) carrying out
capacity building activities for OSE staff; (iii) carrying out annual workshops for evaluation; and (iv) provision
of technical assistance to strengthen the NRW reduction program. In addition, the project would finance the
carrying out of nation-wide improvements in OSE's metering system including replacement of micro and
macro meters; carrying out a pilot program to test automated micrometers; and preparation of a telemetry
program. The combination of institutional and equipment related support would result in increasing OSE's
operational and financial efficiency through a significant reduction in NRW. In regard to Energy Management,
the TOC was that OSE's ongoing energy management activities would need to be strengthened by
institutional support and equipment financing. Institutional support measures would include: (i) development
of an Energy Management Plan (EMP); and (ii) capacity building activities for OSE staff, including training
programs in energy efficiency. Equipment financing would include (I) replacement of pumps and
underperforming equipment; and (ii) acquisition of monitoring equipment and hardware. The combination of
institutional support and equipment financing would result in increasing OSE's efficiency in energy
management, resulting in savings in energy used.

Outputs: as reported in the ICR (Annex 1 Results Framework and paras. 42 to 46):



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



Reduction of NRW is reported in terms of liters/connection/day (l/c/d).

      Reduction in NRW in the Montevideo system (baseline 799 l/c/d; original target 635 l/c/d; revised
         target at restructuring 736 l/c/d; actual 696 l/c/d; underachieved by 61 l/c/d compared to original
         target; overachieved by 40 l/c/d compared to revised target)
        Reduction in NRW in the Rivera system (baseline 668 l/c/d; original target 386 l/c/d; revised target at
         restructuring 483 l/c/d; actual 420 l/c/d; underachieved by 34 l/c/d compared to original target;
         overachieved by 63 l/c/d compared to revised target)
        Reduction in NRW in the Salto system (baseline 579 l/c/d; original target 396 l/c/d; revised target at
         restructuring 483 l/c/d; actual 418 l/c/d; underachieved by 22 l/c/d compared to original target;
         overachieved by 65 l/c/d compared to revised target)
        Reduction in NRW in Las Piedras-La Paz system (baseline 703 l/c/d; original target 400 l/c/d; revised
         target at restructuring 555 l/c/d; overachieved by 9 l/c/d compared to original target; overachieved by
         164 l/c/d compared to revised target)
        Number of electric motors installed and in operation in Aguas Corrientes WTP (original target 10;
         actual 10; achievement 10; achievement 100%)
        Number of equipment (pumps, motors, electrical systems) installed and in operation outside Aguas
         Corrientes (original target 251; revised target at restructuring 51; actual 51; achievement 20% as
         compared to original target, 100% as compared to revised target)
        Energy Management Program published and ready for implementation

Outcomes: as reported in ICR (Annex 1 Results Framework)

      The PDO indicator for NRW was " cumulative value of water recovered under the project" (original
       target 48.76 million m3; revised target at restructuring 81.90 million m3; actual 89.29 million m3;
       achievement 183% compared to original target, 109% compared to revised target)
      The PDO indicator was "energy saved in systems where the project is being implemented" (original
       target 37,983 MWh/year; revised target at restructuring 20,780 MWh/year; actual 26,250 MWh/year;
       achievement 69% compared t original target; 126% compared to revised target)

Assessment: In regard to NRW, although two of the originally targeted cities (Mercedes and Paysandú) were
dropped from the project at the first restructuring in 2016, the overall target in terms of cumulative volume of
non-revenue reduction was raised and the actual achievement exceeded both the original and revised
targets. In part, this overachievement also reflects the inclusion of the additional NRW reduction resulting
from the extension of the original closing date by 22 months. In regard to energy management, an Energy
Management Program for OSE was prepared and was ready for implementation. In terms of energy saved,
although the original target was substantially reduced at the first restructuring, the actual achievement was
substantial (69%) compared to the original target and exceeded (126%) the revised target.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



Sub-Objective 3: Strengthening the management capacity of OSE

Rationale
Activities under the project were directed to help OSE prepare for the future by strengthening its capacities in
the areas of corporate management; planning, and risk management; and environmental sustainability. Under
the TOC, this was to be accomplished through a combination of development of studies and analytical tools,
including supporting software and hardware, and capacity building through training and technical assistance.
Regarding corporate management, the main tools to be developed were (i) establishment of an asset
management program to help OSE deploy and operate its assets more efficiently; (ii) design and
implementation of a logistics management model to help OSE improve its logistics efficiency, including sludge
management, and (iii) design and implementation of a knowledge and innovation model to enable OSE to
share information and experience with similar utilities in the region. With regard to planning, risk
management, and environmental sustainability, the activities included (i) strategic analysis of risks and
expectations; (ii) development of risk maps; (iii) carrying out of a climate vulnerability assessment; (iv)
development of contingency plans for droughts and floods; and (v) development of water safety plans. The
environmental sustainability related activities were expected to yield outputs including (I) Long Term Strategic
Plan; (ii) a Sludge Master Plan; (iii) a Comprehensive Wastewater Plan; (iv) a Water Quality and Quantity
Monitoring Program in selected watersheds; and (v) a Hydraulic and Water Quality Management Program at
the Laguna Del Sauce watershed. The combination of activities and outputs was expected to result in further
strengthening of OSE's management capacity, including operations, planning and risk management, and
environmental sustainability.

During implementation, some significant changes were made to the scope and/or manner of carrying out the
above activities. Activities dropped were (i) design and implementation of a knowledge and innovation model
for OSE and (ii) development of a comprehensive wastewater plan. Development of risk maps, climate risk
vulnerability assessments, and contingency plans, were moved for inclusion in Water Security Plans as they
were developed. Development of the water quality and quantity monitoring program in selected watersheds
and the hydraulic and water quality management program for the Laguna Del Sauce were not carried out
under the project since they were intended to be covered under other ongoing initiatives outside the project.
Activities for strengthening of OSE's corporate management, originally to be supported by external technical
assistance, were modified to enable them to be carried out by OSE utilizing its own resources.

Outputs: as reported in the ICR (Annex 1 Results Framework and paras. 39, 40 and 47 to 54):

      OSE Asset Management Plan for electromechanical equipment prepared and applied for water
         supply, wastewater collection and treatment in one region
        OSE Logistics Model prepared
        Ten OSE areas are using software for quality management
        Water Security Plans prepared for different regions (original target 18, actual 19; achievement 110%)
        Software for quality management installed and used in 10 OSE areas
        Internal communications created and operational
        Strategic Planning Process prepared and applied
        Indicators Book published regularly
        32 training events carried out on environmental issues, monitoring, control, wastewater treatment, and
         effluent control
        Pilot studies prepared under sludge management program - including (I) prototype for bio-solid drying
         for agricultural application - this is planned to be included in the technical design of eight new

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



       wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and (ii) matching supply of nutrient-rich bio-solids from
       WWTPs to demand for fodder for livestock

Outcomes: as reported in the ICR (Annex 1 Results Framework)

A single PDO indicator was included in the Results Framework to measure the project outcomes. This was
the Business Management Efficiency Index (BMEI) that was jointly developed by OSE and the World Bank
project team based on guidelines and templates used in the World Bank Global Practice and the International
Water Authority (IWA). The BMEI was based on 100 defined activities. During the first restructuring in 2016,
the BMEI was modified with the dropping of 20 of the originally defined activities and their replacement by 15
newly added or re-defined activities. The rationale was to better align the BMEI with the post-restructuring
activities and outputs being supported under the project, and thus enable the BMEI to better reflect actual
progress made by OSE under the project. The PDO target set under the BMEI was Satisfactory (representing
a score of between 60 to 79 out of a possible 100). The ICR rates the actual achievement at project
completion as Excellent (representing a score of at least 80 out of a possible 100). While the ICR does not
provide an indication of the score actually achieved by OSE, the project team provided IEG additional detailed
information in regard to achievement of outputs, impacts, and outcomes to supplement that provided in the
ICR.

Assessment: While the ICR reports that a number of the planned activities were completed (as reported
above) and reflected in the BMEI, there were significant modifications in some of the activities. The ICR
(paras. 25 and 26) acknowledges that these changes, including the dropping of the BMEI key indicator
related to "operative knowledge and innovation management" limited and/or delayed OSE's plans to
incorporate risk analysis in its Long Term Strategic Planning and limited the ambition of its wastewater
management transformation. As discussed above in Section 2, under the first restructuring in 2016, the
allocation for Component 3 (aligned with this theme) was significantly reduced from US$11.10 million to
US$4.30 million and the allocation from the IBRD loan was reduced from US$5.55 million to US$0.95 million
(ICR para. 47). Technical assistance and supporting software/hardware planned to be provided under the
project were substantially reduced. The scope of the originally planned activities was significantly reduced
and modified to enable them to be carried out by OSE from its own resources, including its own staff. Key
planned activities and outputs that were dropped or modified included: (I) Development of a Strategic
Wastewater Plan - dropped because of emerging new priorities and the strain on OSE's budgetary and staff
resources (ICR para. 21). (ii) Knowledge and Innovation Management Model - dropped and substituted by
capacity building activities on ozone technology for algae removal (ICR para. 22). (iii) Development of risk
maps, carrying out climate vulnerability assessment, development of contingency plans - dropped because
they were planned to be implemented as part of Water Security Plans (WSPs) for each WTP (ICR para. 22);
in this regard, the ICR, together with additional information provided by the project team, reports that 19
WSPs were prepared under the project, which included the planned activities. (iv) Preparation of Water
Quality and Quantity Program and Implementation of Hydraulic and Water Quality Management Program at
the Laguna Del sauce watershed - dropped because they were being developed by the National Water
Directorate in collaboration with OSE (ICR para.22); based on the additional information provided by the
project team, these activities were later completed. The ICR (paras. 25 and 26) acknowledges that these
changes, including the dropping of the BMEI key indicator related to "operative knowledge and innovation
management" limited and/or delayed OSE's plans to incorporate risk analysis in its Long Term Strategic
Planning and limited the ambition of its wastewater management transformation. On balance, taking into
account the additional information provided by the project team, given the substantial achievements in most
targeted activities, outputs, and impacts, the efficacy for Sub-Objective 3 is rated Substantial.


                                                                                               Page 11 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project had a single development objective, "To improve the sustainability of the Borrower (OSE)" which
                            was evaluated under three Sub-Objectives (1) improving the resilience and reliability of the water supply
                            systems of OSE; (2) enhancing the efficiency of OSE; and (3) strengthening of the management capacity of
                            OSE. For Sub-Objective 1, output targets were achieved and were clearly linked to the sub-objective of
                            improving water supply systems. However, the PDO outcome indicators adopted were not appropriate for
                            capturing the outcomes of resilience and reliability. For this reason, the efficacy for Sub-Objective 1 is rated
                            Substantial with moderate shortcomings. For Sub-Objective 2, the output and outcome targets in regard to
                            NRW reduction and energy efficiency were achieved or substantially achieved, and the efficacy rating for
                            Sub-Objective 2 is Substantial. For Sub-Objective 3, while there were some reductions in
                            scope, achievements of most of the planned activities, outputs, and impacts were substantial and the efficacy
                            for Sub-Objective 3 is rated Substantial.

                            Based on the above, and given the level of achievement, the overall efficacy is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   At appraisal, an economic cost-benefit analysis was carried out for Component 1 (Resilience and Reliability) and
   Component 2 (NRW Reduction and Energy Efficiency) that together accounted for about 71% of the total project
   cost. The indicator applied was the economic rate of return (ERR).

   The ICR reports (Annex 4) that the post-completion economic cost-benefit analysis was carried out using the
   same methodology as adopted at appraisal but updated to reflect actual results and costs and prices prevailing
   at project completion. The analysis covers project investments covering about 98% of the total project cost at
   completion (52% for the resilience and reliability component and 46% for the efficiency component).

   For the Resilience and Reliability component, the ICR reports an estimated post-completion ERR of 35.2%
   (compared to 39.9% estimated at appraisal) and for the NRW Reduction component, it is 77.6% (compared to
   30.9% at appraisal). This includes a high ERR of 129.1% for the Montevideo-Las Piedras sub-component. The

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



project team explained that this was due the fact that, at completion, the actual project cost was substantially
lower (63%) than the estimate at appraisal and the NRW reduction totals were higher due to an increase of 16%
in connections as compared to appraisal estimates. For the project, the post-completion ERR is estimated at
44.4% compared to 34.9%% at appraisal.

Administrative and Implementation Efficiency

Project implementation duration: The project's planned implementation period was 60 months. Under the second
restructuring (2017), the original closing date was extended by 22 months to allow for completion of three
ongoing contracts (Restructuring Paper, Section C. Proposed Changes).

Project cost: At appraisal, the estimated total project cost was US$84 million. The actual project cost as
reported in the ICR Data Sheet was US$66.76 million. However, based on the actual costs of the project
components as reported in the ICR (Annex 4 Table 1) was US$68.55 million. The significant reduction in the
project cost at completion was due to reductions in the cost of Components 2 (NRW Reduction and Energy
Efficiency) and Component 3 (Strengthening of OSE's Management Capacity).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      71.00
 Appraisal                                                  34.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      98.00
 ICR Estimate                                               44.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is assessed as High since the PDO was well aligned with the national priorities of
increasing Uruguay's environmental sustainability, resilience to climate related shocks, and increasing the
efficiency of state-owned enterprises, all of which are being supported under the Bank's Country Partnership
Framework currently in effect. The project's overall efficacy is rated Substantial. For Sub-Objective 1 (improving
resilience and reliability of OSE's water supply systems), the targeted outputs were achieved to deliver the
outcome of improved water supply. However, since the PDO outcome indicator adopted was not suitable for
measuring the project's resilience or reliability impacts, the efficacy rating for this sub-objective is Substantial
with moderate shortcomings. For Sub-objective 2 (NRW reduction and increasing energy efficiency), the
targeted outputs and outcomes were achieved or substantially achieved, and the efficacy rating is Substantial.
For Sub-Objective 3 (strengthening OSE's management capacity), while there were some changes in scope
and/or the manner of carrying out the activities, most of the planned activities, outputs, and impacts were

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



substantially achieved, and the efficacy of Sub-Objective 3 is rated Substantial. The project's efficiency, as
measured by the Economic Rate of Return, exceeded the expectations at appraisal, and the rating for efficiency
is Substantial.

Based on these ratings, the project's outcome is rated Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risks: These risks are rated low. The technologies used in the project interventions are familiar to
OSE and its should be capable of maintaining the outcomes without support from external consultants.

Administrative and management risks: These are rated low. During project implementation, OSE
demonstrated commitment to the project approach and activities by financing, from its own funds, activities
that could not be financed under the project. The ICR reports (para. 97) that OSE has developed an Action
Plan to use its own funds to carry on implementation and expansion of energy efficiency, NRW reduction,
and environmental management activities initiated under the project.

Financial risks: These are rated moderate. Sustainability of the project interventions and their expansion in
future will depend critically on OSE's financial capacity. This depends upon the state of the economy and the
GoU's policy in addressing unforeseen adverse events, including external shocks. Early on during project
implementation, a downturn in the national economy led to financial issues for the GoU and OSE, and
required a restructuring of the project, including major reductions in the allocated funds for some of the
project components. OSE's ability to continue to maintain the gains under the project, and expand them
further, would depend upon its financial capacity for which the GoU's support would be essential.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design benefited from experience gained from the Bank's long involvement with OSE and, in
  particular, the predecessor project (OSE Modernization and Systems Rehabilitation APL2) that included
  activities to help strengthen OSE's management capacity. The project design was influenced by the
  World Bank's raised benchmark for supporting interventions in higher income countries such as Uruguay
  which called for a more innovative and transformative agenda rather than infrastructure financing (ICR
  para. 88). The project's design in regard to the capacity building component was ambitious - a large
  number of activities was included under the component and supported by a substantial allocation
  (US$11.10 million) to cover technical assistance and software/hardware. A positive feature of the project
  design was the establishment of a Business Management Efficiency Index (BMEI), jointly developed by

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



  OSE and the World Bank team, based on guidelines from the World Bank Global Practice and the
  International Water Authority (IWA). The BMEI was intended to help monitor the large number of activities
  under the capacity development component. During implementation, particularly following a period of
  financial difficulty in Uruguay that also affected OSE, the activities had to be dropped, substantially
  modified, or reduced in scope, with a drastic reduction in the allocated amount. As discussed earlier in
  Section 4, while some of the activities were completed in a modified form by OSE utilizing its own staff
  and financial resources, others were left to be completed using resources outside the project. Also, there
  were some shortcomings in regard to M&E design that are discussed below in Section 9.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project supervision team was proactive during the early part of implementation. A Mid-Term Review
 (MTR) was carried out in November 2015 which preceded the first restructuring in September 2016. Key
 changes during restructuring included (I) a re-definition of some of the indicators to better align them with
 the scope of the project-supported activities; (ii) modification of scope and re-allocation of financial
 resources between components; and (iii) modification of the BMEI to better align it to capture progress
 under the activities supported by the project. However, the project team did not take the opportunity to
 modify the PDO outcome indicators under Sub-Objective 1 (resilience and reliability) to make them more
 relevant to the concepts of resilience and reliability. Following the first restructuring in 2016, a large number
 of the strategic and operational studies and capacity building activities were agreed to be carried out by
 OSE utilizing its own resources. While it is not clear from the ICR to what extent the project supervision
 team was proactively involved in following up on the progress and outcomes of the activities, additional
 information provided to IEG by the project team indicates a substantial degree of involvement in following
 up on progress during project implementation. The experience points to a need for continued diligence in
 following up on progress in achievement of project outputs and impacts during supervision.

 The project team had two TTLs during implementation. 15 supervision missions were carried out during
 implementation. The team was adequately supported by fiduciary, environmental and safeguard
 specialists. The team benefited from the location of the fiduciary and safeguard teams in Buenos Aires
 (which was 30 minutes away by air from Montevideo). The Environmental Specialist became a Co-TTL for
 the project which helped in overseeing the implementation of the environmental interventions which were a
 significant part of the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design was impacted by the large number of activities included, particularly under Component 3
 (Strengthening OSE's Management Capacity). While the inclusion of a BMEI was, in concept, a positive
 feature of the M&E design, the definition of the activities included was based on a general framework and
 not fully aligned with those being carried out under the project. Consequently, the BMEI had to be
 substantially modified during the first restructuring in 2016. Also, as indicated in the ICR (para. 72), in
 regard to indicators, the PDO indicator in regard to "improving resilience and reliability of OSE's water
 supply systems" referred to the number of piped household connections benefiting from rehabilitation
 activities. The indicator does not address directly the objective of increasing resilience and has only a
 limited relation to the objective of increasing system reliability (e.g. increasing the number of hours of
 continuous water supply, reduced down times for equipment facilities repairs and maintenance, etc.). The
 NRW indicator had to be re-formulated during the first restructuring to make it more monitorable.



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, a number of adjustments were made to the M&E system, including re-definition of
  indicators, changes in baselines and targets based on more relevant data, and modifications to the BMEI
  to align it better with activities under the project. These changes substantially corrected the design
  shortcomings of the M&E system and the system was able to generate most of the targeted data during
  implementation. One shortcoming that was not addressed throughout the implementation period was the
  need to modify the PDO indicators for Sub-Objective 1 to make them more relevant to capturing the
  outcomes under this Sub-Objective. The ICR reports that there were significant time lags between the
  information collected by the PIU from the individual operating and administrative units (ICR para. 76).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was linked with OSE's operations and management system, drawing information from,
  and feeding information into, the overall system to facilitate policy making within OSE. The ICR also
  reports that the M&E system was used to identify problems and carry out remedial actions, but it does
  not provide details in this regard (ICR paras. 78 and 79).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B requiring partial environmental assessment (EA)
   under the Bank's Environmental and Social Safeguards policies. Other safeguard categories triggered were:
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11); and


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



  International Waterways (OP7.50), although the PAD noted that the project fell under the exception to the
  notification requirement mentioned in para. 7(a) of OP7.50.

  Environment: The ICR reports that no adverse impacts or issues that were not previously identified
  occurred during implementation. Moderate to low risks and potential impacts were successfully managed
  with the safeguard instruments developed under the project. Project environmental compliance was
  consistently rated Satisfactory throughout project implementation (ICR para. 81).

  Social: The ICR reports that, given the possibility that some involuntary resettlement may arise during
  implementation, OSE has prepared an Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework (IRPF), but this was
  never required during implementation (ICR para. 83). The ICR does not provide any information whether an
  Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was established for the project, including grievance
  redressing arrangements for handling complaints from the population.

  The ICR does not provide any information regarding the remaining safeguards that were triggered at
  appraisal: Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural Resources, and International Waterways.

  The ICR does not provide details of the safeguard ratings at the time of the last ISR prior to project
  completion.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports that, overall, the FM system was rated
  Satisfactory. Required financial reports were provided in time. Audit reports, with unqualified opinions,
  were submitted timely to the Bank. Some issues during the early stages of implementation were slow
  implementation due to a lack of counterpart funds - the ICR reports that these were resolved during project
  restructuring. The ICR also reports that there were some non-compliance issues which were rectified, but
  it does not provide any detail in this regard (ICR para. 84).

  Procurement: The ICR reports that procurement performance is rated Satisfactory. World Bank rules and
  procedures were complied with except for minor deviations (not specified) which were corrected, and that
  there were no other issues in regard to non-compliance.

  The ICR does not indicate what were the FM and Procurement ratings in the last ISR prior to project
  closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not report any unintended impacts of the project.



d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)




11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 98 to 101) lists a number of lessons. Specially relevant to projects being
implemented in similar environments is the following:

Lasting institutional transformation for major water supply and sanitation utilities requires a
series-of-projects approach where successive projects build on, enhance and expand on the
gains accomplished under earlier projects. In case of OSE, strengthening of the utility's
operational and management capacity built on significant achievements that resulted from the
Bank's earlier engagements with OSE.

In addition, an IEG lesson that emerges from the experience under this project is that, when the
project includes a large number of management strengthening activities, with analytical,
strategic, and operational outputs, it is important to ensure that adequate attention is given
to assessing the observed impacts of the outputs. This would require monitoring of results and
their impacts as a part of ongoing project supervision.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and consistent with the Bank's ICR preparation guidelines. It provides a clear theory of
change. The reporting is candid and the analysis is evidence-based. The ICR provides adequate information in
the Results Framework and Annexes to support its findings and conclusions as to outputs and outcomes, but
this could have been strengthened further by a discussion of the impact of the outputs on key areas of focus
under the project - increasing resilience and reliability and strengthening OSE's management capacity. In
general, while reporting outputs, the ICR does not provide sufficient information in regard to the observed
impacts of the activities. For activities that were dropped from the project and included under other ongoing
initiatives, the ICR does not indicate the extent to which these were actually accomplished (discussed in


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)



Section 4 above). In regard to PDO outcomes, it could have provided an explanation of how the reported actual
end-results (number of beneficiaries) had been calculated. The ICR does not include a discussion of the
Safeguard OPs triggered and does not report the safeguard and fiduciary ratings in the last ISR filed prior to
project closing. In addition, there are some discrepancies in regard to the reporting of project costs (as reported
in the ICR Data Sheet) and those estimated from the costs of the individual project components reported in the
text of the ICR (discussed in Section 5 above). The ICR provides a number of lessons learned from the project
some of which are also relevant for other projects that are implemented in similar environments.

Rating: On balance, the ICR is rated Substantial on the margin.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 19
