     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022204

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P149714                                     Niger River Basin Management Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                              Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18539                                    31-Dec-2019                                            4,198,202.93

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jan-2015                                 31-Dec-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              7,500,000.00                                     7,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               4,198,202.93                                     4,198,202.93

 Actual                                           4,198,202.93                                     4,198,202.93




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project, as stated in the Grant Agreement (p.5), was “to strengthen the institutional
   framework for regional cooperation in the Niger River Basin”.

   The project objective, as stated in the PAD (p.6), was identical to the above.




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component A: Strengthening the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) for Sustainably Delivering its
   Mandate (cost at appraisal: US$3.75 million; actual at completion US$2.40 million)

   This component supported the institutional, organizational and financial strengthening of the NBA to
   enhance its capacity to implement the its mandate.

   There were three sub-components:

   A1. Further analysis and operationalization of selected financing mechanisms for the NBA (cost at
   appraisal: US$1.2 million), inter alia via (a) development of a business case for hydropower levy, (b)
   development of a related feasibility study, (c) regional and national stakeholder consultations, (d) design of
   am implementation plan, and (e) provision of support to the NBA to implement said plan.

   A2. Implementation of the Water Charter (cost at appraisal: US$0.55 million) through inter alia (a) revisions
   to the draft Annex 2, based on stakeholder consultations at national and regional levels, improvement and
   operationalization of the relevant hydrological information system tools for implementation of Annex 2. This
   would be supported through provision of consulting services, technical assistance (TA) and goods.

   A3. Strengthening the NBA’s institutional and organizational systems (US$2.0 million) by providing financial
   support to (i) the Dam Safety and Safeguards Panel of Experts, (ii) NBA operational expenses related to
   project implementation, (iii) project operational expenses including Project Management and Coordination
   Unit (PMCU) staffing, and technical/organizational support to the implementation of priority
   recommendations from the institutional and organizational audit prepared under the Niger Basin Water
   Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management (WRD-SEM) Program.

   Component B: Facilitating Evidence-Based Decision-Making in the Fomi multipurpose project
   (FMP) (US$3.75 million; actual at completion US$ 1.8 million).

   This component provided process support to the design and implementation of a clear roadmap for project
   development, decision-making points, and engagement and sensitization of concerned stakeholders, plus
   complementary studies on environmental and social impacts.

   There were four sub-components:

   B1. Process of engagement and decision-making around Fomi (US$1.65 million) through (a) Support to the
   NBA for development of a summary of the state of knowledge on the FMP, (b) development of a strategy
   and Action Plan for the decision-making process on the FMP, (c) undertaking a process of engagement and


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



   sensitization of stakeholders, plus workshops to familiarize decision-makers with technical details of key
   studies.

   B2. Institutional frameworks for FMP (US$1.1 million). This sub-component supported studies and TA to
   explore institutional arrangements for the FMP.

   B3. Complementary environmental and social assessments (US$1.1 million) through complementary
   studies related to environmental and social risks arising from the FMP, including: (a) an advanced modelling
   of the ecosystem services in the Niger Inner Delta, and (b) further studies in response to issues emerging
   from the technical reports and Environmental & Social Impact Analysis (ESIA).

   B4. Donor and investor roundtables (US$0.35 million) via a program of activities to enable the NBA to
   mobilize resources from a range of potential sources, including investor conferences organized, and
   communications materials developed to introduce the FMP to investors.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$7.5 million. Actual cost at project completion was
   US$4.2 million.

   Financing: The project’s cost was financed through an IDA grant of US$7.5 million.

   Dates: The closing date for the original loan was December 31, 2019. There were no extensions to the
   closing date, and the project closed on schedule.

   Restructurings: The project went through a restructuring on June 27, 2018, to update the results
   framework, change some component and their costs, propose a partial cancellation of the grant (reducing the
   amount from US$7.5 million to US$4.2 million), and reallocate between disbursement categories. The PDO
   remained unchanged.


3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Regional Context:

The Niger River Basin is mostly rural, poverty-stricken, agriculture-dependent and vulnerable to food
insecurity and conflict. At the time of appraisal in 2015, significant changes were taking place on the Niger
River and its main western tributaries, impacting its transboundary water flows, which called for a strong
river basin organization that would be able to ensure coordinated management and development, so as to
avoid furthering poverty in already fragile areas. These changes included the development of three large
dams in the upper basin in Guinea (Fomi), Mali (Taoussa) and Niger (Kandadji), which would significantly
alter water flows downstream and potentially affect hydropower generation from downstream dams being
constructed at the time in Nigeria. Given the heavy concentration of people living along the banks of the
Niger River in the Sahel, including the cities of Bamako and Niamey and the vast NID wetland in Mali, it
was critical to ensure that decisions potentially affecting the livelihoods of so many (over a million) people

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



               be taken based on evidence, and taking into account their local and transboundary impacts. Towards this
               end, it was critically important to ensure that the Niger Basin Authority (NBA), which – despite the
               commitment of the member states - was struggling at the time to fill its regulatory role, be strengthened
               through upgrading of its institutional, financial and technical capacity, so that it could effectively fulfil its
               mandate of managing water resources in the Basin. This was strongly supported by Member States
               themselves, whose Council of Ministers validated and approved several steps for improving NBA as an
               organization, including adoption in November 2019 of a legally binding Annex to the Water Charter, to
               which they would have to abide when developing new infrastructure in the river basin; to be implemented by
               NBA. This support reflected the commitment to regional cooperation by the nine riparian states, under the
               Paris Declaration in 2004, which reaffirmed the central role of the NBA in implementing a Basin-wide
               Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP). Implementation of the SDAP, provided the basis for a US$8
               billion 20-year investment program in 2008, to construct irrigation and cascade storage dams, ecosystem
               conservation and natural resource protection, which made support to the institutional strengthening and
               capacity building of NBA key to the growth and development of the Basin area. By strengthening
               cooperative management of water resources infrastructure around the Basin, leading to an improved
               understanding of environmental flows essential to sustain wetlands and fisheries, the project would help
               transform the livelihoods of vulnerable and poor communities in rural parts of the Basin, and serve as a
               catalyst for boosting shared prosperity. The broader benefits from enhanced cooperation would help
               catalyze benefits beyond the river, including development of agribusiness growth poles, enhanced regional
               trade (e.g. West Africa Power Pool), prosperity and security in the Basin.

               Alignment with Strategy:

               The project’s objectives were substantially aligned with Objective 4.2 of the Africa Regional Integration and
               Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY18-23), which aimed to “support sustainable management and
               financing of transboundary water, coastal and marine resources”. A key expected outcome for this
               objective (p.58) was improved coordination systems for identified river basins. The project was closely
               coordinated with the World Bank’s wider engagement and projects in the Niger Basin, including the Water
               Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management program adaptable loan (APL) [WRD-
               SEM], whose second phase was in part dedicated to the Kandadji program, including financing of the
               hydropower plant and irrigation. Finally, the project’s objectives were consistent with the CIWA
               (Cooperation in International Waters in Africa) objective (Annual Report, FY19, Annex C) of strengthening
               cooperative water resources management and development to enable sustainable climate-resilient
               economic growth in the region.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



“To strengthen the institutional framework for regional cooperation in water resources in the Niger River
Basin”

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The ICR presents (p.7) a diagrammatic visualization of the theory of change (TOC), depicting the causal links
between the various activities supported by the project, the intermediate results and ultimate outcomes. The
activities included: (a) implementation of the Water Charter, and strengthening of NBA’s institutional and
organizational systems, (b) analysis/operationalization of selected financing mechanisms for the NBA, (c)
donor and investor roundtables, (d) engagement/decision-making processes and institutional frameworks
around Fomi, and (e) studies of environmental and social risk. These would lead to intermediate outcomes
such as: Clarification of coordination mandates for regulating infrastructure, Development of mechanisms for
financial sustainability, Mobilization of resources by NBA from a range of sources, and Creation of a roadmap
for decision-making among Member-States, which would lead to ESAs completed and discussed by Member-
States. These intermediate outcomes could be expected in turn to lead to the key outcomes of institutional
enhancements for coordination and management of shared waters between Member-States, a
complementary financing mechanism endorsed by Member States and a joint decision-making process for
Fomi, approved by the Inter-Ministerial Committee, and implemented. Together, these would help achieve the
project development objective of strengthening the institutional framework for cooperation in water resources
in the Niger River Basin.

While the activities were appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes, it should be noted that the theory of
change (TOC) discussion in the ICR does not specifically analyze whether they were of adequate scale to
create a critical mass for change. Also, the TOC’s visualization of the long-term (higher-level) outcomes
resulting from achievement of the developmental objectives does not adequately clarify the extent to which a
properly functioning institutional framework for regional cooperation, supporting an efficient utilization of
resources, could have a transformative impact on the basin region. However, the results framework reflected
the results chain clarification of coordination mandates for regulating infrastructure and was appropriate to
measure the outcomes being sought.

After restructuring, the TOC was slightly revised to take account of a slight change in focus from the specific
case of Fomi towards support for large, transboundary infrastructure in general within NBA’s mandate. As a
result, activities relating to the institutional management arrangements for the Fomi dam, the donor
roundtable and environmental and social studies were removed from the project and replaced with more
generic methods for evidence-based decision-making for large transboundary infrastructure in the Niger
Basin.

Progress towards achievement of PDO targets was to be achieved by strengthening the primary institution
responsible for facilitating regional cooperation in water resources in the Niger River Basin (NBA).

Outputs: The project achieved the following outputs:

1. The clarification of coordination mandates for regulating infrastructure was partially achieved. (The
indicator measured revision of Annex 2 and clarification of FOMI institutional framework, on a Yes/No basis).:

- Annex 2 to the Water Charter on coordinated management of water infrastructure and its implementation
modalities was endorsed by the NBA Council of Ministers, as per the target, making it legally binding. This

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



could be considered a groundbreaking achievement, as this was one of the few RBOs around the world to
have a legally binding mechanism on coordinated management of dams.

- The indicator that the Fomi institutional framework would be clarified was not achieved per se. However,
the evidence-based decision-making process financed by the project did lead to a consensual decision in
favor of an alternative solution.

- Strengthening of NBA institutional and organizational systems was partially achieved. Priority measures
were identified and some were implemented.

2. A new mechanism for financial sustainability was developed and discussed.

- A business case for a hydroelectric levy, via a feasibility study and an action plan, was approved by the
Technical Committee. (target, that it would be endorsed by member states). However, the levy itself was not
approved by member states, on account of objections from Nigeria and Guinea. Revisions to the proposed
financing mechanism are currently on-going.

3. Strategy and action plan for the decision-making process on the Fomi project was completed in November
2017, leading to the unanimous decision by key stakeholders to abandon the original site (target, that the
decision-making process would be approved by the Fomi Inter-Ministerial Committee).

4. Design and discussion among relevant members of a roadmap for decision-making around Fomi, which
was the indicator target, was not achieved. In part, this was because the sound decision-making process
financed by the project led to a consensual choice of an alternative solution. Members decided to abandon
the Fomi site due to undue estimated social and economic risks arising. The project was put on hold until
new studies could be completed, which meant that actions related to the indicators lost relevance.

5. Complementary assessments of environmental and social impacts, which were to be completed and
discussed by member states, as per the target, were partially achieved. Some of the studies were dropped,
as being no longer relevant.

6. The holding of an Investment Forum for the Fomi project did not happen, as per target, as it became no
longer relevant and the activity was dropped.

Outcomes:

The project partially achieved its objective of strengthening the institutional framework for regional
cooperation in the Niger River Basin. There were three outcome-level indicators:

(i) Institutional enhancements for coordination of development and management of shared water resources
endorsed by member states (Target: that Annex 2 to the Water Charter would be endorsed by the NBA
Council of Ministers): This was partially achieved. The key achievement was the development of a legally-
binding tool on how to regulate the coordinated management of dams in the basin. Annex 2 was validated by
the Technical Committee of the NBA and endorsed by Member States. A strategic institutional audit, leading
to the identification of priority measures, endorsed by Member States, on how to strengthen the NBAs
capacity was also financed by the project. These measures were now being implemented. Activities related
to the setting up of an institutional framework for the FMP however lost relevance as a result of the evidence-



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



based decision-making process, supported by the project, as a result of which the original site was discarded
in favor of an alternative solution.

(ii) The target of a complementary financing mechanism endorsed by Member States was not
achieved. Although both the Technical Committee and decision-makers did endorse the feasibility study
(supported by the project) on the complementary financing mechanism based on a hydropower levy and
proposed operational and financial frameworks, they did not endorse a legal component, as Guinea and
Nigeria rejected the hydropower levy. The Committee did agree on an approach to continue the process, and
the financing mechanism was being revised, but it remains unclear whether it will prove politically acceptable
and be adopted in practice.

(iii) Joint decision-making process for multipurpose project approved by the Fomi Inter-Ministerial Committee
(FIC) and followed (Target was that this would be approved and followed): This was achieved. A
methodology for joint decision-making around the Fomi dam was tested and validated by the FIC. A major
outcome of this was the decision to halt the project on account of studies which showed major problems
associated with the original site, plus knowledge gaps for a possible alternative site.

Based on this, efficacy, pre-restructuring, is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To strengthen the institutional framework for regional cooperation in water resources in the Niger River
Basin”

Revised Rationale
Though the PDO remained unchanged, the restructuring introduced changes in the results framework to take
into account changes in scope of the project. Though the restructured project continued to support an
operationally sustainable financing mechanism, it no longer planned to provide assistance to set it up, as this
was deemed unrealistic within the project’s timeframe, and could be supported under future
engagements. Endorsement of the financing mechanism was scaled down from ministerial to technical level,
for the same reason. A (new) strategic institutional analysis of the NBA was included at the latter’s
request. The scope of Component 2 was broadened from the specific case of the Fomi multipurpose project
towards support for large transboundary infrastructure in general within the NBA’s mandate. Activities related
to the review of institutional management arrangements for the Fomi dam, financing of the donor round table,
and additional environmental studies were all removed. The restructured project focused on assisting NBA to
develop methods for evidence-based decision-making relating to more generic transboundary infrastructure
projects in the Niger Basin. The Theory of Change was modified accordingly in the ICR (p.15), to reflect the
elimination of these activities, but otherwise retained its inherent logic.

Outputs:



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



- Revised and finalized text of Annex 2 to the Charter was achieved, based on national and regional
consultations and an operational hydrological too.l It was endorsed by the Council of Ministers in November
2019 (target achieved).

- Priority actions to improve the organizational performance of the NBA to be approved by the Summit of
Heads of State and implemented, were partially achieved. The council of Ministers had endorsed for
implementation six important measures contained in a strategic institutional audit, supported by the project,
on how to strengthen the capacity of the NBA. Two of these measures were implemented and a third (revision
of the NBA’s organizational chart) was delayed but implemented subsequently, close to project closing.

- A business case for the hydroelectric levy, including a technical justification, was prepared (as mentioned
earlier). Feasibility study and roadmap were endorsed by an NBA Regional Workshop in October 2019, and
subsequently by a technical committee of experts.


- The decision-making methodology financed by the project was successfully tested via updated ESIA and
feasibility studies of the Fomi dam, in December 2017 (target achieved).

- Modelling report from the operation of the Niger Inner-Delta model was generated and published (target
achieved) in December 2019, and staff were trained.



Outcomes:

The project partially achieved its objective of strengthening the institutional framework for regional
cooperation in the Niger River Basin. There were three outcome-level indicators:

(i) The target of institutional enhancements for coordination of development and management of shared
water resources being endorsed by member states was achieved. The indicator remained unchanged from
the pre-restructuring period, though some of the intermediate indicators were changed to adjust for
abandonment of Fomi dam activities, while broadening the scope to more generic transboundary
infrastructure. In addition to the priority actions that were endorsed and adopted, the revision of NBA’s
organization chart, which has been delayed on account of the COVID crisis, is likely to be implemented once
the crisis is over. It is worth bearing in mind that the forthcoming World Bank Kandadji project, focuses inter
alia on strengthening of NBA, particularly through these priority actions – which makes it more than likely that
they will all be implemented.

(ii) The target of a sustainable financing mechanism, designed and endorsed by a Technical Committee (TC)
and/or Regional NBA workshop was not achieved. Member states and the TC asked for revision of the legal
framework of the financing mechanism based on a hydropower levy.

(iii) The target of evidence-based decision-making process for transboundary infrastructure projects,
endorsed by the TC and presented to decision-makers was achieved. The methodological note for such
decision-making was validated by a TC on November 5 and 7, in Niamey. The NBA had already organized a
regional workshop to validate the note, but had to postpone it on account of the COVID crisis. This can be
expected to be held as soon as the crisis is over. Since the indicator did not require political endorsement
and the methodology in question is not controversial, there is little risk that it will not be discussed and

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



                            endorsed when the workshop takes place.

                            Overall, as a result of the operation, the institutional and technical capacity of the NBA improved substantially
                            relative to pre-project levels. The NBA is now equipped with a legally-binding agreement, signed by Member
                            States, on how to regulate the coordinated management of transboundary dams. It has tested a framework
                            for evidence-based decision-making around this infrastructure. It has a technical tool to model the impact of
                            operational decisions on dams on river flows, ecosystems, and livelihoods. All this would enhance NBA’s
                            capacity to carry out its mandate vis-à-vis Member States. Due to the project’s support, NBA was also
                            instrumental in influencing the choice of the site for the Fomi dam, relying on technical data and
                            analysis. The endorsement of the financing mechanism at the highest political level is however the one thing
                            that has yet to happen.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project modestly achieved its objectives prior to restructuring, and substantially achieved them after
                            restructuring. Disbursements were 27 percent pre-restructuring and 73 percent post-restructuring.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   Measuring the economic impact of a technical assistance project is usually difficult. In the PAD, an analysis of
   the economic impact was attempted in terms of the interventions around the Fomi dam. Economic benefits
   were estimated on the assumption that this TA operation would expedite the implementation of the Fomi dam in
   scenarios of 2, 5, 10 and 15 years respectively, in comparison to the ‘business as usual’ scenario. Estimated
   net present value (NPV) of benefits varied from US$472.3 million in the ‘no delay scenario’ to US$114.4 million
   in the event that implementation was delayed by as much as 15 years. However, the fact that the original site of
   the Fomi dam was abandoned during the course of the project meant that a comparison with estimated benefits
   at project closing could not be made, severely limiting the usefulness of economic analysis to measure the
   efficiency of the project.

   Administrative and Operational Efficiency


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



In terms of administrative efficiency, while the project did complete all of its planned activities, and disbursed all
of its funds (significantly reduced at restructuring), significant implementation delays did take place, including a
near 18-month pause in project implementation. This arose on account of governance issues within the NBA,
when the NBA Executive Secretary unilaterally dismissed members of the Project Management and
Coordination unit (PCMU) and appointed its own members, without a formal No Objection from the World Bank
– leading to a de facto suspension of the project. Other delays that took place included long internal
administrative procedures for approval of the procurement process relating to key contracts. As a result of the
delays, most major activities that were completed were completed only during the last three months before the
closing date.

Based on the above, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were Substantially relevant to the World Bank Group’s Africa Regional Integration and
Cooperation Assistance Strategy (FY18-23). Efficiency was rated Modest. Overall efficacy was Modest prior to
restructuring and Substantial after restructuring, with disbursement being 27 percent pre-restructuring and 73
percent, post-restructuring. Rating the achievement of outcome as 3 (on a six-point scale) pre-restructuring,
and 4 in the subsequent period, overall efficacy works out to (3 x 0.27 + 4 x 0.73 = 3.73, rounded out to 4, or
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



On account of the institutional enhancements put in place for coordination and management of shared
waters, endorsed by member states, the sustainable financing mechanism endorsed by the Technical
Committee, and the evidence-based decision-making process for transboundary infrastructure projects that
were endorsed by the Technical Committee, the sustainability of the project’s development outcomes should
be relatively assured.

At a technical level, the adoption of Annex 2 of the Water Charter by NBA’s Council of Ministers is a key
achievement in regional cooperation and coordination for the management of water resources in the Niger
River Basin. It is a legally binding document to which all member states have committed to comply with –
certain provisions of the Annex even taking precedence over national legislation. With the help of a
computerized tool and a simulation model, this legal instrument allows for the management of current and
future dams on the basis of interests that go beyond national boundaries. The NBA, aided by its “permanent
technical committee” (in which all member states are represented) is well placed to be able to discharge its
function. The risk that Annex 2 will not be implemented is considered low, though this something that is
clearly difficult to predict. The risk that the NBA will not go through with a planned reorganization based on
the recommendations of the audit is moderate.

At a financial sustainability level, however, though the Technical Committee endorsed a sustainable
financing mechanism, the NBA still needs to articulate a concrete and persuasive offer of services, as
consistently recommended by development partners in recent years. As regards the near future, the risk that
the proposed financing mechanism will not be endorsed by member states is high.

At a political level, the risk of the NBA losing support and mandate for the evidence-based decision-making
process for transboundary infrastructure projects designed and endorsed by the Technical Committee will
depend upon whether any shared regional projects that can benefit from the process were not to be
developed and presented. In the current context of water mobilization in the Basin (e.g. the Kandadji,
Taoussa and Fomi dams), it is expected that the NBA will be able to continue providing its coordinating role
for transboundary and other initiatives. However, the NBA will have to demonstrate its ability to implement
the process in conjunction with project financing, with the support of member states. The risk that some
countries might carry out some investments on their own or on a bilateral basis cannot be ruled out, as a
result of which the risk to development outcome here remains Substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design and preparation of the project was informed by over a decade of engagement by the Bank
  and other donors in the Niger River Basin to strengthen the NBA, promote cooperation and plan the
  development of new transboundary infrastructure. The design of the project was further informed by
  the World Bank’s experience in transboundary river issues in other African river basins, including the
  Nile, Zambesi and Senegal River Basins. This experience determined the priority, for instance, of
  ensuring that the NBA’s funding needed to become independent of national budgets of member
  countries, and for developing and implementing a road-map for decision-making on Fomi.

  During appraisal, as mentioned in the ICR (p.32), the team assessed the Governance risk as
  Moderate. In hindsight, this probably underestimated the true risk, arising from weak governance at

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



  regional and country-level institutions, and the team should have been less optimistic on the
  transparency and accountability of NBA in the early years. The fiduciary risk was however
  appropriately assessed as Substantial, on account of weak internal controls, and mitigation measures
  were planned to reduce this risk, including through the recruitment of an experienced accountant, and
  a qualified procurement specialist.

  The choice of lending instrument was sound. Other instruments were being explored at the time
  (ICR, p.33), including additional financing through the existing regional IDA WRM-SEM (Water
  Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management) Adaptable Lending Program
  (APL). The APL was however due to close in 2014, and extension was only possible for the national
  Guinean part of the loan, which was not felt to be the best vehicle to support the inherently regional
  activities that would be facilitated by NBA. Also, the scope of the second phase of the APL was
  relatively narrow, focusing on the implementation and supervision of the Kandadji dam in Niger, and
  activities relating to the Fomi dam would have been beyond its scope.

  Implementation arrangements were appropriately kept simple, with NBA being the grant recipient and
  the project using the existing project management structure already in place and available for
  implementation of the Niger Basin WRD-SEM Program.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p.33), the Bank team provided strong supervision throughout project
 implementation, providing regular guidance when needed and helping design appropriate solutions. The
 three and-a-half years since effectiveness in May 2016 and project closing in December 2019 saw 10
 supervision missions being undertaken. Because of slow progress and governance issues during the
 initial 2 years, the Bank intensified monitoring and implementation support to make sure the project
 would achieve its targets by closing. Regular, bi-weekly discussions were held with the PMCU to
 monitor progress in procurement, and achievement of targets, with fairly intense support being provided
 by the task team during the final year of implementation.

 The ICR reports that agreements entered into during supervision missions were clearly recorded in Aide
 Memoires signed by the Executive Secretary NBA and the Bank team. Bank supervision teams were
 appropriately staffed with multidisciplinary specialists, supplemented by international experts hired with
 Trust Funds. The team also provided support to the PMCU on fiduciary issues. Task team leaders, as
 well as the PMCU, were provided with procurement training, and the team designed a practical tool for
 the NBA to report on procurement and disbursements.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



 The team also undertook a timely restructuring that changed some activities and clarified some of the
 indicators. According to the ICR, the team remained still too ambitious with some indicators (such as
 implementation of priority actions identified by the strategic institutional audit), and should have defined
 more clearly the level of endorsement of certain deliverables. Though no doubt driven by the need to
 have PDO indicators that could be realistically achieved by close of project, the revisions meant that in
 the RF the new wording merely differentiated between an output and an outcome in terms of
 endorsement. On the other hand, the team could usefully have revised legal covenants on the
 installation of a computerized accounting system and hiring of an accountant assistant, which were
 overdue and deemed no longer valid.

 The project had a high turnover of task team leaders (TTLs), with three TTLs managing the project in the
 course of 3.5 years. However, this did not have a negative impact on project implementation, as the
 second TTL had been on the team during preparation and the third had been managing another project
 involving NBA, and was therefore familiar with the project team.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design of the M&E system and the results framework was adequate to monitor and evaluate the
 performance of the project’s activities. As indicated in the Theory of Change discussion in Section 4, the
 project’s objectives and results chain were fairly clear, and indicators not difficult to measure, although
 some indicators may have been somewhat ambitious, given the Bank’s ongoing relationship with
 NBA. Intermediate in indicators were generally well distributed along the project’s implementation timeline,
 with achievements expected from Year 2.



b. M&E Implementation
  A full-time M&E specialist worked closely with the PMCU technical team, which prepared and submitted
  semi-annual progress reports to the Bank and the NBA Executive Secretariat. Between January 2017
  and June 2019, M&E was rated Moderately Satisfactory. The rating was raised in June 2019, when the
  PCMU came up with a schedule to achieve all indicators, and identified the steps that needed to be taken
  to achieve them, along with associated dates. The ICR states (p.30) that despite these steps, not all




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



  indicators in the results framework were measured and reported in the ISRs. However, a perusal of ISRs
  does not indicate that that was actually the case.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data collected for M&E informed the restructuring of the project in 2018. Subsequently, the M&E expert
  and the technical teams developed a plan to ensure achievement of the targets by project closing,
  identifying necessary steps, roles and responsibilities. The delay in project implementation on account
  of the suspension of all activities for more than a year meant that the revised RF was used more
  intensively in the last two years of implementation (2018-19). M&E data findings are informing another
  operation (the Kandadji project), which will continue to support the NBA until 2026.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B. As this was a technical assistance project, there
   were no planned works or physical footprints associated with activities under this project. The project was
   not planning on financing any of the core preparatory studies in relation to the Fomi Multipurpose Project
   (FMP). An Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was triggered by the project to cover upstream
   analytical work, to enable the counterpart make an informed decision regarding the technical design of the
   FMP with adequate knowledge of environmental and social risks and opportunities. No other safeguards
   policies were triggered. The ICR does not clarify whether the policy relating to the environmental
   assessment was complied with or not. However, it does mention (ICR, p.31) that environmental and social
   risks were classified as low to moderate in all Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and
   compliance was rated moderate to satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): The project’s financial management was rated Moderately Satisfactory in
   ISRs, at project closing, despite the fact that two legal covenants remained overdue (recruitment of an
   assistant accountant and installation of a computerized accounting system). Earlier, during implementation,
   the rating had been lowered to Moderately Unsatisfactory in 2017, on account of the absence of an
   accountant acceptable to the Bank in the PCMU. Once the accountant was hired, NBA complied with the
   timely submission of the Intermediate Financial Reports and annual financial audit reports. The ICR does
   not specify whether external auditors’ opinions were qualified or not. However, the Project team clarified,
   separately (September 17, 2020), that they were indeed unqualified. The last financial audit (period
   January 1 to December 31, 2019) was expected to be submitted by the PCMU by the end of June,
   2020. The Project team clarified (as above) that on account of the COVID situation, the due date for


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



   submission was moved to December 31, 2020, but the report was expected to be received well before that
   date.

   Procurement: The ICR reports (p. 32) that the rating for procurement management had been lowered to
   Moderately Unsatisfactory in December 2016, because no progress had been made at the time in
   procurement of the two main contracts, despite appointment of a procurement specialist. It was raised to
   Moderately Satisfactory in December 2017, and remained so until project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   According to the ICR (p.26), one unintended impact of the Bank’s 18-month suspension of project
   implementation (see Section 5), was that the Bank was not at the table when important matters were being
   discussed, such as the temporary withdrawal of Guinea from the NBA to carry out Fomi studies unilaterally
   – which threatened the legitimacy and raison d’être of the NBA itself.

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 M&E Design, Implementation
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Substantial               and Utilization were adequate to
                                                                                 meet the needs of the project.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. An autonomous financial mechanism for a River Basin Organization (RBO) has a better
chance of being approved if all Member States perceive tangible benefits: The case of the
hydropower levy and the concerns expressed by some states (Guinea and Nigeria) about the
potential for negative impacts on the business environment and the cost of electricity illustrates that
the likelihood of endorsement by member states is dependent upon their perceived assessment of
relative costs and benefits. The likelihood of member states providing regular financing
contributions is higher if they perceive that being part of an RBO provides them with tangible
benefits, such as being able to mobilize financing for investments; the fact that an RBO merely
carries out a regulatory function may not be enough,


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)



2. Transboundary programs need to be cognizant and realistic about the political economy
of the transboundary space: Such programs face challenges in achieving political buy-in, since
several countries need to collaborate. This calls for long-term engagement to achieve
results. Project durations also need to be commensurate with the basin structure and complexity of
the project – which could mean being open to extensions of closing date. This also calls for a clear
and coherent World Bank strategy, aimed at building trust with the client and facilitating project
implementation.

3. It is essential for RBOs to have strong organizational and institutional capacity, to be able
to carry out their mandate in a timely and effective manner: A strong Project Management and
Coordination Unit, with well-trained staff – especially one that is familiar with implementation of
World Bank projects - is key for the success of such Bank-funded operations. Regional programs
involving RBOs must include a strong component on continuous learning and capacity building,
capitalizing on previous training programs. Evidence-based, multicriteria decision-making needs to
become embedded in the modus operandi of NBOs, based on the decision-making experience
around Fomi.

4. A clear and coherent World Bank Group engagement strategy with an RBO builds trust
with clients, which facilitates successful project implementation: Towards this end, it is
essential for Bank management to give a clear signal of support, once it is engaged in the project,
and to provide a consistent set of priorities to Bank teams working with the same RBO, and to
ensure prompt and transparent communication in case changes are necessary. The engagement of
Bank management is essential also to ensure that governance challenges are properly addressed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written, concise and consistent with guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s
activities and results. and is internally consistent. Its analysis is broadly evidence-based, and the ICR presents
a number of annexes with details relevant to its conclusions. The ICR has identified a number of appropriate
lessons and recommendations arising from the operation. There were one or two shortcoming, including that
the ICR did not provide clarification on whether safeguards policies were complied with, as well as on whether
all financial audits received unqualified opinions or not (this information was subsequently derived from the
team).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Niger River Basin Management Project (P149714)




                                                                              Page 17 of 17
