     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022225

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P095485                                     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77940,IBRD-87000                       29-Feb-2016                                        194,679,985.45

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Oct-2009                                 31-Dec-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            194,679,985.45                                                0.00

 Actual                                        194,679,985.45                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Elisabeth Goller            Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The overall development objective of the this adaptable programmatic loan (APL) was to improve the quality
   and sustainability of urban transport systems in Argentine metropolitan areas, through the improvement of
   sectoral decision making frameworks and by giving priority to public transport modes in the urban transport
   sector (PAD, para 31).

   The project development objectives (PDO) of this first loan (APL1), as stated in the loan agreement (LA),
   were to: (i) support the design and creation of a multijurisdictional Metropolitan Transport Agency (MTA) for

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



   the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (AMBA); (ii) strengthen the institutional capacity of the transport
   authorities in decision making, planning, priority setting, and resource allocation in urban transport; (iii)
   improve the quality and performance of urban transport infrastructure and/or services in medium-size
   metropolitan areas; and (iv) improve the physical integration and access to public transport networks
   in AMBA.

   In this review, the achievement of the PDO of APL1 will be assessed and each of the four sub-objectives will
   be assessed separately.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Creation of a MTA for the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Area (estimated costs
   US$28.5 million, without contingencies; estimated cost according to the 2017 additional financing (AF) with
   contingencies US$11.14 million; actual cost US$11.21 million - Note: the Bank task team provided the
   estimated costs according to the 2017 AF and the actual costs by project end in this section). This
   component was to strengthen the capacity of transportation planning and management at the metropolitan
   level and consisted of the following sub-components: 1.1 Agency Structuring: to develop the legal and
   institutional frameworks for the new MTA; 1.2 Consolidation of Transportation Planning in Buenos Aires to:
   (i) improve AMBA's urban transport model, (ii) prepare AMBA's transport master plan, (iii) conduct feasibility
   studies and design studies for a major multijurisdictional project in AMBA, and (iv) transport planning data
   collection and updating; 1.3 Urban Transport Observatory: to create an observatory to collect, process, and
   maintain all urban transport and air quality databases; 1.4 Integrated fare system (Sistema Unico de Boleto
   Electronico - SUBE): to facilitate the creation of a single fare media payment technology across
   all transportation modes in AMBA; and 1.5 Staff and Operational Expenses: to finance necessary staff,
   office and other operational expenditures of the MTA for the duration of the project.

   Component 2: Urban Transport Improvements in Argentina’s Medium-Size Metropolitan Areas
   (estimated costs US$62.90 million without contingencies; estimated cost according to the 2017 AF with
   contingencies US$22.56 million; actual cost US$20.05 million). This component was to enhance the mobility
   conditions of selected Argentina’s medium-size metropolitan areas (Mendoza, Posadas, Tucumán, Córdoba
   and Rosario) by financing the implementation of priority projects or feasibility studies and final designs for
   projects to be implemented in the second APL. It included the following sub-components: 2.1 Metropolitan
   Area of Mendoza: to pave the Colector Papagayos; 2.2 Metropolitan Area of Posadas: to construct
   a segregated busway on Uruguay Avenue; 2.3 Metropolitan Area of Tucumán: to pave and provide storm
   water drainage for Barrio 11 de Marzo; 2.4 Metropolitan Area of Córdoba: to prepare studies for Mitre
   Intermodal transport terminal; 2.5 Metropolitan Area of Rosario: to prepare studies for High Quality transit
   for the Corridor Norte- Sur Project; 2.6 Technical assistance: to finance feasibility and/or design studies or
   other studies supporting interested cities in attaining eligibility criteria for the program; and 2.7

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



Strengthening Environmental and Social Management Capacity: to
finance institutional capacity strengthening of participating metropolitan areas in environmental and
social management.

Component 3: Public Transport Access and Modal Integration in AMBA (estimated costs
US$53.6 million without contingencies; estimated cost according to the 2017 AF with contingencies
US$220.92 million; actual cost by project end US$221.74 million). This component was to
improve accessibility and mode integration of the public transport network in AMBA and consisted of the
following sub-components: 3.1 Transfer centers: to prepare detailed design studies for improvement
infrastructure works in three intermodal centers of AMBA; 3.2 Station Accessibility: to carry out works to
improve the access conditions around train stations in the AMBA; 3.3 Grade separated crossings at critical
railroad intersection; and 3.4 Train signaling System: to design the best strategy to improve the
train signaling system.

Component 4: Sectoral Training: Urban Transport Planning (estimated costs US$2.5 million without
contingencies; estimated cost according to the 2017 AF with contingencies US0.65 million; actual cost by
project end US$0.65 million). This component was to design a postgraduate program (masters) in urban
transport, including all the necessary subjects, such as engineering, planning, economics, etc. It consisted
of the following sub-components: 4.1 Institutional and Academic Development: to prepare the institutional
and academic design of the course and to obtain accreditation by the Ministry of Education; 4.2
Implementation of the course: to finance education fees and a limited amount of scholarships for students;
and 4.3 Teacher training program: to finance the teacher training program for the teaching staff that was
expected to participate in the masters course.

Component 5: Project Management (estimated costs US$4.6 million without contingencies, estimated
cost according to the 2017 AF with contingencies US$9.10 million; actual cost by project end US$10.72
million). This component was to finance the project implementation unit to carry out the proposed
operation.

Several activities under components 1, 2, and 3 were revised in the 2014 restructuring as follows:

Component 1 formally remained unchanged but its cost was reduced to reflect that the MTA was created
utilizing a different model. The ICR para 26 mentions that the urban observatory under subcomponent 1.3
was replaced by the creation of the urban transport planning office and the contract involving the
supervision of the integrated fare system (SUBE) supervision under subcomponent 1.4 was dropped in
2012 because of allegations of fiduciary irregularities. The Bank task team pointed out that the urban
transport planning office is not the same as the observatory, which was expected to centrally collect and
use urban transport data. However, the underlying objective of both was to strengthen urban transport
planning.

Under component 2, infrastructure improvements originally envisaged in Mendoza, Posadas,
and Tucuman were dropped primarily due to delays in the initiation of the civil works. Instead, the
component was revised to finance high impact infrastructure projects in four medium-size cities,
including smaller scaled bus rapid transit (BRT) projects in Santa Fe and Rosario, and two bike lanes in the
cities of Tucuman and Salta. Technical assistance was to be provided to various other medium-size cities,
such as origin destination (O-D) surveys, updating of planning tools, and preparation of project portfolios,
and to strengthen their environmental and social management capacity.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



  Under component 3, the originally envisaged activities, such as transfer centers, station accessibility,
  grade separated crossing and train signaling systems, were maintained, but their location was modified. In
  addition, two emblematic works were included, which were the La Matanza BRT and the Saenz transfer
  station (ICR, para 28).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was US$264.86 million, which is 141 percent of the appraisal cost
  estimate of US$187.60 million and in line with the 2017 AF cost estimate.

  Financing: The project was expected to be financed through two IBRD loans of US$150 million (original
  financing) and US$45 million (AF), respectively. These loans were nearly fully disbursed (the actual
  disbursements were US$149.68 million and US$45 million).

  Borrower Contribution: The expected borrower contribution at appraisal was US$37.60 million (PAD,
  datasheet). The ICR does not include the borrower contribution. The Bank task team pointed out that the
  actual borrower contribution was US$70.17 million.

  Dates and Project Restructuring: The project was approved on October 20, 2009, became effective on
  November 26, 2010. It was expected to close on February 29, 2016, and was extended four times for a total
  of 46 months. It closed on December 31, 2019. The project had five level-two restructurings and an
  AF accompanied by restructuring.

  The first restructuring took place on August 18, 2014, when an amount of US$47.23 million of the loan
  amount was disbursed. This restructuring (i) changed project activities (see section 2.d above), (ii) adjusted
  the implementation arrangements, (iii) reallocated funds between components and disbursement
  categories, and (iv) changed the results framework. The changes to the results framework included
  replacing the 12 original PDO indicators with five new ones and changing most of the intermediate
  outcomes or targets.

  The second restructuring took place on September 29, 2015 to extend the loan closing date by 11 months,
  to January 31, 2017, to enable the completion of a new activities introduced with the 2014 restructuring and
  account for project implementation delays.

  The third restructuring took place on September 15, 2016 to (i) extend the loan closing date by nine months,
  to October 31, 2017, to account for delays caused by adjustments in the civil works scope, and (ii) to
  reallocate funds between disbursement categories because of cost overruns.

  The AF took place on January 6, 2017, when US$92.76 million of the loan amount were disbursed. The AF
  (i) added US$45 million to finance cost overruns under the Matanza BRT contracts because of scope
  changes and a higher bid price than budgeted, (ii) reallocated funds between components and
  disbursement categories, and (iii) added two additional PDO and one intermediate indicators for two
  activities introduced with the 2014 restructuring.

  The fifth restructuring took place on April 8, 2019 and increased the Bank financing percentage for civil
  works to 100 percent to accelerate project implementation. The last restructuring took place on June 21,



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



                       2019 to (i) extend the project closing date by six months, to December 31, 2019, to complete the Saenz
                       transfer station and (ii) reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

                       Need for Split Rating: The PDO-level indicator changes introduced with the 2014 restructuring reduced the
                       number of indicators and replaced most of them. Some of the new PDO indicators seem less ambitious,
                       such as the indicator "Existence of a legal agreement for creating the AMT, signed interjurisdictionally",
                       which replaced the indicator "AMBA MTA legally created, adequately staffed according to the organization
                       chart designed in the project, with adequate offices and equipment, and its own operating budget". In
                       addition, the original and revised PDO indicators are not fully adequate to measure the PDO, several of
                       them are output indicators in nature, hence the PDO indicator changes introduced in 2014 do not have a
                       significant bearing on the achievement of the PDOs. The 2017 AF was to cover a cost overrun and
                       introduced two new PDO indicators, which did not increase the project's level of ambition but improved
                       results measurement. Therefore, this review will not apply a split rating and will assess the four sub-
                       objectives based on the revised indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with Strategy: The PDO remained highly relevant under the FY2019-2022 Country Partnership
Framework, which in area 2 aims at addressing key institutional constraints for better governance and
service delivery and in area 3 aims at supporting Argentina to implement its National Determined
Contributions (NDC). The latter is to be implemented through (i) improving metropolitan coordination, (ii)
strengthening decision-making frameworks, policy formulation, and planning capacities within the urban
transport sector, (iii) improving the quality and performance of critical transport infrastructure, addressing a
sector that directly supports and enables the urban economy and contributes to strengthen domestic
markets, and (iv) improving access to public transport networks, tackling congestion and building key transit
infrastructure to curb private vehicle use and lay a path towards more sustainable public transit (ICR, para
36). The PDO is also fully aligned with the government's 2016 resolution (ICR, para 38).

Country Context and Previous Sector Experience: The PDO was outcome-oriented in substance and
appropriately pitched for Argentina's development status and capacity. In the light of the longstanding
engagement of the Bank in the urban transport sector, the balanced share of institutional, capacity, and
infrastructure related subobjectives was adequate. The project continued what had been achieved in
previous projects, including extending its scope to medium-size cities (IEG PPARs- Buenos Aires Urban
Transport Project and GEF Sustainable Transport and Air Quality Program, 2017).

Given the PDO's close alignment with the Bank and country strategy, and its appropriate pitching for a
country like Argentina, the relevance of objectives is rated high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Support the design and creation of a multijurisdictional MTA for the AMBA.

               Rationale
               The theory of change for subobjective 1 was that the activities related to the creation of and support to the
               multijurisdictional MTA would have as output a legally created MTA. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to
               a functioning MTA carrying out coordinated planning of major multijurisdictional infrastructure and services
               restructuring, including infrastructure provision and bus and subway service restructuring and multimodal
               integration, especially fare integration, smart card compatibility, and subsidy and uniform tariff policies (PAD,
               paras 38 and 60 and annex 1).

               Outputs

                     MTA (Agencia de Transporte Metropolitano, in Spanish) legally created with decrees of 2012, 2013,
                      and 2014, meeting the revised target. The MTA was originally envisaged as agency, technical
                      secretariat, or body with adequate staff, equipment, and an operational budget. The project
                      subsequently realized that it was more realistic to set up a tripartite arrangement to carry out
                      metropolitan transport planning and coordination and formalized this change with the 2014
                      restructuring. The Bank task team clarified that the legally created coordination arrangement for
                      AMBA consists of a representative of the municipal, provincial, and national governments and an
                      executive director. The government representatives, the executive director, and the staff of the
                      planning office are paid by the public administrations of their origin. AMBA's executive
                      director chairs the MTA meetings and leads the urban transport planning office set up within the
                      national government. The planning staff in this office are officials of the municipal government of
                      Buenos Aires and the national government. Although such an coordination arrangement does not
                      comply with the originally envisaged formalities, as seen under the outcomes below, it carried out the
                      key functions of a metropolitan coordination body.

                     Statute of internal MTA organization, meeting the revised target.

                     MTA representatives appointed, meeting the revised target.

                     The Bank task team pointed out that the project supported a study on the legal arrangements for the
                      MTA, provided international best practices on metropolitan transport authorities, and supported a
                      study to further upgrade the MTA. The team also clarified that the studies to inform the MTA's work
                      (2014 PP) consisted mainly of technical assistance to support MTA's planning capacity listed under
                      sub-objective 2 below and its decisions making during project implementation.

               Outcomes




                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



In terms of functionality, the MTA held 19 meetings between 2016 and 2019, meeting the revised project
target. The task team explained that the MTA held regular meetings since its establishment, but in the
absence of a project indicator, which was introduced in 2014, did not provide the Bank with information on
these meetings. It is important to highlight that the MTA continued to regularly meet even after the recent
government change, which brought the national and municipal governments under different political parties.

The Bank task team clarified that since its establishment the MTA facilitated the introduction of targeted
subsidies and integrated tariff policies in AMBA. The MTA approved the AMBA transport master plan and
prioritized the civil works to be implemented by each jurisdiction in AMBA. The MTA was in charge of the two
AMBA investments with inter-jurisdictional participation under the project, exceeding the target that was to
provide evidence on the MTA's performance. The MTA representatives took decisions on BRT
extensions, bus reform, bus fleet renewal, and the metropolitan rail service extension in AMBA. However, not
all these decisions were necessarily formalized as MTA decisions because the decisions were also part of the
representatives' other functions and hence this route was more straightforward. The urban transport planning
office, chaired by the MTA's executive director, has been in charge for all metropolitan transport planning in
AMBA.

Although AMBA's MTA did not comply in form with what was originally planned, by (i) carrying out
metropolitan planning, (ii) coordinating the interjurisdictional urban transport infrastructure and service
provision, and (iii) facilitating several key transport policy measures, it carried out the functionalities of an
MTA. Given that the MTA sustained its coordination functions beyond the government change and
continues to move the metropolitan coordination agenda forward, the efficacy of subobjective 1 is rated
substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the institutional capacity of the transport authorities in decision making, planning, priority
setting, and resource allocation in urban transport.

Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 2 was that the activities related to improving and producing urban
transport planning tools and establishing an urban transport planning master course would have new and
improved planning tools and trained staff as outputs. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to the use of the
planning tool and an enhanced planning and urban transport management capacity.

Outputs

      AMBA transport model developed and updated in 2017, with data from the integrated fare system
       SUBE and the new O-D surveys, and technical staff of the urban transport planning office trained to
       use and improve the model. The Bank task team pointed out that the model was of unprecedented
       complexity for Argentina and the update innovative.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




      Institutional Strengthening Plan for Mobility and Transport in the city of La Rioja prepared, which
       included (i) a diagnosis of the public transport situation in the city, (ii) an action plan and investment
       priorities, and (iii) the training needs for municipal staff.

      Integral Urban Mobility Study for the Metropolitan Area of Salta prepared, which included (i) a
       diagnosis of mobility patterns in the metropolitan area, (ii) a list of investment projects, (iii) a
       sustainable mobility plan, (iv) the prefeasibility design of a priority BRT project, and (v) training for
       Salta's new metropolitan transport authority staff.

The production of these three planning instruments is in line with the revised target of three planning
instruments.

      O-D household surveys in eight metropolitan areas produced, which exceeds the revised target of 6
       O-D surveys. These surveys provided information on travel patterns, including trip motives, transport
       modes used, perceptions on public transport, as well as socio-economic information. They were used
       as basis to design the project interventions (ICR, para 42).

      Studies and designs for BRT projects in Rosario, Santa Fe, and Salta, for bike lanes in Salta and
       Tucuman, and for the first phase of an integrated public transport system in Corrientes carried
       out, meeting the revised target of a portfolio of six projects developed (ICR, para 43).

      Masters course in urban transport planning in line with the original and revised targets, which the Bank
       task team helped design in one of the most prestigious universities in Argentina, bringing together
       three different faculties. This is in line with the target. According to the Bank team, the course was
       sponsored by the project through scholarships to participants in 2014, 2015, 2016. The next course is
       scheduled to take place in April 2021.

Outcomes

The project enhanced the transport planning capacity in AMBA and medium-size cities through mobility
data collection activities, which helped start evidence-based policy making in these cities (ICR, para 62).
According to the ICR (para 41), the AMBA transport model became the key tool for the urban transport
planning office to carry out investment planning at metropolitan level. This office used the model to
prepare the fare integration policy, the economic evaluation of several transport interventions, and the
rationalization of bus routes in the AMBA.

According to the Bank task team, the preparation and update of the AMBA transport model and the
establishment of the urban transport planning office created a planning capacity within the government, which
is new in Argentina. The team stressed that this office used the model to prioritize the two projects
implemented under this project, but also to carry out analyses for other government units and policies. This
included the bus fleet rationalization policy, smart card fare analysis for cities outside Buenos Aires, and
analyses for urban projects that required the estimation of the transport demand in an area, such as for the
transit-oriented development project in AMBA. The latter was publicly announced, had the zoning law
changed to support it, but has not yet been implemented because of the economic slowdown in Argentina.

With respect to the Integral Urban Mobility Study for the Metropolitan Area of Salta, the Bank task team
pointed out that this planning exercise not only enhanced the capacity of the city's planning staff but also


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



provided them with credibility vis-a-vis their superiors. Based on the plan, the city constructed a bike lane with
project funds. The plan was also the basis for the city's implementation of a bus reform, pedestrianization,
and a BRT system. The latter was not exactly implemented as planned, but it was inspired by the study.

The Bank task team mentioned that the Institutional Strengthening Plan for Mobility and Transport for the city
of La Rioja was less successful, but because of the collaboration under the project, a city official attended the
master course and is now the city's urban mobility leader.

In Santa Fe, the BRT project helped implement an integrated urban development corridor with a BRT
system, bike lane, vegetation for flood control, and measures to incentivize denser development and mixed
land use. The city used their local design for the corridor, and the project assisted in improving it. Therefore,
although there were no formal capacity strengthening activities in this city, important capacity building took
place through learning by doing. The Bank task team also confirmed that the city officials and university staff
who worked in the project were still working in areas related to urban mobility in Santa Fe, some in different
positions.

The transport agencies in the metropolitan areas used the O-D household surveys as baseline to design
the Bank-financed interventions (ICR, para 42). The Bank task team added that the O-D survey data
generated under the project helped place the cities on a level playing field in the bus service negotiations with
private bus operators, who previously were the only ones to have mobility data.

Similarly, according to the Bank task team, the preparation of project studies and designs helped
create institutional capacity in transport authorities through the technical discussions on project elements. The
team pointed out that, for instance, in the city of Corrientes, the designs of a transfer station and a segregated
bus lane, and the redesign of the bus circulation patterns spurred lots of discussions and consequential
learning. The BRT system design in Santa Fe helped create a vision around this project. In Misiones, the
preparatory activities for a BRT system created knowledge even if the project was not implemented because
the mayor took too long to take a decision.

During the three years in which the project provided scholarships, the master course in urban transport
planning trained 94 students, of which 60 received scholarships. The Bank task team clarified that several of
these students worked in AMBA and many others in municipalities. According to an estimate by the Bank task
team, at least half of them remained in their positions after the government change.

Because of the project's data collection activities, planning tools, capacity building through urban mobility
projects, and the masters course in urban transport planning helped strengthen the institutional capacity of
the transport authorities, the efficacy of subobjective 2 is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the quality and performance of urban transport infrastructure and/or services in medium-size
metropolitan areas.

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 3 was that the activities related to designing and constructing urban
transport infrastructure in medium-size cities would have road improvements and new public transport and
non-motorized transport (NMT) infrastructure as outputs. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to better
quality urban transport infrastructure and reduced generalized costs of travel*.

Outputs

      BRT systems and associated improvements in the corridor, such as sidewalks, lighting, and bike
       lanes, in Santa Fe and Rosario of a total of 8.2 km, carried out. This exceeds the revised target of 7.8
       km.
      Bike lanes and associated improvements, such as lights and sidewalks, in Tucuman and Salta of a
       total of 8.8 km (the project had no target for bikeways) implemented.

Outcomes

The BRT systems in Rosario and Santa Fe greatly improved the bus service performance by reducing travel
times and enhancing the quality of the public transport user experience (ICR, para 46). The systems reduced
the generalized cost of travel by 13.34 percent in Santa Fe and by 14.30 percent in Rosario, exceeding the
targets of 10 percent (para 45, ICR). The Bank task team pointed out that this type of infrastructure not only
facilitated the flow of buses, but also helped organize the traffic in the corridor, enhanced walkability, and
highlighted the importance of road safety measures. The Bank task team did not have data on public
transport ridership in Rosario and Santa Fe and mentioned that the impact of these systems on ridership
was likely small because the BRT corridors were short, and it is difficult to shift transport users to other
modes.

The two BRT systems were among the first BRT projects outside AMBA and, according to the Bank task
team, helped showcase this urban transport solution to other medium-size cities. The Bank task team
mentioned that although Rosario did not implement a planned second phase of the project corridor because
of the low transport demand, it continued with the BRT solution. The ICR (para 46) pointed out that the project
provided an additional sustainable transport solution for medium-size cities and helped advance NMT
solutions, which were almost nonexistent in medium-size metropolitan areas in Argentina. The ICR, para 46,
considered the NMT agenda even more relevant under the COVID-19 crisis and mentioned that the project
experience could serve to further extend these initiatives in the country. The Bank task team pointed out
that particularly in Salta bicycle use increased, but they did not have data.

The project enhanced urban transport infrastructure quality and its performance in terms of travel speed,
accessibility and safety features. It also helped create awareness for the BRT solution in medium-size cities in
Argentina. Therefore, the efficacy of subobjective 3 is rated substantial.

*Note: The Bank task team clarified that the generalized cost of travel multiplies travel time saving in the
corridor by the number of people using the BRT corridor and the value of time.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve the physical integration and access to public transport networks in the AMBA.

Rationale
The theory of change for subobjective 4 was that the activities related to improving public transport
infrastructure and introducing integrated ticketing in AMBA would have as output improved integrated
transport infrastructure and ticketing. In terms of outcomes, the improved integrated infrastructure
was expected to reduce the generalized cost of travel and increase the ridership on the La Matanza BRT
corridor, reduce the travel time at the Saenz transfer station, and facilitate public transport access.

Outputs

      La Matanza BRT corridor constructed (actual 11.3 km against the revised target of 10 km), including
       street widening, 40 bus stops, ramps, sidewalks, 17 stations, 1,390 planted trees, signaling,
       passenger information, lighting, and transfer center.

      Elevated Saenz transfer station, in line with the revised civil work's completion target of 100 percent.

      25 train stations in AMBA with improved surroundings, including paved or repaved accesses to
       stations, access ramps for people with disabilities, new or reconstructed sidewalks and pedestrian
       walkways/crossings to facilitate access and transfers, improved train signaling systems, grade-
       separated crossings in critical railroad intersections, public lighting, and upgraded transfer points
       between transport modes improved bus stops and bike shelters, among others. This is in line with
       the original and unrevised target of 100 percent completion.

      Integrated fare system SUBE introduced in AMBA in 2018 and in 15 other cities (the support for the
       integrated fare system SUBE in AMBA was cancelled from the project scope in 2012, but according to
       the ICR, para 51, the project played a key role in pushing this agenda in its initial phases, supporting
       analytical work and providing strong technical assistance and international experiences on integrated
       fare/ smartcard systems).

Outcomes

The public transport travel speed in the La Matanza BRT corridor increased by over 105 percent, from an
average travel speed of 12 km/hour to 25 km/hour, which is substantial but realistic for a segregated corridor
in a suburban environment. This increase in travel speed represents a reduction in the average time of travel
from 45 minutes to 23 minutes. The generalized cost of travel went down by 34 percent, exceeding the
revised target of 10 percent. The ridership during the first year of implementation increased by 4.8 percent
and according to the Bank task team corresponds to about 300,000 new passengers. Although this is an
important achievement by international standards, it is significantly below the target of a 10 percent. The ICR,
para 48, points out the benchmark used to set this target and its applicability to the La Matanza corridor
were questionable. The Bank task team clarified that the La Matanza neighborhood was a very poor area
with people already using public transport, therefore, the margin for modal shift was low.


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



                            In terms of integration, the Bank task team highlighted that the La Matanza BRT starts at a transfer center
                            in the outskirt of the city, which was built as part of the project. The station links two main roads, the railways,
                            a small informal bus station, and a motorcycle parking area. The BRT corridor has 16 intermediate stations,
                            which provide integration with local bus lines.

                            The elevation of the railways at the Saenz transfer station led to 53 percent travel time saving, largely
                            exceeding the revised target of 10 percent (ICR, para 49). The Bank task team explained that this was
                            previously a very busy at grade rail crossing, hence the large travel time savings were due to the elevation of
                            the station. The team also pointed out that the Saenz station currently provides for bus to train transfer for a
                            significant number of bus lines that operate on Av. Saenz. The team pointed out that in future, the Saenz
                            transfer station will enable the connection between the rail, buses, and the planned terminal station of the
                            subway line H, thus will provide excellent connectivity to the city center by rail. The planned subway station
                            was approved by the legislative as part of the subway extension plan.

                            The train station improvements in AMBA enhanced the overall accessibility to these stations (ICR, para 50).

                            The integrated fare system SUBE had a direct impact on promoting modal and fare integration among
                            different public transport modes in AMBA, resulting in an overall reduction of passengers' travel cost. It
                            improved access to public transport because the integrated fare system SUBE provided a 50 percent
                            discount on the second public transport trip and a 75 percent discount on further trips, mainly benefiting the
                            poorest users who undertake longer trips with more transfers. Similar benefits took place in the other 15 cities
                            in Argentina, to which system was extended (ICR, para 51).

                            Overall, the project improved physical and fare integration and enhance access to public transport in AMBA.
                            Therefore, the efficacy of subobjective 4 is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project helped establish a functioning metropolitan transport coordination mechanism in AMBA,
                            strengthened the planning and decision making capacity of transport authorities, improved the quality and
                            performance of urban transport infrastructure and services in medium-size metropolitan areas, and improved
                            the physical integration and access to public transport in AMBA. The achievement of all four subobjectives
                            is rated substantial. Therefore, the overall efficacy is also rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial


                                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, cost benefit analyses were carried out for the investments in Tucuman, Posadas, and Mendoza
under component 2 (all dropped later) and the grade separated rail crossings under component 3. The
analyses used a 22-year time horizon (2 years of construction and 20 years of operation) and a 12
percent discount rate. The benefits considered in each case were different. They included (i) savings in vehicle
operating costs, (ii) savings in public transport operating costs, (iii) reduction in travel times for all users, public
transport users, pedestrians and cyclists, and (iv) benefits due to enhanced accessibility to health care facilities,
schools, and work places. The benefits were quantified using (i) values of the vehicle operating cost
methodology of the National Road Directorate of Argentina, (ii) average salaries, and (iii) estimates
of inaccessibility days to urban facilities, among others (PAD, para 83, and annex 9).

For the station accessibility improvements under component 3, no cost benefit analysis was carried out, but the
stations to be intervened were selected based on a multicriteria analysis, including the poverty index, number of
passengers boarding and alighting at the stations, and the relative importance of the corresponding train line
(PAD, para 83).

For Tucuman, the analysis showed a net present value (NPV) of US$14.73 million and an economic internal rate
of return (EIRR) of 23.1 percent. For Posadas, it showed a NPV of US$37.41 million and an EIRR of 16.8
percent. For Mendoza, it showed a NPV of US$ 32.17 million and an EIRR of 60.8 percent, and for the grade
separated railways crossings, it showed a NPV of US$1.23 million and an EIRR of 13.4 percent. The
sensitivity analyses showed that the economic evaluations were robust since no investment yielded a negative
NPV (PAD, annex 9 and paras 4 and 5).

The 2017 PP includes the economic analyses for the La Matanza BRT and the Saenz transfer station. The
benefits considered were time savings for public transport and private vehicle users and road safety
improvements. The analyses showed a NPV of US$46.82 million and an EIRR of 17.5 percent for the La
Matanza BRT and a NPV of US$ 115.00 million and an EIRR of 42.6 percent for the Saenz transfer station (the
PP has slightly different figures for the latter in the text and a table).

The ICR, para 54, however, mentions that at appraisal an economic evaluation was only carried out for the
Santa Fe BRT, which showed a NPV of US$9.3 million and an EIRR of 22 percent.

By project close, ex-post cost benefit analyses were limited to the three most cost intensive investment for
which the necessary data was available. This included the (i) Santa Fe BRT, (ii) Rosario BRT, and (iii) La
Matanza BRT. These analyses used the same time frame and discount rate as in the ex-ante analyses, the
actual investment costs with a revised value of time and time savings, and updated vehicle operating costs. The
benefits comprised of time and vehicle operating cost savings. The analyses also looked at road safety
and emission reduction benefits, but these benefits were not quantified (ICR, para 55 and annex 4).

For the La Matanza BRT, the ex-post analysis showed a significant higher return, with a NPV of US$206 million
and an EIRR of 50 percent. This compares to a US$46.82 million and an EIRR of 17.5 percent estimated in
2017. According to the Bank task team, the high return was due to the unexpectedly large travel time saving,
which as mentioned in the Efficacy section seems realistic for this kind of infrastructure. For the Santa Fe BRT,
the ex-post analysis showed a NPV of US$10.60 million and an EIRR of 31 percent, compared to an ex
ante NPV of US$9.30 million and an economic internal rate of return of 22 percent. For the Rosario BRT, the

                                                                                                          Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



analysis showed a NPV of US$10.20 million and an EIRR of 62 percent. No ex-ante analysis is presented in the
project documents.

The Bank task team explained that for the Saenz transfer station no cost benefit analysis was carried out by
project close because the station opened a week before loan closing, and it was difficult to get the necessary
data or economic analysis from the government staff, which had recently changed.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The project's efficiency suffered from a 46-month-extension of the implementation period, more than doubling of
the project management costs, and significant civil works cost overruns for the La Matanza BRT and the Saenz
transfer station, which required an additional financing of US$45 million. The cost overruns were caused by high
inflation, design adjustments to increase the contract scope requested by the new administration, and a bid price
significantly higher than the budget estimate for the La Matanza BRT. According to the ICR, para 56, the design
adjustments resulted in more paving, including of the two lanes for general traffic, better quality pavements to
increase resistance, and road safety measures.

Although the administrative and operational efficiency of project implementation was modest, the three main
project investments showed very high returns. Therefore, on balance, the efficiency of project
implementation is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    34.30
 Appraisal                                                 28.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    64.60
 ICR Estimate                                              47.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's relevance of objectives is rated high. The project had minor shortcomings in efficacy and
efficiency, which are both rated substantial. Therefore, the overall outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paras 108 to 110) does not identify specific risks to development outcomes, but
simply mentions that sustainable urban mobility remained a key priority for the country and that the
government and the Bank were discussing a potential new urban transport operation. Based on discussions
with the Bank task team, IEG identified the following risks to development outcomes:

      Metropolitan coordination in AMBA. The MTA has continued to meet under the new
       government after project closing. This government is from a different political party than the previous
       one. The government asked the Bank for technical assistance to help evolve the MTA under a
       possible new loan under discussion. Therefore, the risk that the MTA, as metropolitan urban
       transport coordination mechanism, will stop operating is low. There is a substantial risk that the MTA
       will not be transformed into a fully autonomous body because this would require that the three
       jurisdictions in AMBA transferred their responsibilities and powers to it.

      Urban transport planning in AMBA. The urban transport planning office has become the
       metropolitan transport planning body in AMBA. The office and staff remained in place after the
       government change. The Bank task team reiterated that having a metropolitan urban transport
       planning capacity in the government is new in Argentina. According to them, the capacity is highly
       valued, and the new administration has been fighting for it. As with government change, however,
       there is a risk that the progress in metropolitan planning might not continue at the pace it progressed
       under the project.

      Planning in medium-size cities. The Bank task team pointed out that they still have contacts with
       some of the cities involved in the project. This is, for instance, the case with Salta, where the city has
       continued to strengthen the transport team. For the other cities, especially where the project
       established a less solid planning base, there might be a risk to the sustainability of the project's
       efforts.

      Masters course in urban transport planning. The masters course established under the project
       continued to be offered even without the project's scholarships, so there is a low risk to its
       sustainability.

      Public transport integration at the Saenz transfer station. There is a moderate risk that fiscal
       constraints might delay the extension of the subway line to this station, hence also delay its full
       integration potential.

      Infrastructure maintenance. Fiscal constraints could negatively impact the maintenance of the
       infrastructure built under the project, but the BRT design used requires very little maintenance
       because it was conceived as "cheap system to operate". Similarly, the bikeways do not require major
       and costly maintenance.

      Public transport demand. There is a risk that public transport demand might decrease, but the
       corridors intervened have low demand elasticity, which reduces this risk.



                                                                                                        Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank task team intervened in a highly relevant sector for the economic and social development of
  major cities. The team designed the project as a natural continuation of the ongoing operations in the
  sector expanding its scope to medium-size cities. The use of the APL instrument was meant to further
  promote continuity in the Bank's involvement in urban transport in Argentina.

  The Bank's previous engagement in the sector was beneficial in terms of implementation arrangements
  because the existing project implementation unit was familiar with Bank policies and procedures and had
  the necessary capacity. In addition, funds of the ongoing project could be used to finance
  project preparation. This ensured that the technical, financial, and safeguard preparatory work was
  carried out adequately and timely (ICR, para 72). These funds were also used to preselect the medium-
  size cities, where the project works under component 2 were to take place (ICR, para 72).

  Although a combination of institutional and capacity strengthening with urban transport infrastructure and
  service performance improvements and the expansion of the project scope to medium-size cities
  was appropriate from a technical point of view, the original project design was overly complex, with many
  small interventions involving different and new implementation agencies. In addition, some of the
  preselected medium-size cities did not have the capacity and technical resources to justify the
  investments in terms of clarity of conceptual designs, economic analyses, and social acceptability of the
  interventions (ICR, para 98).

  The Bank task team ensured that social, environmental, and fiduciary frameworks were in place at the
  time of project approval (ICR, para 100). The team identified most implementation-related risks, such as
  limited capacity of municipalities, fiduciary and procurement risks, cost overruns, and problems with
  interjurisdictional coordination (PAD, para 78). However, the gravity of several of these risks was
  underestimated, leading to an overall risk rating of moderate. This is especially the case for setting up a
  MTA, which is difficult and hence highly risky. Not all risk mitigation measures proposed were sufficiently
  effective. For instance, the training workshops and other measures to cope with the limited capacity of
  medium-size cities were insufficient to avoid a need for project changes and implementation delays. In
  addition, the planned procurement-related mitigation measures were not sufficient to avoid bid prices
  significantly exceeding cost estimates in major civil works, which contributed to increase in project cost.

  As mentioned below, the project had shortcomings in M&E (for details, see M&E section).

  Mainly because of the shortcomings in the original design, which had to be drastically changed, and the
  weaknesses in risk severity identification and mitigation, Bank performance in ensuring quality at
  entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




b. Quality of supervision
 During the project's lifetime, the Bank task team was a key partner of the government on urban transport
 issues and supported a broad range of policy issues (ICR para 60). The team leveraged resources to carry
 out additional activities and studies, which helped, among others, (i) foster the Ministry of Transport
 Planning Secretary's digital data capacity, by supporting methods for data recollection through cell
 phones to better understand travel patterns, including of non-motorized transport, (ii) enhance road safety
 under the La Matanza BRT, and (iii) introduce interest for transit-oriented development in Argentina (ICR,
 paras 67 to 69). The team also carried out analytical work that contributed to key strategic policy
 discussions, including tariff and subsidy policies, and bus sector reform (ICR, para 106).

 The ICR, para 103, points out that the project team categorized the project as “problem project" in the
 initial implementation period due to long delays, low disbursements, and red flags in terms of
 project governance. In response to the governance challenges, the Bank task team carried out a forensic
 audit, a fiduciary action plan, and technical assistance as needed. This response helped mitigate
 obstacles in project implementation and achieved the PDOs, especially after the early 2016.

 The Bank task team also managed to adjust the project to the changing context and circumstances,
 especially through the 2014 restructuring. This was a turning point in project execution, and from 2014, the
 overall performance of the project improved considerably in terms of performance ratings and
 disbursements. As mentioned, the team carried out five additional restructurings, including the 2017 AF
 (ICR, para 75 and 76).

 The 2014 restructuring, however, had shortcomings. It did not fully adequately revise the results framework
 (see M&E section). The 2014 PP did not include the economic analysis for the new investments. The 2017
 PP included the economic analyses for the La Matanza BRT and Saenz Station, two of the investments
 identified through the 2014 restructuring. The 2017 PP reports only limited methodological details on the
 economic analysis and includes slightly different figures of the NPV and EIRR for the Saenz transfer
 station.

 According to the ICR, para 102, continuous technical supervision of civil works, particularly for the BRT
 constructed in the complex environment of La Matanza, was a key factor to ensure the quality of
 this investment. The ICR, para 104, also points out that the governance issues related to the integrated
 fare system SUBE put in question the Bank's contract supervision. However, the Bank's Integrity
 Department (INT) found no wrongdoing of Bank staff. Finally, the ICR, para 105, mentions a TTL high
 turnover under the project, four in 10 years, but does not indicate that this had negative consequences on
 project supervision.

 The borrower expressed appreciation about the close collaboration between the government
 counterparts' and Bank task team (ICR, annex 5).

 In summary, the Bank task team used this project as a platform to provide broader support to the urban
 transport sector in Argentina. The team carried out an adequate supervision effort under a project that
 suffered from serious design deficiencies, lasted ten years, had different government counterparts and
 TTLs, and, during its initial years of implementation, took place in a difficult fiduciary environment. The
 above-mentioned shortcomings mainly in terms of restructuring are minor. Consequently, Bank
 performance in supervision is rated satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project was to be monitored by the participating cities under the overall supervision of the project
 implementation unit. This unit was also expected to carry out data collection, analysis, and evaluation, and
 it was said to have the necessary capacity (PAD, annex 3).

 The original results framework included 12 PDO and nine intermediate indicators. All indicators had
 baselines and targets, except for the two indicators measuring user satisfaction, for which the baselines
 were to be determined through a user survey in year one. The PAD, annex 3, provides some information
 on how results were to be measured.

 The PDO indicators, however, were not fully adequate to measure the project's achievement. Several of
 them were output indicators in nature, such as "metropolitan areas with O-D surveys" and "transport plan
 completed". Others were not necessarily fully attributable to the project, such as "percentage of primary
 school students absent on low transitability days" and "number of appointments in in community health
 centers cancelled on low transitability days". The PDO indicators were also closely linked to the project
 activities. Therefore, once certain project activities were changed, the indicators were no longer
 appropriate.

 The 2014 restructuring replaced the 12 PDO indicators with five new ones, two for subobjective 2, and one
 for the other subobjectives. It also changed most of the intermediate outcomes or targets. The 2017 AF and
 restructuring added two additional PDO and one intermediate indicators to improve results measurement
 for two activities introduced with the 2014 restructuring.

 The revised indicators had shortcomings. Although all indicators had baselines and targets, two targets
 were largely overachieved. This might be an indication that the targets were not sufficiently ambitious.
 Several other targets were obviously conservative, such as the ones measuring the number of planning
 instruments produced and the evidence of the MTA performance. The target for the increase in public
 transport passengers on the La Matanza BRT corridor, on the other hand, was highly ambitious compared
 to international standards for modal shift.

 In addition, many of these baselines and targets were in percentage terms only. At least for some of them,
 to specify also the absolute numbers, such as travel time in minutes or the public transport users in
 numbers, would have been useful, including to judge their level of ambition. The PPs do also not include a
 definition of the generalized cost of travel nor a description of the methodologies to measure




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



 results. Several of the revised PDO indicators remained output indicators in nature. They also remained
 closely linked to project activities.

 Finally, the measurement of certain subobjectives would have benefited from additional PDO indicators,
 such as to improve the quality and performance of urban transport infrastructure and/or services in medium
 size metropolitan areas, which was only captured through the generalized cost of travel on the BRT
 corridor in two cities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project implementation unit's dependence on data from the participating cities in the project caused
  difficulties in M&E implementation, particularly because the cities originally selected were modified during
  implementation (ICR, para 80). According to the Bank task team, these difficulties were caused
  by delays in signing the agreements between the project implementation unit and the cities. These
  agreements set out the obligations of the latter, including on M&E. It was also difficult to have cities
  comply with these agreements in terms of data provision, especially once the civil works were completed
  and their incentives gone. To make things worse, during project implementation there were relationship
  frictions between the national government, i.e. the borrower, and the cities.

  For the four biggest project interventions, the project had adequate baseline and follow-up surveys to
  measure the project indicators (ICR, para 81). Indeed, although the cities did not provide the monitoring
  data in the agreed form and on time, they provided the information on the impact of the main project
  works towards project end.

  Finally, the Bank task team pointed out that in Santa Fe the project tried to measure the impact of the
  BRT system on road safety, commercial activities, and other aspects. The project created the baseline
  with the indicators, but Santa Fe did not measure results. The project carried out a similar exercise for the
  La Matanza BRT.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR, para 82, mentions the project’s M&E system was not designed and implemented to inform and
  improve project implementation, hence it was not useful as feedback mechanism. The Bank task team
  also mentioned that cities did not care about project data, and after measuring the initial travel time
  savings, they did not see the utility to measure it each year.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



  The project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. It was expected to
  have positive environmental impacts in the long run, such as reduced congestion and emissions and
  improved road safety. The civil works were expected to have short-term negative impacts, which were
  considered mitigatable (PAD, para 98). No involuntary resettlements were expected, except for the
  investments in Mendoza (PAD, para 102). The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental
  Assessment OP/BP4.01, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, and Involuntary Resettlement
  OP/BP4.12.

  The project implementation unit prepared an environmental and social management plan, which included
  a resettlement policy framework. The cities, where the civil works took place, prepared environmental and
  social impact studies and abbreviated resettlement plans, as needed (ICR, paras 84 and 85).

  The ICR does not report any details regarding the environmental performance of the project. It only
  mentions that the "project maintained a satisfactory rating in the application of environmental and social
  safeguards, undertaking all required public consultations and adequately handling complaints from affected
  stakeholders as they arose (ICR, para 88)." The environmental performance of the project in the last four
  implementation status reports (ISRs) was rated satisfactory. In the previous two ISRs, it was rated
  moderately satisfactory. The ICR, para 88, mentions that the establishment of a solid social and
  environmental capacity within the Secretary of Transport Works was an institutional strengthening outcomes
  facilitated by the project.

  In terms of social safeguards, in the case of the Matanza BRT, 11 informal vendors were adequately
  resettled. The process lasted over three years and resulted in better working conditions for most vendors.
  According to the last monitoring report (2018), six vendors were using the new commercial posts provided
  by the project, two intended to occupy their posts in the short run, one continued to use the original post,
  one moved to another zone, and one passed away. The three vacant commercial posts were given to other
  vendors from the same area (ICR, para 86).

  For the Saenz transfer station, the project identified four informal vendors to be affected by the civil works,
  but two of them disappeared before the start of the works. The remaining two vendors were relocated, also
  resulting in better conditions, particularly given the increased movement of passengers at the station. A
  temporary resettlement plan was implemented in a satisfactory manner. The last monitoring report (2019)
  indicated that the income of these vendors was not affected at any point during the process. The vendors
  were offered relevant training, which was extended to other vendors in the area. The project implementation
  unit's social team implement a communication plan to accompany the civil works at the Saenz transfer
  station given their temporary impact on the circulation of passengers (ICR, para 87). The involuntary
  resettlement compliance was rated moderately satisfactory in the last six ISRs.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project had several fiduciary issues. According to the ICR (para 89), intellectual property rights and
  financial management assessments in 2012 revealed (i) contracts of staff working for the project pending
  signature by the Minister for two years, hence the respective expenditures were considered
  ineligible, (ii) suspected case of collusion in a survey contracts, where the price more than doubled
  compared to the cost estimate, (iii) concerns related to ongoing works in five train stations, and (iv)
  systematic deficiencies in cost estimates, among others. The project also had instances of double billing

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



   for office furniture, leading to disbursements exceeding the overall cost of the contract (ICR, para 90). In
   addition, there were irregularities in the supervision contract of the fare integration system SUBE, which led
   to an INT case ending in sanctions (ICR, para 91).

   In response to the allegations of these irregularities, the Bank conducted a forensic audit, which covered all
   Bank projects implemented by the same project implementation unit. This audit confirmed irregularities and
   possible double billing for about US$7 million, but only US$281,000 were related to this project. The
   project implementation unit staff was changed in 2012. The new staff prepared and implemented a
   comprehensive fiduciary action plan. As a result, their performance improved significantly (ICR, paras 92 to
   94). Financial management and procurement were rated satisfactory in the last five ISRs.

   The Bank task team pointed out that these fiduciary issues related to the first part of the project
   implementation period. From 2013 onwards, the project's fiduciary performance hugely improved, with the
   application of strict procedures and staff training. The project provided timely interim financial reports and
   financial audit reports. The latter had unqualified opinions and very little observation. In 2015, as reported,
   the fiduciary performance improved.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project was able to obtain trust fund resources to carry out complementary studies and technical
   assistance, which helped, among others, (i) foster the Ministry of Transport Planning Secretary's digital
   data capacity, by supporting methods for data recollection through cell phones to better understand travel
   patterns, including of non-motorized transport, (ii) enhanced road safety under the La Matanza BRT, and
   (iii) introduced interest for transit-oriented development in Argentina (ICR, paras 67 to 69).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  Shortcoming in M&E design,
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Modest
                                                                                  implementation, and use
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following have mostly been derived and summarized from the ICR, with minor additions by IEG:


                                                                                                     Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



Scattered small interventions have higher transaction costs than focused major
investments. The original project design envisaged many small, geographically scattered
interventions in different cities. These interventions had higher transaction costs to implement,
were more difficult to supervise, and had limited impact. For instance, the works to improve the
access conditions around 25 train stations in AMBA demanded lots of discussions, required a large
supervision effort, and had limited impact compared to the La Matanza BRT and the Saenz transfer
station. At least in Argentina's political and economic context, it seems that concentrating efforts on
larger, emblematic projects is a better strategy in rallying support and political buy-in for a project. It
is also more efficient in reducing Bank transaction costs in terms of procurement, safeguards, and
supervision tasks. This does not mean that mean that focused small interventions are not important.

For projects aimed at smaller cities, without previous Bank experience, addressing their
technical and capacity constraints upfront and reinforcing the project-agreed implementation
mechanisms might increase the likelihood of success and sustainability. Under this project,
some of the cities originally expected to participate in the project did not have a strong technical
expertise, so were not able to justify the project benefits and provide the necessary data. They had
also no experience with World Bank procedures. Therefore, it was very difficult to move their
projects forward. Therefore, project preparation for these cities has to be comprehensive, with
detailed agreements on details and capacity strengthening in advance.

Contract flexibility, transparency, and overall good governance is central to
project implementation. Under this project, the flexibility of the Bank task team to adapt to a
changing and challenging implementation context was critical to promptly take measures to turn
around a problem project with deficiencies in its original design and deliver the expected
development outcomes. The measures taken to respond to fiduciary irregularities, including the
forensic audit and fiduciary action plan, significantly improved fiduciary performance in the
later years of project implementation.

The introduction of new BRT projects needs to be adapted to the context of the city, the
institutional capacity of the local government, and the bus operators' business model. The
discussions on the main characteristics of this type of transit infrastructure and the alternatives to
structure the service provision led to a BRT design, which differs from the standards set by the
Transmilenio BRT systems in Bogota, Mexico, and Brazil. The Argentine BRT model, (i) has low-
floor doors on the right side, which provides more flexibility and integration with the rest of the bus
system outside the BRT corridor, (ii) has longer and open stations, different from the closed station
with ticket pre-payment typical in Bogota, which provide a perception of enhanced safety to
passengers and lower maintenance costs, and (iii) rationalizes the existing bus services, but does
not require the restructuring of the operators' business model, hence making continuity easier.
Although this model foregoes some efficiency gains in service provision, (i) it had a huge success
with municipalities with limited capacity and resources to maintain and operate a more complex
system, (ii) had the support of bus operators that benefited from the reduction of vehicle
operating costs, and (iii) was welcomed by users for the travel time and safety improvements.
Therefore, the Argentine BRT model supported by the project might be a valid model for many cities
worldwide exploring alternatives for sustainable mass transit infrastructure.

The following is an additional lesson added by IEG:




                                                                                                        Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



Using PDO indicators closely linked to project activities reduces the flexibility to change
project activities and makes results measuring difficult. Under the original project design, many
PDO indicators were closely linked to specific project activities, such as "Availability of public bus
service along the Papagayo corridor in Mendoza" to measure the subobjective of improved quality
and performance of urban transport infrastructure and/or services. Therefore, when several project
activities were replaced, such as in this case to improvements in the Papagayo corridor, the whole
results framework had to be changed. A more appropriate indicator could have been one that
measured improved quality aspects of public transport in general.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is thoroughly done. It is longer than the recommended 15 pages, but this is largely justified due to the
project complexity, duration, and multiple changes. The ICR includes very useful details and summary tables
with the project scope and indicators changes.

On page 6, the ICR presents the theory of change, reconstructed based on the information in the
PAD. The theory of change shows the project activities, outputs, subobjectives, program PDO, and long-term
outcomes in respective columns. The long-term outcomes correspond to the Country Partnership
Strategy priorities. It also lists the critical assumptions. The theory of change does not include the expected
outcomes captured by the PDO indicators, which nearly completely changed during project implementation.

In terms of outcome analysis, the ICR clearly presents the relevance of objectives. The assessment of the
achievement of the PDO is concise but focuses too much on reporting of outputs also because, as previously
seen, many so-called PDO indicators were output indicators in nature. This assessment would have benefited
from additional evidence on the achievement of the PDO not captured through indicators to make a more
convincing case. The Bank task team filled the gaps to adequately assess the project outcomes.

The ex-post cost benefit analysis is comprehensive, includes the necessary methodological information, and
appears to be thoroughly done from a technical point of view. For instance, the value of time of public transport
uses, for which no public information existed, was captured through an analysis of average salaries correlated
to average GDP per capita. However, the reporting on the results of the ex-ante cost benefit analyses under the
project was incomplete. It did also not include an ex-post cost benefit analysis for the Saenz transfer station
because of lack of data.

The ICR includes many well thought-through lessons, which are based on the project experience.

In terms of other minor shortcomings, the ICR does not identify any specific risk to development outcomes, but
explains in general terms that this risk was limited. It does also no report on actual total project costs but only
on the project costs financed by the Bank.



                                                                                                      Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Metropolitan Areas Urban Transport (P095485)



On balance, given its laudable aspects and shortcomings, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 24 of 24
