     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022202

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146244                                     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83450                                  31-Dec-2019                                        299,948,105.82

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Apr-2014                                 31-Dec-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         300,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 9) and the Project Appraisal Document (page 8), the project
   development objective of the Arab Republic of Egypt Promoting Innovation for Inclusive Financial Access
   Project was "to expand access to finance for micro- and small enterprises using innovative financing
   mechanisms, with a special focus on youth and women as well as under-served regions."




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had a single component.

   Line of Credit to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development Agency (MSMEDA) to
   Finance Micro- and Small Enterprises (MSEs) (US$300 million estimated at appraisal, and US$300
   million was disbursed) supported the establishment and operation of a line of credit by the MSMEDA,
   formerly Social Fund for Development (SFD), for the purpose of providing financing to participating financial
   institutions (banks, non-government organizations, microfinance institutions, financial leasing companies,
   factoring companies, and venture capital firms) for MSEs. The MSMEDA, acting as the project
   implementing entity, would provide financing to participating financial institutions under the terms of
   participation agreements and the participating financial institutions would provide sub-financing, in the form
   of loans or equity or convertible debt, to MSEs for sub-projects under the terms of sub-financing
   agreements with the MSEs.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The estimated and actual cost of the project was US$300 million.

   Project Financing. The project was financed with a loan in the amount of US$300 million from the
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to the Arab Republic of Egypt. The whole amount
   was disbursed

   Borrower Contribution. There was no financial contribution to the project from the borrower.

   Dates. The project was approved on April 1, 2014, became effective on July 22, 2014, and closed as
   scheduled on December 31, 2019.

   Restructuring. The project was restructured on October 29, 2017, with US$270.1 million disbursed (90
   percent of the original financing), to change the project implementing entity to the MSMEDA, established
   under Prime Ministerial Decree No. 947 of 2017, from the SFD, established under Presidential Decree No.
   40 of 1991. Prime Ministerial Decree No. 947 dissolved the SFD and created the MSMEDA as its
   replacement.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



The project objectives aimed to address a market failure in the Egyptian economy --- the limited access
to finance for MSEs, especially for women-led and youth-led MSEs and MSEs in under-served regions of
the country.

      MSEs were vital contributors to overall economic development in Egypt, accounting for more than
       98 percent of all enterprises, more than 85 percent of employment in the non-agriculture private
       sector, and 40 percent of total employment in 2013.
      In an economy where financial intermediation remained low (private sector credit dropped from 36
       percent of GDP in 2009 to 28 percent in 2014), MSEs suffered disproportionately --- only 11 percent
       of micro enterprises and 17 percent of small enterprises had bank loans, compared to 38 percent of
       large enterprises, according to the Egypt Investment Climate Assessment Update of 2012. Access
       to non-bank finance remained even more limited --- only 2.5 percent of MSEs tapped non-bank
       finance.
      Banks were reluctant to lend to MSEs; the value of collateral required for a loan was 88 percent of
       the loan size for small enterprises. Among non-banks, micro finance institutions held only 8 percent
       of the potential micro finance market, financial leasing and factoring companies were under-
       developed and provided limited services to MSEs, and venture capital companies and loan investors
       had a limited presence in the country.
      Women entrepreneurs, constrained by limited control over their assets (due to guardianship rules),
       faced more challenges with access to finance than men, being required to post higher collateral for
       loans than men entrepreneurs. Disparities with access to finance also persisted between and within
       regions of the country. Among governorates, Upper Egypt ranked lowest in access to
       finance. Among urban metro regions, Port Said and Suez accounted for barely three percent of
       total financing while Cairo and Alexandria combined for 30 percent.

The project objective to expand access to finance for MSEs was consistent with the development priorities
of Egypt at appraisal and at completion.

      After three years of prolonged political transition and slow economic growth following the Arab
       Spring and the fall of the Mubarak government in 2011, Egypt moved to advance its economic plan
       centered on structural reform and investment promotion to raise growth and create jobs, and fiscal
       adjustment to bring the budget deficit and public debt under control. According to the International
       Monetary Fund (IMF) Staff Report on the Arab Republic of Egypt 2014 Article IV Consultation,
       strategies to restore the country's economic growth prospects centered on: (a) improving the
       business climate, including through an ambitious overhaul of the regulatory framework; (b)
       developing the financial sector, by increasing access to finance for SMEs, and encouraging higher
       investment; and (c) strengthening the social safety net to address poverty and social needs. Growth
       could be made inclusive and sustainable by integrating women and the youth in the economy and
       by increasing and improving the quality of social spending. The project objectives were consistent
       with the second and third of these strategies.
      Egypt Vision 2030 articulates a long-term strategy focused on "three main areas": (a) restoring
       macroeconomic stability; (b) improving public sector delivery; and (c) fostering social justice and
       inclusion. The project objectives are consistent with the first strategy which vests the private sector
       with the leading role in restoring growth and providing sustainable job creation. The priorities
       include: supporting existing establishments and investors; improving access to markets; and
       improving the business environment through --- legislative reforms, focusing in particular on
       protecting investors; simplifying permits and licensing, easing access to land and construction


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



                                        permits issuance; simplifying liquidation process; improving regulatory governance, and "improving
                                        access of micro and SMEs to finance, including microfinance."

               The project objective was also aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Egypt at appraisal and at
               completion.

                                       The Interim Strategy Note for the Arab Republic of Egypt 2012-2013 (ISN) focused Bank Group
                                        support on three pillars: (a) improving economic management through control of the fiscal deficit and
                                        initiating reforms to enhance transparency in government operations; (b) job creation, through direct
                                        emergency lending and initiating steps to improve the environment for private sector led growth and
                                        job creation; and (c) fostering inclusion, which involves ensuring broader access by disadvantaged
                                        segments of the population --- women, youth, the poor, and lagging geographical regions --- to
                                        infrastructure, finance, and social services, and enhancing citizen and community participation in the
                                        design, implementation, and monitoring of government operations. The project objective was
                                        aligned with Strategic Objective 2.2 under the ISN Pillar 2 to "broaden access to credit, in particular
                                        for micro, small, and medium enterprises, especially for women and the youth" and to "enhance
                                        access to finance for under-served and unserved segments of the economy", as well as with
                                        Strategic Objective 3.6 under ISN Pillar 3 to "improve women's access to finance."
                                       The Country Partnership Framework for the Arab Republic of Egypt for the Period FY2015-
                                        2019 (CPF) committed Bank Group support to Egypt's development strategy focused on three
                                        pillars: (a) improving governance; (b) improving opportunities to private sector job creation; and (c)
                                        advancing social inclusion. The project objective was aligned with the Objective 2.5 under CPF
                                        Pillar 2 to "enhance access to finance for medium, small-scale, and micro-enterprises." Having
                                        selected Egypt as a priority country for "achieving universal access by 2020", the Bank Group
                                        committed its support "to further improve financial inclusion in Egypt particularly in under-served
                                        areas", including through the development of SME-specific instruments for banks to help increase
                                        their SME outreach using long-term loans and risk-sharing facilities.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To expand access to finance for micro- and small enterprises using innovative financing mechanisms, with a
                             special focus on youth and women as well as under-served regions.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Creating innovative financing mechanisms beyond the basic bank loan would help a wide
                             range of financial institutions, including banks, microfinance institutions, financial leasing companies,


                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



and venture capital companies to better meet the financing needs of MSEs. The provision of a line of credit
to the MSMEDA, acting as the apex institution, would help support the financial intermediation process,
allowing the financial institutions to service segments of the MSE market that are perceived as risky, including
women-owned MSEs, youth-owned MSEs, and MSEs in under-served regions of the country.

Outputs. The project achieved all nine output targets, exceeding seven of these targets.

      Four financial leasing companies participated in the project, exceeding the target of three financial
         leasing companies.
        One venture capital company and angel investor participated in the project, exactly meeting the target.
        The portfolio at risk for participating lenders, 90 days, stayed under five percent, meeting the target.
        The volume of microfinancing from the line of credit to participating financial institutions reached
         Egyptian pound (LE) 1,870 million by the project closing date, exceeding the target of LE 630 million.
        The number of micro enterprise clients reached 167,677, exceeding the target of 126,000 micro
         enterprise clients.
        The volume of small financing from the line of credit to participating financial institutions reached
         LE 1,963 million by the project closing date, exceeding the target of LE 1,470 million.
        The number of small enterprise clients reached 6,911, exceeding the target of 4,900 small enterprise
         clients.
        The number of women served through the line of credit reached 73,856, exceeding the target for the
         line of credit to serve 38,500 women.
        The number of person-days of employment created reached 714,002,400, exceeding the target to
         create 23,688,000 person-days of employment.

Outcomes. The project achieved all five outcome targets, exceeding four of these targets.

      The number of direct project beneficiaries was 174,488, exceeding the target of 103,900.
      The outstanding MSE portfolio of the financial institutions participating in the project increased from LE
         1.886 billion in the baseline to LE 35 billion by end-June 2019, exceeding the target that the MSED
         portfolio reach LE 15.529 billion by the project closing date.
        The participating financial institutions offered three innovative financial products to MSEs, exactly
         meeting the target.
        The percentage of women-owned businesses among the direct project beneficiaries served by the line
         of credit reached 42 percent by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 30 percent.
        The percentage of youth-owned businesses among the direct project beneficiaries served by the line
         of credit reached 44 percent by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 40 percent.
        There was no results indicator or results target defined for the focus on MSEs in lagging regions of the
         country, but the ICR reported on this anyway, quoting data from the Implementation Status and
         Results Reports filed by the Bank supervision missions. The percentage of businesses operating in
         lagging regions of the country (principally, Upper Egypt and the Sinai) among the direct project
         beneficiaries served by the line of credit reached 40 percent by the project closing date.



Rating


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project met all output and outcome targets for the objective to expand access to finance for micro- and
                            small enterprises using innovative financing mechanisms, with a special focus on women and the youth as
                            well as on under-served regions of the country. Eleven banks, four microfinance institutions, four financial
                            leasing companies (one more than the target), and one venture capital company (as targeted) participated as
                            financial intermediaries in the line of credit, with the MSMEDA acting as the apex institution. Three new
                            financial products for SMEs were introduced (as targeted) --- the financial lease, factoring, and venture capital
                            investment. The volume of micro enterprise financing from the line of credit was three times the target and
                            served 40,000 more micro enterprises than planned. The volume of small enterprise financing from the line
                            of credit was 1.3 times the target and served 2,000 more small enterprises than planned. The outstanding
                            portfolio of all participating financial intermediaries grew from LE 1.9 billion in the baseline to LE 35 billion,
                            more than twice the target of LE15.5 billion; the number of direct project beneficiaries reached more than
                            174,000, exceeding the target by over 70,000; and the project generated an estimated 71.4 million-days of
                            employment, more than thrice the target. Around 42 percent of project beneficiaries were women-owned
                            SMEs, more than the target 30 percent; 44 percent were youth-owned SMEs, more than the target 40
                            percent; and 40 percent were SMEs in under-served regions of the country.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document and the ICR did not conduct a formal economic
   analyses and compute economic rates of return for the project. Nevertheless, both the Project Appraisal
   Document and the ICR argued that there were potentially substantial economic benefits from the proposal to
   provide lines of credit to Egypt's financial institutions for on-lending to MSEs.

                               According to the Project Appraisal Document, MSE sub-projects that would be financed by the line of
                                credit to the MSMEDA were as yet unidentified at the appraisal stage. The Project Appraisal
                                Document (pages 6-7) therefore argued that the project would yield various economic benefits: (a)
                                provide liquidity to a significant sector of the economy that was deprived of adequate financing; (b)
                                encourage the MSMEDA to enhance access to finance to start-ups; (c) support the evolution of
                                innovative financing tools and mechanisms, including financial leasing, factoring, and venture capital
                                financing; (d) overall, benefit some 125,000 micro-enterprises, 5,000 small enterprises, and 100,000
                                individuals, including 35,000 women, with MSE financing.
                               According to the ICR, the data did not allow for a calculation of the economic and financial return of the
                                project. Like at appraisal, the ICR (pages 48-49) argued that the project: (a) decreased the cost and risk


                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



       of credit to MSEs; (b) enabled MSEs to improve their competitiveness and increase employment
       and incomes; (c) improved governance, with the MSEs gaining access to finance using transparent
       selection criteria; and (d) decreased informality in private business.

Operational Efficiency. The operational efficiency of the project was high.

      Participation by financial institutions in the project was robust. A total 33 participation agreements were
       signed with financial intermediaries for LE 2.593 billion, representing a hundred percent of the project
       value. The total amount disbursed to these financial institutions was LE 2.578 billion, representing 98
       percent of the project value.
      The participating financial institutions provided LE 2.836 billion in financing to beneficiaries, including in
       the form of revolving credit, amounting to 147 percent of the project value, for some 174,588 sub-
       projects.
      When the project was declared effective in July 2014, some 69 percent of the project funds
       were disbursed to the MSMEDA. Within the first year of project implementation, the MSMEDA had
       signed 12 participation agreements with financial institutions for LE 1.57 billion. Within the second year
       of project implementation, about 90 percent of the project funds had been disbursed to the MSMEDA.
      The project loan was fully disbursed, and the project closed as scheduled in December 2019, four years
       and eight months after Board approval.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was highly relevant to addressing a market failure in the Egyptian economy, namely the
limited access to finance for MSEs, especially women-led and youth-led MSEs and MSEs in under-served
regions of the country, and was consistent with and aligned to both the development priorities of the government
and the strategy of the Bank Group in the country. The efficacy of the project was substantial, with the MSE line
of credit meeting all, if not exceeding most, output and outcome targets set for the number of participating
financial intermediaries, the number of innovative SME financial products, the volume of financing for, and the
number of micro and small enterprises served, and the focus on women-owned and youth-owned MSEs and

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



MSEs in the under-served regions of the country. While the economic efficiency of the project was not
formally analyzed, the operational efficiency of the project was well evident in the high disbursement rate, the
speed of disbursement, leveraging financial contributions from financial institutions for loans to beneficiaries,
and the completion of the project on schedule.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcome of this operation appear to be moderate.

Political Risk. Government commitment to access to finance objectives and to MSE lending is historically
strong, beginning with the comprehensive Financial Sector Reform Program launched in the early 2000s and
supported by the Bank Group with development policy loans valued at around US$1.5 billion. Other
evidence of commitment include the launch of the Central Bank of Egypt SME Initiative in 2016, the ready
passage of the Financial Leasing and Factoring Law in 2018, and the enactment of the SME Law in
2020. The efforts by the government to expand access to finance have been actively supported by
international development organizations, including the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development, the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, the Islamic
Development Bank, the United Arab Emirates Khalifa Fund for Development, and the Agence Française de
Développement, further reinforcing the government's commitment to the project objective.

Macroeconomic Risk. Egypt had a strong track record of successfully completing its economic reform
program supported by the IMF under the Extended Fund Facility in 2016-2019. Egypt posted strong growth,
falling unemployment, moderate inflation, a buildup of strong reserve buffers, and a significant reduction in
public debt over the period. The authorities were looking to broaden and deepen structural reforms begun
under the Extended Fund Facility before the COVID-19 pandemic struck. Growth is expected to slow
considerably in 2020/21 as tourism is at a standstill and domestic activity is expected to significantly
slow. The external accounts are expected to deteriorate from portfolio outflows and the shock to tourism and
remittances, resulting in an urgent balance of payments need.

COVID-19 Crisis Risk. The government responded to the crisis with a comprehensive package that
supported health care needs, the economy, and the most affected individuals and sectors; the Central Bank
of Egypt also took several actions to support economic activity and borrowers. The Bank approved US$50
million under the Fast-Track COVID-19 Facility in May 2020 to strengthen the response to the pandemic .
Separately, the IMF approved the government's request for a purchase of SDR 2.037 billion (US$2.772
billion) under the Rapid Financing Instrument in May 2020 to help address balance of payments financing
needs arising from the COVID-19 crisis. Additionally, the IMF approved a 12-month Standby Arrangement
for Egypt in June 2020 for SDR 3.76 billion (US$5.2 billion equivalent, with US$2 billion available for
immediate disbursement).

Mitigation Measures from a Follow-on Project. The risks to the sustainability of the development outcome of
this project are also expected to be partly mitigated through the Catalyzing Entrepreneurship for Job Creation
Project, which became effective in January 2020. The new project aims to foster job creation and improve


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



economic opportunities for targeted beneficiaries and consists of financial support to MSMEs (through a line
of credit to the MSMEDA), risk capital for innovative start-ups and high-growth SMEs, and business and
capacity development for financial institutions, risk-capital intermediaries, and MSMEs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was informed by analytical work produced by the Bank and other authors on
  MSEs and MSE finance in Egypt, including the Egyptian Private Enterprises in the Aftermath of the
  Revolution: An Investment Climate Assessment. (2012), The Future of Micro and Small Projects in
  Egypt (2012), and The Role of Micro and Small Enterprises in Egypt’s Economic Transition (2013). The
  design of the project was also informed by previous and ongoing Bank Group projects in Egypt on MSE
  finance, including the Egypt Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprises Project (2010-
  15), the International Finance Corporation's Middle East and North America MSME Technical Assistance
  Facility, and the Egypt Inclusive Regulations for Microfinance Project (2014-21).

  The project was planned with sufficient operational detail. The Project Appraisal Document (pages 38-
  47) lists: (a) the eligibility criteria for non-government organizations and microfinance institutions engaged
  in retail lending to MSEs; (b) the terms and conditions of participation agreements between the
  MSMEDA and non-government organizations and microfinance institutions; (c) the eligibility criteria for
  banks; (d) the terms and conditions of participation agreements between the MSMEDA and banks; (e)
  the eligibility criteria for the selection of venture capital companies; (f) the terms and conditions of
  participation agreements between the MSMEDA and venture capital companies; (g) the eligibility criteria
  for the selection of financial leasing companies; and (g) the terms and conditions of participation
  agreements between the MSMEDA and financial leasing companies.

  According to the ICR (page 31), the Bank advised the MSMEDA at appraisal to consult extensively with
  stakeholders of the project, including private and state-owned banks, non-government organizations,
  microfinance institutions, leasing companies, and venture capital companies on the design of the line of
  credit. In response, the MSMEDA organized roundtable discussions in October 2013 (six months before
  the Board approval of the project) with various stakeholders, including local financial institutions and
  many international development organizations.

  The Bank assessed the operational risks to the project, all of which it considered moderate, and
  proposed risk mitigation measures. To address institutional capacity risks at banks, microfinance
  institutions, and leasing companies, the Bank emphasized that the MSMEDA would weigh the
  institutional capacity of eligible lenders in selecting financial institutions to participate in the line of
  credit. To address the risk that the credit line might not necessarily sustain improvements in access to
  finance given deficiencies in credit information, the Bank stated that MSMEDA would focus on
  institutions capable of operating efficiently on a large scale and with the capacity to address information
  problems.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank employed qualified task team leaders for the project. The leadership changed twice, but the
 transition was always smooth, according to the ICR (page 28). In both cases, the replacement was drawn
 from the ranks of staff who had previously worked on a predecessor Bank project.

 The Bank fielded supervision teams staffed by experts from headquarters and from the country office and
 by specialists in the financial sector as well as in environmental safeguards, social safeguards,
 procurement, and financial management. A labor economist reviewed the methodology used to measure
 the number of jobs created by the project. The methodology had been developed separately, with the
 assistance of the African Development Bank, and was found to be acceptable.

 The Bank filed nine Implementation Status and Results Reports over the two-and-half-year duration of the
 project, or about three reports a year, more than the annual average of two reports for Bank investment
 financing projects. The Bank also filed two Aide Memoires, the first at the time of the mid-term review in
 May 2015 and the second covering the missions of December 2015 and January 2016. According to the
 ICR (page 28), reporting by the Bank through the ISRs and Aide Memoires was of high quality, "reflecting
 all issues and developments during the different phases of implementation."

 The Bank responded appropriately to the dissolution of the SFD in 2017 and the creation of the MSMEDA
 as the replacement agency. Following the terms of the Loan Agreement, the Bank placed disbursements
 on hold, conducted the necessary due diligence, and restructured the project. Following the resolution of
 the pertinent legal issues (the MSMEDA used the old SFD bylaws to reinstall all previous operational and
 administrative procedures governing the operation), the Bank re-authorized the disbursement of project
 funds.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project had a well-defined M&E plan.

       Following the theory of change, the Project Appraisal Document (page 20) defined nine output
        indicators and five outcome indicators to evidence the achievement of the project objectives. The

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



        indicators were well-defined and measurable, specified cumulative targets over five years, identified
        data sources, and assigned data collection and reporting responsibilities to specific agencies. Most
        data would be generated from the day-to-day business operations of the participating financial
        intermediaries. Additional data would be drawn from an impact evaluation and from follow-up
        surveys.
       However, the results framework plan lacked a results indicator for the expansion of access to
        finance for MSEs in under-served regions of the country. Moreover, the results indicator for
        women-owned MSEs was stated in three different versions in the Project Appraisal Document
        (page 20).
       According to the Loan Agreement (page 8), the MSMEDA, the implementing agency for the project
        and the apex institution for the line of credit, would monitor and evaluate the progress of the project
        and prepare project reports in accordance with the International Bank for Reconstruction and
        Development General Conditions for Loans of 2012.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (pages 29-30), the M&E design was implemented according to plan.

        The MSMEDA created an M&E unit with the responsibility of collecting key data from participating
         financial institutions, which were required, under the terms of their contracts with the MSMEDA to
         submit operational reports covering disbursements from the line of credit to the MSEs in addition
         to the results framework indicators and other M&E data requirements detailed in the Project
         Operations Manual.
        The MSMEDA produced the quarterly monitoring reports that were submitted to the Bank,
         following the terms of the Loan Agreement.
        While the M&E design lacked an indicator on MSE financing in under-served regions of the
         country, the MSMEDA was able to provide data to the Bank, which the Bank reported in
         Implementation Status and Results Reports filed over the duration of the project. The ICR (pages
         52-57) cites these data in Annex 6.1 - Summary of Implementation Status and Outputs.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 27), the M&E data were used to "evaluate performance, guide
  implementation, and enable the effective management of the project." The MSMEDA M&E unit was also
  cited for being "responsive and cooperative" when the Bank conducted a due diligence of the project
  ahead of the project restructuring in October 2017.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)



  Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment Category "FI"
  (Financial Intermediation) at appraisal and was governed by the environmental safeguards provisions of the
  Bank's OP/BP 8.30 – Financial Intermediary Lending. The Bank reviewed and cleared an Environmental
  and Social Management Framework for the project, which was disclosed and posted at the Bank's InfoShop
  and at the MSMEDA's website in December 2013. Because sub-loans to MSEs were small- to medium-
  sized, it was expected that environmental risks --- the risks of using the sub-loans for activities detrimental
  to the environment --- would not be significant and that any environmental impact would not be
  irreversible. The Environmental and Social Management Framework essentially used the Environmental
  Management Plan prepared by the MSMEDA in 2009 for the Egypt Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro
  and Small Enterprises Project, following an assessment of national environmental laws and the institutional
  capacity of the MSMEDA to uphold environmental standards. According to the ICR (page 30), the project
  complied with all environmental safeguards policies during project implementation.

  Social Safeguards. The social impact of the project was expected to be positive. Investment in MSEs
  would lead to the creation of job opportunities and help raise incomes, diversify livelihoods, and reduce
  poverty. The project would offer opportunities to women entrepreneurs and youth entrepreneurs with poor
  access to finance. The Project Operations Manual, which detailed the principles, criteria, procedures, and
  processes for screening sub-projects, also provided for a grievance redress mechanism to ensure that: (a)
  women had equal opportunities as men in gaining access to finance, (b) any labor, health, or safety
  issue would be adequately addressed; (c) any sub-project which involved land acquisition or involuntary
  resettlement would not be eligible for financing; and (d) any sub-project which affected indigenous people’s
  communities or groups would not be eligible for financing. According to the ICR (page 30), the project
  complied with all social safeguards policies during project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: The Loan Agreement (page 8) required that the procurement of goods under sub-financing
  and for sub-projects financed by the project follow the Project Operations Manual, which itself must follow
  the Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services for IBRD Loans and IDA
  Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers of 2011. The ICR (page 30) did not raise any fiduciary
  compliance issues related to procurement during project implementation.

  Financial Management: The Loan Agreement (page 8) required the government to maintain a financial
  management system following the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development General
  Conditions for Loans of 2012, including by preparing and submitting to the Bank quarterly interim financial
  reports and having the annual financial statements audited. The ICR did not raise any issues with financial
  management during project implementation. According to the ICR (pages 26-27): (a) the MSMEDA's
  Accounting Financial Department diligently performed the project financial management functions
  (including flow of funds, cash management, accounting, and reporting); (b) the MSMEDA's Internal Audit
  Department effectively evaluated all financial intermediaries participating in the project, with the
  department's staff in its regional offices performing the detailed assessments; and (c) the government hired
  an independent external auditor, whose work was considered satisfactory, based on the Bank's financial
  management standards.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The first two lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 34-35), with some adaptation; the third is
offered by this ICR Review.

Technical assistance is especially valuable in SME finance projects, where the focus is on
financial innovation and non-bank financial institutions. This project benefitted from the
provision of technical assistance from the Bank's and the International Finance Corporation's Middle
East and North America MSME Technical Assistance Facility as well as from "South-South"
collaboration with India (the Small Industries Development Bank) and Malaysia (the MSE
Corporation Malaysia, among others). The government enacted Law No. 176 in 2018 regulating
financial leasing and factoring activities, replacing Law No. 95 of 1995 on financial leasing and
Ministerial Decree No. 446 of 2003 on factoring activities. The lesson is that availing of expert
advisory services, the MSMEDA established a specialized Investment and Venture Capital
Department in 2015 and launched the Venture Capital Program to pilot venture capital activities.

Having a capable and experienced apex institution for a line of credit operation facilitates the
expansion of the operation's scope and scale. The MSMEDA (then the SFD) was the
implementing agency for the Egypt Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprises
Project from 2010 to 2015. That project aimed to contribute to a sustainable improvement in
inclusive access to finance for MSEs on a commercial basis and provided US$300 million for MSE
financing by banks and microfinance institutions. This project expanded the scope of the
predecessor operation, embracing the participation of non-bank finance institutions, introducing
leasing, factoring, and venture capital products, and focusing on women-owned and youth-owned
MSEs and MSEs in lagging regions of the country. The lesson is that MSMEDA's previous
experience and record as an apex institution for an MSE line of credit, including its familiarity with
Bank standards and operations, helped with the design and implementation of this project.

This review suggest the following additional lesson.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)




Providing MSE financing on a commercial basis, even as the targets are the riskier segments
of the market, remains vital to keep MSE financing sustainable. This operation placed a
special focus on women-owned MSEs, youth-owned MSE, and MSEs in lagging regions of the
country. In lending programs with social impact dimensions, it remains vital that financing be
provided on a commercial basis and avoid introducing market distortions or promoting entitlement
programs. This project successfully used commercial banks, microfinance institutions, leasing and
factoring companies, and venture capital companies as financial intermediaries. The Bank also
prescribed the use of participation agreements, sub-financing agreements, and a Project Operations
Manual that emphasized sub-project appraisals as well as lending and investment decisions that
were "in accordance with market principles."



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a fairly good record of the project which is consistent with the guidelines. With this
operation aiming to build on the achievements of the Egypt Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small
Enterprises Project (2010-15), the comparison between the two projects in Annex 6.1 (pages 58-59) is highly
informative. The summary of the findings and conclusions of nine Implementation Results and Status Reports,
in Annex 6.1 (pages 52-57), is helpful to understanding the progress made during implementation and the links
from action to results. The report submitted by the MSMEDA, summarized in Annex 6.3 (pages 60-63) and
including the extensive dataset in Annex 6.4 (pages 64-76), is also very useful.

The ICR presents a candid assessment of the achievements of the project. All nine output targets and all five
outcome targets were met. But it also helped that: (a) the project had a simple design; (b) the operation stood
to gain from the experience and the lessons learned from the prior MSE finance project; (c) the operational
details of the project were well planned; (d) the line of credit used a capable and experienced apex institution;
(e) the innovations introduced benefitted from able technical assistance; (f) the implementing agency and the
Bank were diligent with project supervision (the Project Management Committee and a Bank representative
held weekly meetings). The lessons were generally useful.

The ICR had some minor deficiencies. It could have corrected for the repetitious statement of the target for
women-owned MSEs --- the "number of project beneficiaries, female beneficiaries (percentage)", "women-
owned businesses served by the line of credit (percentage)", and "number of women served through the line of
credit" were measures of the same result. Some terms were drawn from the Project Appraisal Document were
also left undefined in the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Promoting Innovation for Inclusive FA (P146244)




                                                                               Page 15 of 15
