     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022206

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P120636                                    GH-Land Administration - 2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ghana                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48700,IDA-63450,TF-14256               31-Mar-2016                                         49,296,023.50

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2011                                31-Jan-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            50,000,000.00                                    2,879,706.49

 Revised Commitment                             52,500,919.13                                    2,500,919.13

 Actual                                         49,296,023.50                                    2,500,919.13




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 John R. Eriksson             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7):

   "To support the Recipient's efforts to consolidate and strengthen land administration and
   management systems for efficient and transparent land service delivery".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



   This project was completed on October 19, 2018. Following a government request in February 2018 for
   Additional Financing (AF) for the project, which would have taken implementation over ten years (March 2011
   to March 2021), an interim Implementation Completion Report (ICR), was submitted to the Board on October
   19, 2018 , and the interim ICR was reviewed by the Implementation Evaluation Group (IEG)). The AF
   was approved on November 21, 2018. However, shortly thereafter, the government decided to address land
   sector issues with Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements. The government and the Bank could not
   reach satisfactory agreement on the modalities of the PPP within the AF in 2019. On January 20, 2020, the
   Bank withdrew the AF at government request, and the project closed on January 20, 2020. Since the original
   credit was disbursed and the AF not utilized, implementation ceased at the end of 2018. This IEG review of
   the project, includes the modifications that were made following the completion of the Interim ICR.

   Since Land Administration and Land management activities are closely interconnected, this review will not
   parse the objective into those two sub-objectives. Instead the review will group together key activities under
   three sub-objectives cited in the PDO; namely, .

   (i) consolidation and strengthening of land administration and management: (ii) efficiency: and (iii)
   transparency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Apr-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 9 - 11).

   1. Strengthening the Policy, legal and regulatory Framework for Land Administration. The estimated
   cost at appraisal was US$5.00 million. The actual cost was US$3.67 million. This component planned to
   finance technical assistance activities aimed at land law reforms, preparing land regulations, and
   establishing new land courts. Activities in this component included: (i) capacity building for land use
   planning bills and related legislative instruments: (ii) recruiting legal experts for
   consultations with stakeholders on legal reforms, dissemination of information on new laws, and training
   stakeholders: (iii) capacity building of the judiciary to review court processes and activities aimed at
   reducing the level of disputes that go through alternative dispute resolution programs: and, (iv) capacity
   building for reporting land cases, scanning and storage of files.

   2. Decentralization and Improving Business and Service Delivery Processes. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$23.2 million. The actual cost was US$32.1 million. This component planned at improving
   transparency and reducing the time and cost of delivering land services. Activities in this component

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



  included: (i) financing studies on customary land practices: (ii) establishing Customary Land Secretariats
  (CLS) for addressing statutory land rights: (iii) streamlining registration procedures through Information
  Technology (IT) systems and (iv) creating a digital version of backup records.

  3. Improved maps and spatial data for land administration. The estimated cost at appraisal was
  US$31.5 million. The actual cost was US$35.6 million.This component planned to develop spatial land
  transaction products. Activities in this component included: (i) developing policies for surveying,mapping
  and other spatial activities: (ii) preparing base maps: (iii) establishing a geodetic reference network: (iv) pilot
  boundary demarcation for customary and private land holders: (v) preparing land use plans: (vi)
  revaluing properties in selected district capitals: and (vii) a 'street addressing system' for urban
  management.

  4. Human Resource Development and Project management. The estimated cost at appraisal US$10.7
  million. The actual cost was US$12.7 million. This component planned at developing the human resources
  capacity and providing logistical support to land sector agencies, land owners and surveyors. Activities in
  this component included: (i) training key land sector agencies: (ii) capacity building of private and public
  service providers (surveyors, planners, real estate agents, tenant farmers and Non-Governmental
  Organizations (NGOs): and (iii) construction of a regional lands office in
  Kumasi: and (iii) project management support.

  There was an unallocated component of US$1.4 million at appraisal. The actual cost of this component was
  US$0.8 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$72.0 million. With the AF of $20.8 million, the revised
  estimate was US$92.8 million. The AF was not activated. The actual project cost was US$49.2 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$50.0 million. AF of US$35.0 million
  was approved on November 21, 2018. With this, the Bank financing for the project was US$85.0 million.
  The AF was not activated. The actual amount disbursed at closure was US$46.7 million. The difference
  between the appraisal amount of Bank financing and actual disbursements was due to exchange
  fluctuations between the US$ and Special Drawing Rights (SDR) during implementation..At appraisal, there
  was a Trust Fund (TF) financing from the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) estimated
  at US$15.0 million. This amount was reduced to US$ 2.8 million during implementation. At closure, the
  CIDA contribution was US$2.5 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$5.0 million at appraisal. There was
  no borrower contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 31, 2011, became effective on August 8, 2011, and was
  scheduled to close on March 31, 2016. An AF for $US 20.8 million was approved on November 21, 2018
  but was withdrawn by the Bank at government request on January 20, 2020. Given that the original credit
  was disbursed, and the AF not effective, implementation ceased at the end of 2018. The project formally
  closed on January 2020, once the withdrawal of the AF was communicated to the government by the Bank.




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



   Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

   The first restructuring on April 15, 2013 reallocated funds between categories in the wake of funding
   from the CIDA TF.

   The closing date for the TF was extended by an year from March 31, 2017, to February 28, 2018., through
   the second restructuring on February 28, 2018.

   The following major changes were made under the third project restructuring on April 15, 2015, following
   the Mid-Term Review (MTR) on June 2014 and approved by the Board on April 17, 2015.

         The results framework was modified.
         The credit proceeds were reallocated in the disbursement schedule.
         The closing date was extended by 12 months from March 31, 2017 to February 28, 2018.

   The fourth restructuring on February 26, 2018, extended the closing date by a year from February 28, 2018,
   to January 31, 2019, for preparing an AF agreement.

   The AF was approved on October 19, 2018 and with AF, the closing date was extended to December 31,
   2021. At government request, the AF was withdrawn on December 11, 2019, and the project formally
   closed on January 20, 2020 (although implementation ceased at the end of December 2018). .

   Split rating. Given that the AF was not activated and the PDOs remained unchanged. this review is not
   based on a split rating of objectives..




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Ghana's economy is agrarian, with 90% of its export earnings coming from land-related
activities. However, land sector issues and tenure insecurity hampered investments in land. In urban
areas, limited land supply, migration from rural areas and growing urbanization, contributed to growing
demand for land.

Sector context. The statutory land delivery system and the traditional system for administering land
customary tenure, were weak to deliver services commensurate with the growing demand for land. These
issues had led to: (i) high incidence of land-related disputes in urban areas; (ii) inadequate tenure
security which undermined land investments; (iii) depressed national and local government revenues; and
(iv) indeterminate boundaries of customarily held land. Hence creating, an efficient land
management system (defined as the process of managing the use of land) and a land administration
system (defined as the ways the rules of land tenure are applied), was important to the government
strategy.

(The PAD (paragraph 8) notes that there are four categories of land ownership in Ghana: (a) state land: (b)
vested lands held in trust by customary authorities: (c) private lands in customary areas that are held in


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



               customary tenure: and (d) private lands. Under current legislation, only land ownership under private
               lands required registration):

               Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were relevant to the government strategies articulated in the
               Second Generation Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, (GPRS -11), the Ghana Shared Growth
               Development Agenda (GSGDA) for 2010-2013, and the Food and Agriculture Development Policy
               (FASDEP). The GSGDA recognized the crucial importance of land management for attaining the objectives
               identified in the strategy. The FASDEP emphasized sustainable land management policies as essential for
               addressing agricultural productivity and environmental resilience.

               Bank strategy. The PDO was aligned with the Pillar One of the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for
               2008-2011: Improving private sector competitiveness, through among other things, improving access to
               land and secure property rights (CAS, pages 6 - 8). The PDO was consistent with the first pillar of the
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016: Improving economic institutions, through enhancing
               governance of natural resources and strengthening land administration. This CPS was extended to 2018,
               when the project effectively ceased operations.

               The Bank has executed several projects in Ghana, including the prior Land Administration Project,
               which laid the policy and institutional foundations, and piloted initiatives in land administration, that were to
               be scaled up in future operations. This project aimed at addressing the issues identified in the prior land
               administration project, such as, addressing land tenure insecurity issues, land administration issues due
               to undocumented ownership claims, weak land administration systems, lack of public outreach on land
               laws, updating maps, and addressing delays in courts through alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.

               Development Problem. Ultimately, the project and the objective sought to improve business development
               and economic growth by strengthening land administration and management systems. The project design
               and the PDO were however broad. While the development problems align with Ghana's CAS and CPS, the
               project design failed to include specific aspects of the development problem and lacked clarity on the
               intended outcomes. The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that the lessons from the prior Bank-financed project
               were either not available or not considered, and hence the project did not sufficiently capture the intended
               transformation required to address land issues. The relevance of objective is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             Consolidation and strengthening of land administration and management


                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)




Rationale
Theory of change. The links between the overall project activities, outputs and outcomes were
logical. Enacting legislation and legislative instruments for land use, developing spatial data for land
administration, and training stakeholders, were aimed at improving land administration. Technical
assistance aimed at improving adjudicating land cases, training judges, alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms and automating land courts, were aimed at expediting the judicial process for resolving
land issues. Decentralizing the land administration services through establishing Client Service Access
Units and providing publicly the information on land transactions fees and charges, were expected to improve
land transactions. The combination of these activities was likely to aid in strengthening land administration
and management for privately held lands. While these outcomes were logical, the PDO indicators only
measured the time required for registering private lands. The project activities were expected to benefit less
than 10% of the potential beneficiaries, since 80% of land was held under customary arrangements and 70%
of urban properties were unregistered.

Outputs (ICR, pages 14 - 21 and pages 64 - 78).

      A Land Bill was submitted to parliament following Cabinet approval on October 23, 2017. The
         legislation had not been enacted when the project closed.
      These activities were completed as targeted. (1).The legislative instrument (LI) for Administration of
         Stools Land Act and the Land Commission Act was submitted to the Attorney General (AG); and (2)
         Manuals and documents for guiding the Customary Land Secretariat (CLS) were submitted to the
         AG. .
        Eight customary land practices were identified when the project closed, below the revised and original
         targets of ten and fifty respectively.
        88 Customary Land Secretariats (CLS) were established to provide support to local residents
         in customary land areas. This exceeded the target of 51.
        36,178 land rights cases were recorded, exceeding the target of 25,000.
        62,633 backlog of land title applications were cleared when the project closed, short of the target of
         79, 472. The ICR (page 38) notes that backlogs have developed from 2010 to 2018, although the
         exact figures are not yet known.
        307 cases were resolved by CLSs using the Alternative Dispute Mechanism (ADR), short of the target
         of 2,000.
        Maps were completed for two regions as per the revised target (although short of the original target of
         four).
        Five policies for national spatial data infrastructure, survey and mapping and geodetic reference
         network were developed as targeted. Design of the Geodetic Reference System (GRS)
         architecture was completed as targeted. Three spatial development frameworks and regional
         frameworks were prepared as targeted. One customary boundary was demarcated as targeted.
        The project identified streets and street names for municipal decision making. Street signs were in
         place for 3,782 streets in the Accra Metropolitan Area (AMA).This exceeded the 2,850. 120,000
         property parcels were identified. There were no targets for this indicator.
        Human resource development plan was completed as targeted.
        76 Civil Society Organizations were trained in Gender equality, land rights and monitoring and
         evaluation, exceeding the target of 15.
        5,792 stakeholders (judges, lawyers, land sector staff, civil society organizations) were
         trained, exceeding the target of 120.

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)




      20 people (14 males and six females) undertook postgraduate studies and over 5,500 people (31%
       females) were trained. There were no targets for this indicator.

Outcomes.

      82,438 land transactions were registered, exceeding the target of 30,000. Of this, 16,490 transactions
       were registered for females. There were no targets for this indicator.

Although the number of land transactions registered exceeded the target, this referred to only private land
registration. Given that this covered less than 10% of the land, and over 80% of land was under customary
arrangements and 70%of properties in urban areas were unregistered, the extent to which project activities
contributed to the PDO of consolidating and strengthening land administration and management, is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To increase efficiency of land administration operations.

Rationale
Outputs.

      Dedicated land courts increased from six to twelve when the project closed. These included six
       dedicated land courts in Accra, three regional land courts in Sekondi, Kumasi and Tamale, and one
       sub-regional Land court in the city of Tema. There were no targets for this indicator.
      645 judges and key staff (of which 127 were judges and magistrates, and 236 other court officials)
       were trained. There were no targets for this indicator.
      A fully functional information system called LUPMIS was developed, and was in daily use when the
       project closed.
      The implementation of an automated system for Land Commission activities, the Ghana Enterprise
       Land Information System (GELIS) was subject to delays, and this activity was not complete when the
       project closed.

Outcomes.

      The turn-around time in registering land deeds in Client Service Access Units (CSAUs) reduced from
       three months at the baseline to 2.11 months when the project closed. This did not meet the target of
       one month.
      The turn-around time registering land titles in CSAUs was expected to reduce from seven months to
       two months by project closure. There was no data on the actual time taken to register land titles when
       the project closed. The ICR (paragraph 49) notes that the turn-around times recorded in the results
       framework for land title registration for the baseline data was inaccurate, and not based on sound

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



                                   methodology. Subsequent reporting also did not reflect the realities on the ground. The ICR notes that
                                   although some applications at the Land Registration Division are processed within a within a few
                                   months, the majority will take several years to process.

                            Given the modest achievement towards this objective for private land, the extent to which the project activities
                            contributed to increasing efficiency is rated as modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective

                            To improve transparency of land administration operations.

                            Rationale
                            Outputs.

                                  Seven Client Service Access Units (CSAUs) were established to provide customer services as per
                                   the revised target, although below the original target of 12.
                                  111 public outreach and awareness activities were conducted, exceeding the target of 100. Five
                                   gender equality desks were established at regional centers, exceeding the target of four.
                                  Basic information on standard statutory fees, land transactions were publicly available when the
                                   project closed.

                            Outcomes.

                                  While the ICR reported on the actions that were taken for dissemination of information, the actions
                                   were output-oriented. There were also no indicators to measure the public's increased trust in
                                   land management or their perception of transparency.

                            Given the lack of credible evidence, the efficacy of improving transparency of land administration operations
                            is rated as modest



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



  The turnaround time for land deeds improved slightly, but the project was unable to measure the turn around
  time for registering land titles. More problematic, the backlog of application of title registrations remained
  huge, and there were no credible indicators to measure transparency. Finally, the activities potentially
  impacted only on the private lands which represented under 10% the land in Ghana.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure for activities associated
with improving maps and spatial data for Land administration. These activities accounted for 43% of the
appraisal estimate and actual cost. The project benefits were expected to come from: (i) land investments due to
tenure security: (ii) efficient registration systems: and (iii) improved land information, through geo-referenced
land information, land use planning and street addressing. These benefits according to research conducted in
Australia, were expected to have a positive effect on Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Net Present Value
(NPV) at closure was US$65.8 million with a 10% discount rate, as compared to the NPV of US$27.8 million
estimated at appraisal. The ex post Economic Internal Rate Of Return (EIRR) was 22% as compared to the ex
ante EIRR of 15%. The Cost-Benefit Ratio (CBR) of was 2.61 at closure, as compared to 1.45 at appraisal.

Financial analysis. At appraisal, the Financial Rate of Return (FRR) was calculated by comparing the
difference in net revenue collected by the Land Commission (LC), with and without the project. The LC collected
revenue in the form of stamp duty and fees collected for registration of deeds, titles, certified copies, etc. The ex
post FIRR was 57% as compared to the ex ante FRR of 27%.

Administrative and Operational issues. The administration costs allocated under component four activities
nearly doubled from US$8.3 million at appraisal to US$17.7 million at completion. All other component costs
were lower than planned at appraisal. The project was delayed for a total of 34 months and the rise in
administration costs reflect the administrative inefficiencies during implementation.

In sum, efficiency is rated as substantial, in view of the economic and financial analysis of the project.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



                                                                                     43.00
Appraisal                                                 15.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     43.00
ICR Estimate                                              22.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is substantial. Efficacy of the objectives of
consolidating and strengthening land administration and management systems, increasing efficiency and
transparency of land administration systems, is modest in view of the limited achievements. Efficiency
is substantial, in view of the economic and financial analysis. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is
rated as moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk. The ICR (paragraph 105) notes that while the Land Use and Spatial Planning Authority
(LUPSA) financed through the project is budget financed, local planning activities were financed through
construction permit fees. The legislation that established LUPSA also identified the need for a revolving fund
to ensure that there is a regular source of funding for local planning. Given that the government had not yet
set up a revolving fund to date, there is no secure basis of funding for local planning activities.

Technical risk. The ICR (paragraph 106) notes that while many of the Customary Land Secretariats (CLS)
established under the project were working when the project closed, there are opportunities for abuse of their
role for financial gains. The ICR also notes that to date the methods for auditing and ensuring social
equity are not robust and need to be continually monitored. Similarly, the Land Commission and the Client
Service Access Units showed little improvement in addressing the registry backlog. The improvement of the
registration process needs specific investments to address the registration backlog.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was a follow-up project to a prior Bank-financed project (Land Administration Project 1). At
  appraisal, several risks were identified including, risks associated with political commitment to a long term
  reform agenda, the risk that benefits associated with new technologies and ICT applications may not be
  sustained due to inadequate budgets, and risks that actions taken at the levels of customary land
  secretariats could diminish the rights of existing holders. Mitigation measures incorporated at design

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



  included, a review of the cost recovery measures, increase in the share of revenue that land agencies are
  allowed to retain, and public awareness programs and stakeholder consultations. With
  these measures, project risk was rated as medium at appraisal (PAD, page 47). The implementation
  arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU), housed in the office of
  the implementing agency - the Ministry of Land and Natural Resources (MLNR). The MLRN was to report
  directly to the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC), chaired by the Minister of MLNR. At regional
  level, the regional PCUs were responsible for coordinating regional activities. (PAD, paragraphs 37 - 39).
  Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
  sections 9 and 10).

  There were significant shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, as indicated in section 3 above, the design
  failed to include specific aspects of the development problem into the objective, and this contributed to
  the lack of clarity on the project's theory of change. Two, the lessons from the prior financed land
  project were not considered at preparation. And the present project ended up repeating the same mistake
  as the prior project regarding complexity and overstating what was achievable. Three, given the wider
  spectrum of activities, specialists were required to address different aspects (including in, land law, land
  registration, IT systems, planning, valuation and property taxation). The ICR (79) notes the preparation
  team did not include people with expertise in land registration, property taxation, IT, and planning, and
  the Task Team Leader (TTL) was not a land specialist. Four, the design included many activities the
  targets for which were unrealistic given the resources and the backlog of applications for title
  registrations: there were M&E shortcomings (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Eighteen implementation Status Results Reports (ICRRs) were filed over a project lifetime of ten years,
 implying on average, twice a year missions. The continuity of leadership was maintained with three Task
 Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime. The ICR (paragraph 88) notes that handovers were well
 planned and transitions were smooth. The support provided by the supervision team aided in fiduciary and
 safeguards compliance.

 There were significant shortcomings in supervision. The ICR (paragraph 87) acknowledges that for most of
 the project period until the appointment of the last TTL, a land specialist did not lead the team, and the
 team lacked people with sufficient expertise on addressing issues relating to land title registry and IT
 systems development. Two, although problems with backlog at the title registry were identified, there was
 no effort at addressing this issue. Three, while the Mid-Term Review addressed many issues such as
 simplifying the PDO statement, they were neither reflected in the project paper, nor addressed
 through subsequent project restructurings. and Four, there was no follow-ups on financial commitments.
 For example, during the restructuring process, the government's financial commitment decreased from
 US$5.0 million to US$1.0 million, and ultimately to zero (ICR, paragraph 82).

 Given the significant shortcomings in Quality at Entry and in Supervision, overall Bank performance is rated
 as unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Policy, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation department of the Ministry of Land and Natural Resources
 (MLNR), was in charge of monitoring project performance (PAD, paragraph 40) and the regional Project
 Coordination Units (PCUs) were responsible for collecting regional level data (PAD, paragraph 42).

 The results framework had several gaps. For example, key aspects of land ownership - such as informally
 held land - were not covered by the PDO indicators (ICR, paragraph 8). While the intermediate indicators
 provided insight into the activities that were conducted, they did not describe the intended outcomes of
 these activities. The lack of critical indicators inhibited the project's ability to document its results. For
 example, there was no indicator to measure contributions towards the higher level of improving business
 development and economic growth. The results framework focused primarily on proxy indicators related to
 the efficiency of registration deeds and titles registration. Transparency was only measured by whether
 information on the land administration was made publicly available. This besides being an output indicator,
 is also a very limited definition of transparency.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project did not adequately focus on implementing a monitoring and evaluation system that would
  enable the project to capture results. Although data was collected regularly, the MTR recommendations
  relating to the inadequacy of PDO indicators were not followed through. The project team did not use the
  opportunity to address the significant results framework flaws through restructurings.

  According to the ICR (paragraph 96), the M&E specialist was not filled for long periods time. Further, the
  data quality checks on key PDO targets was inadequate. For example, data collected to report on
  turnaround time for land title registry was not adequately disaggregated according to the registration of
  transaction and first time registration of property rights (ICR, paragraph 59).



c. M&E Utilization
  The results framework was utilized to monitor outputs and focus on areas that were not achieving
  expectations.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



  In sum, M&E is rated as modest in view of the shortcomings in design and failure to take corrective
  actions during implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project, under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page ix).

   Environmental Assessment. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted at
   appraisal. The PAD (paragraph 61) noted that adverse environmental impacts were expected to be
   minimal. An Environmental and Social Mitigation Plan (ESMP) was prepared and publicly disclosed at
   appraisal (PAD, paragraph 61). According to the ICR (paragraph 99), there was compliance with
   environmental safeguards and there were no adverse environmental impacts during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 35) noted that there could be loss of livelihood of
   people currently occupying land spaces that was earmarked for developing a regional office for the Lands
   Commission in Kumasi. An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) was prepared and publicly
   displaced at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 98) noted that, although there was no physical
   displacement, six farmers were economically displaced. The ICR (paragraphs 98 and 99) notes that the
   that resettlement activities relating to economic displacement were completed with proper disclosure of
   information and involvement of stakeholders.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment conducted at appraisal, to assess the financial capacity of the
   Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR), concluded that the financial management performance
   of the MLNR was satisfactory and was rated as moderate in the PAD (paragraph 51).

    Procurement. A procurement assessment was conducted at appraisal. The procurement risk was rated
   as substantial in view of the lack of experienced staff in the MLNR.. The mitigation measures incorporated
   at design, included recruiting a procurement specialist with experience in Bank procurement policies,
   training staff, and preparing a procurement plan. (PAD, paragraph 52). The ICR (paragraph 101) notes that
   there were no internal investigations and there was compliance with procurement management.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 There were significant
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Unsatisfactory              shortcomings both in Quality at
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Entry and in Bank Supervision.
Quality of M&E                  Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1.Establishing sound management through steering committees can help project
management and component ownership. In this project, the project established a steering
committee to ensure that that five ministries could work together. Each ministry took responsibility
for their mandate and made sure that their activities succeeded. Furthermore, the Human resources
strategy and training plan were developed at an early stage, and this plan included arrangements
for post-graduate training for twenty staff. Each staff member was given specific roles and
associated tasks upon training completion. This method proved to be effective.

2. It is necessary to consider lessons from previous projects, prior to finalizing the next
phase. Although this was a follow-up project, the draft of the Implementation Completion Report
(ICR) did not include any lessons from the project. And this project ended up repeating the same
mistakes as the prior project, especially regarding complexity and overstating what was achievable.

3. Implementation and completion of major Information Technology ( IT) systems was not
realistic within a five year project cycle. The IT system for this project was not completed on time
and this impacted the overall achievement of the key project indicators. The design and feasibility
analysis of IT systems need to be concluded prior to appraisal and be fully operational within a three
year period. The ICR recommends that if the IT system is not contracted within the first year of the
project, then the project should rethink and take appropriate actions to either simplify or downsize
expectations.

4. Although land projects can be highly beneficial if they are successfully completed, they
can be complex, expensive and time consuming. Teams need to seriously consider such
projects from a practical implementation perspective, and include experienced land administration


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GH-Land Administration - 2 (P120636)



and land management specialists both at preparation and during implementation. Professional
expertise is especially needed at the team leader level.

IEG draws the following lesson.

1. Lack of attention to monitoring and evaluation systems can impede the ability of the
project to measure and document its achievements. The ICR highlights as key areas of
achievement of the program, human resources planning and training. However, the project failed to
collect supplementary data to demonstrate success at the outcome level. This failure to pay
attention to the monitoring and evaluation system led to inadequate indicators that could fully
capture the project story and document its achievements.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and provided sufficient information. The ICR candidly acknowledges the shortcomings in
the theory of change, which did not clearly illustrate what was achievable with the project activities. It also very
candidly acknowledges the significant shortcomings in Bank performance both at Quality at Entry and at
supervision. The information provided in Annex Seven is very useful. The ICR generally follows the guidelines
and derives good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

One minor shortcoming with the ICR is it is length. The main body of the text at 30 pages is twice the
recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 15
