     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022170

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P111760                                    SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                 Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48690                                 31-Dec-2017                                           73,566,926.54

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Mar-2011                               30-Jun-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            88,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             80,866,237.54                                               0.00

 Actual                                         73,566,926.54                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          John R. Eriksson            Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Financing Agreement (p.5) dated September 16, 2011, and the Project Appraisal
   Document (p.3) dated February 2, 2011, the project objective was “to improve the availability, quality and
   sustainability of public water supply services in selected districts of the Syrdarya region.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   A. Improvement of Water Supply Infrastructure. (Appraisal cost: US$95.99 million; actual cost:
   US$87.32 million)

   This component included the rehabilitation and expansion of water supply systems in five districts in the
   Syrdarya region, i.e., Akaltyn, Bayaut, Mirzaobad, Sardoba and Khavast, consisting of (1) civil works; and
   (2) provision of: (a) related design and supervision services; (b) operations and maintenance equipment; (c)
   spare parts; (d) information systems; (e) a pilot for supervisory control and data acquisition system
   (SCADA); and (f) water quality laboratories.

   B. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. (Appraisal cost: US$1.76 million including physical
   and price contingencies; actual cost: US$1.24 million)

   This component was to provide technical assistance to improve the capacity of the Syrdarya Region Water
   Management Enterprise (Syrdarya Region Suvokova), the project implementing entity, through the
   following: (1) the improvement of utility management and operational practices; (2) the assessment of the
   institutional capacity of the project implementing entity and a study for private sector participation; (3) local
   and international training on management and operations; (4) the provision of utility management
   equipment and software; (5) the development of communications strategies and public awareness
   campaigns; and (6) the preparation of customer satisfaction surveys.

   C. Feasibility Studies for Future Investments. (Appraisal cost: US$0.75 million including physical and
   price contingencies; actual cost: US$0.40 million)

   This component was to finance consultancy services for the preparation of feasibility studies for future
   priority investments in the sewerage sector in the Syrdarya region.

   D. Project Management. (Appraisal cost: US$1.68 million including physical and price contingencies;
   actual cost: US$1.58 million)

   This component was to finance consultancy services to strengthen the project management, monitoring and
   coordination capacity of the project coordination unit under Uzkommunkhizmat, the national communal
   services agency located in Tashkent, as well as its branches in the Syrdarya region.



   Revised Components

   The project components were not officially revised during implementation, but instead of covering the town
   of Birlashgan in the Mirzaobad district, the project covered three additional settlements, i.e., Yuldashabad,
   Bakhoriston, and Navbahor (ICR, Table 1, p.10).


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$121.03 million including financing costs,
   taxes, and duties. In June 2019, the project closed with a total cost of US$108.21 million.

   Financing: At appraisal, the International Development Association (IDA) credit was estimated at US$88.00
   million (SDR57.2 million—SDR stands for Special Drawing Rights, an international type of monetary reserve
   used in the financing agreement). By project closing in June 2019, the project had disbursed US$73.57
   million of the IDA credit. On December 11, 2015, US$7.01 million of the IDA credit was cancelled because
   of mis-procurement (ICR, p.11). All project funds were accounted for at project closing.

   Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution of the Government of Uzbekistan (GoU) was
   estimated at US$33.03 million. At project closing, the GoU’s actual contribution was US$34.64 million.

   Restructurings: There were three project restructurings:

         First Restructuring (Level 2 – October 31, 2016): A total of SDR32.80 million was reallocated
          from Goods and Unallocated categories to Civil Works category.
         Second Restructuring (Level 2 – November 23, 2017): The closing date was extended by 18
          months from December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2019 to allow the completion of two civil works
          contracts that were delayed because of protracted procurement and contract registration processes
          (Restructuring Paper, Report No:RES26701, p.3). Additionally, SDR 1.0 million was reallocated from
          Goods category to Works category to cover the deficit caused by the fluctuation of the SDR/US$
          exchange rate.
         Third Restructuring (Level 2 – October 29, 2018): This restructuring was a part of a broader water
          sector portfolio action plan that was agreed by the Bank and the GoU to improve the implementation
          of then on-going three water and sanitation projects. In this restructuring, the financing agreement
          was revised (i) to allow the full allocation of IDA funds without counterpart funding to expedite
          contractual payments as there were delays in the availability of counterpart funding; (ii) help the GoU
          absorb IDA funds without extending the project closing date; and (iii) save government funds so that
          they could be used to finance the remaining works after project closure (ICR, p.11).

   Dates: The project was approved on March 1, 2011. The Financing Agreement was signed on September
   16, 2011, and the credit became effective on January 14, 2012. The lengthy process to issue the
   presidential resolution to sign the legal agreements and the delay in signing of the Subsidiary Agreement—
   one of the two effectiveness conditions—were the reasons for a long delay in the effectiveness of the
   project after the board approval (ICR, p.22). The Mid-Term Review was conducted in March 2015. The
   original closing date was December 31, 2017. In the second restructuring, the closing date was extended by
   18 months, and the project closed on June 30, 2019. The reason for closing date extension has been
   outlined in the second restructuring entry above.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



               Rationale
               The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context. Locally available water is scarce in
               Uzbekistan and the country depends 80 percent on water originating from neighboring countries. Therefore,
               provision of water supply services through reliable and efficient water supply systems is an important topic
               on the agenda of the Government of Uzbekistan. The country relies on the dilapidated infrastructure built
               during the Soviet Union, and half of the population did not have access to potable tap water at the start of
               the project with a large disparity—one to three—between rural and urban areas (ICR, p.5). The project
               objectives were outcome-oriented and appropriately pitched for the development status of the country.
               Despite the lack of institutional capacity to implement the project, it was a reasonable expectation that the
               project objectives could be achieved, with the support of the World Bank and the project implementation
               consultant to be hired under the project, because of its vital impact on the people’s daily lives. The project
               objectives were also in line with the government’s efforts to improve the water supply services in the
               country. The GoU’s Program for the Comprehensive Development and Modernization of Water Supply and
               Sewerage Systems for 2017-21 aims at improving water and sanitation services delivery through continued
               reconstruction and rehabilitation of infrastructure, adoption of modern technologies, information systems,
               and automated water billing systems, and introduction of market-based mechanisms (ICR, p.12).

               The project objectives were highly aligned with the Bank strategy, too, as defined in the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for Uzbekistan for 2016-20 as adjusted by the Performance and Learning
               Review of the CPF for Uzbekistan (ICR, p.12). The project sought to address the development problem of
               increasing access to improved water supply services as defined in the objective under the Focus Area 2,
               Reform of Select State Institutions and Citizen Engagement (ICR, pp.12-13). Insufficient access to and
               quality of water supply services, as municipal services, are noted as significant challenges for development
               in Uzbekistan in the Bank strategy (ICR, p.13).

               The Bank has been an important development partner in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan has the second largest
               country program supported by the Bank in the Europe and Central Asia region after Turkey. The Bank has
               been involved in other water projects in the Bukhara and Samarkand regions. Therefore, given the Bank’s
               experience in the sector and the country, the project objectives were sufficiently challenging, but overly
               ambitious in targeting a major institutional reorganization at the regional level while implementing
               investment activities to establish the infrastructure backbone for water production, transmission and
               distribution network.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated substantial, rather than high, because of the risk in achieving
               the objective through the establishment of a major infrastructure backbone investment while institutionally
               reorganizing the regional water utility, which had limited capacity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To improve the availability of public water supply services in selected districts of the Syrdarya region.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1

The investments to be financed under the first component—rehabilitation and upgrading of water supply
infrastructure consisting of water production, transmission and distribution systems—were to directly lead to
an increase in the capacity of the water systems. The project was to finance the provision of equipment and
spare parts for operation and maintenance (O&M), utility management equipment, information systems, as
well as software for the sustainability of the service delivery. Consultancy services were to be provided for
technical and institutional capacity strengthening for efficient operation of the water supply network.
Campaigns were to be implemented to increase the public awareness about the benefits of connecting to the
water supply network through metered connections. The expected outputs were reliable water supply
systems operating in the five districts, increased institutional capacity, and increased awareness. These
outputs were to lead to the following outcomes: increase in water availability because of increased water
production capacity and reduced share of water not generating revenue; increase in access to improved
water supply in terms of quality and reliability; increase in water consumption; and efficient operation of the
water network in the project area. The efficient implementation of investment activities and the communities’
willingness to connect to the water network and pay for water supply service were the key assumptions for
the achievement of the outputs and outcomes. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were
valid and direct, and the outcomes achieved could be fully attributed to the project’s intervention, but the
project’s failure to address the absence of internal plumbing in apartment buildings, which later proved to be
an important barrier in increasing metered household connections, was an important shortcoming of the
theory of change.

Outputs

As a result of the project activities, following outputs were achieved:

      Length of water transmission mains constructed or rehabilitated was 344 kilometers (km) against the
         target of 370 km.
        Length of water distribution network constructed or rehabilitated was 749 km against the target of 360
         km.
        Length of water service mains constructed or rehabilitated was 150 km against the target of 420 km.
        The number of wells rehabilitated through the installation of new pumping equipment was 28 against
         the target of 28.
        The number of water distribution centers constructed was 44. There was no target set for this output.
        Number of piped households with water meters was 10,900. The achievement of this outcome fell
         short of the target of 46,683 households.
        Equipment necessary for O&M, such as excavators, freight vehicle, dump and cargo trucks, crane
         trucks, emergency cars, water carriers, and office equipment were purchased.
        The percentage of staff trained was 80, as planned.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)




      Only the data acquisition part of the SCADA system was implemented, covering the intake pumping
         stations at Turttom and Sirgali, the only two sources of water supply to the project area. The
         achievement fell short of the target set at appraisal, which was to have an operational SCADA system
         for monitoring and controlling the operating conditions of the water network. Furthermore, attribution
         could not be established because this activity was financed by the State Secretariat for Economic
         Affairs (SECO) of Switzerland.

The actual values of project outputs show a large deviation from target values. The project team commented
that “[t]he target value numbers for networks and transmission lines were not well defined at appraisal based
on feasibility study estimates,” and that the actual values achieved at project closing differed from appraisal
targets because of the updated design during project implementation (Project team’s email dated November
17, 2020). This is why some project activities, such as construction of water distribution centers, did not have
target values set at appraisal nor were there indicators defined for their monitoring and evaluation.

Following activities were not completed:

      Procurement of some of the critical equipment, such as nonrevenue water measurement equipment
       and meter test bench, was cancelled at the last supervision mission in February 2019 without any
       specific reason given (Aide Memoire, February 2019, p.17).
      Procurement of computers and servers for the district and branch offices of the water utility was
       cancelled because of lengthy delays in starting the procurement process (Aide Memoire, February
       2019, p.7).

Outcomes

The project outputs resulted in the following outcomes:

      Although the target was to provide continuous water supply throughout the day, the water supply at
         project closing was intermittent.
        Number of people provided with access to improved water sources was 210,000. The achievement of
         this outcome, too, fell short of the target of 280,098.
        The water consumption of the urban population increased from a baseline of 15 liters per capita per
         day (lcd) to 80 lcd. The target value was 125 lcd. Since the water system was not fully commissioned
         at project closing, the achievement under this indicator could not be determined based on actual
         measurements; the achievement was measured by taking the ratio of the amount of bulk water
         supplied to the project area and the number of urban inhabitants with access to water via household
         connections or standpipes. This methodology is not well-defined and does not capture the impact of
         the project since the system was not fully commissioned.
        The water consumption of the rural population increased from a baseline of 15 liters per capita per day
         (lcd) to 60 lcd. The target value was 95 lcd. The achievement under this indicator was measured
         applying the questionable methodology used in the previous indicator.
        The project was expected to achieve at least 80 percent customer satisfaction rate with water supply
         services, a sharp increase from a baseline value of 38 percent. This indicator was to be measured
         through customer satisfaction surveys. But since the water system was not fully commissioned, the
         satisfaction rate could not be measured. (The ICR provides a satisfaction rate of 25 percent measured
         by a customer survey conducted in 2017, but it captures the satisfaction of the customers with water
         supply from unregulated private operators, not from the new public water supply network (ICR, p.27)

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



       Therefore, the actual value of this indicator is irrelevant to measure the achievement of the project
       outcome).
      Although the water loss reduction measurement equipment was not procured under the project, using
       the data provided by the project coordination unit in May 2002, it was estimated that water loss,
       defined as the ratio of total hydraulic and technical losses to water production, dropped from a
       baseline of 40 percent to 20 percent. The target value was 14 percent.

At the third restructuring in October 2018 (see the Third Restructuring entry in section 2.e above), the
financing agreement was revised to allow the full allocation of IDA funds without counterpart funding to
expedite contractual payments, with the expectation that the GoU would finance the remaining works after
project closing in June 2019. This expectation did not materialize, and at the time of data collection for the
Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) in May 2020, the water system was not fully
operational. The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in early 2020 adversely affected the completion of the
investment works. The project fell significantly short of achieving the target number of households connected
to the water system. The low achievement was because of the absence of internal plumbing in apartment
buildings and houses in villages, which was not addressed by the project’s intervention.

On the other hand, the number of people provided with access to improved water sources increased by
210,000 people against a target of 280,099 people, which is a substantial achievement given that the project
fell short of achieving output targets, and that the new system was not fully operational. According to the
information provided by the project team, the actual number of 210,000 people consisted of 65,000 people
who were connected to the water system through 10,900 piped household connections, and the rest were
connected through public stand posts. The project team further informed that the number of people connected
to Beshbulok pump station, which supplies water to the regional capital city of Gulistan, was included in the
actual number of people with access to improved water sources, although the number of these beneficiaries
was not included in the target value estimated at appraisal.

Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objective to improve the availability of public water
supply services is rated modest because of low achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of public water supply services in selected districts of the Syrdarya region.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The theory of change for the second objective follows the same logic in the theory of change for the first
objective above. In addition to an increase in the number of people with access to water, the project outputs,
i.e., newly built water production, transmission and distribution network, would result in an improvement in the
quality of the water supply. The project inputs were to result in the construction of the water testing


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



laboratories—outputs. The assumption was that the water samples from the system would be regularly tested
at these laboratories to ensure water quality in accordance with the Uzbekistan Drinking Water Standard.

Outputs

In addition to the outputs listed under Objective 1 above, the project financed the establishment of two water
quality testing laboratories; one in Gulistan at the head office of the Syrdarya Suvokova Unitary Enterprise
(SUE) and the other at the Turttom Pumping Station. The additional four water quality laboratories, one in
each of the Bayaut, Khavast, Sardoba, and Akaltyn districts, were not established because of the
consolidation of all district utilities under a single regional utility, i.e., SUE, in 2016 following the change in
government in 2015.

According to the information provided by the project team, the water quality laboratory at the Syrdarya SUE
head office in Gulistan is responsible for water quality monitoring for the whole water distribution system of
the Syrdarya region. The water samples are regularly collected from the distribution system and brought to
the laboratory for testing. The project team further commented that in the absence of laboratories at the
district level, the water quality testing heavily depends heavily on the sustainable operation of water sampling
from the districts and transportation of those samples by car to the head office. The other laboratory at
Turttom Pumping Station tests the water quality at the Turttom and Sirgali water intakes.

Outcomes

According to the data provided by the Syrdarya SUE, the water quality at the intakes was 100 percent in
compliance with the Uzbekistan Drinking Water Standard. However, only 80 percent of the samples at the
system level, which were tested at the Syrdarya SUE head office laboratory, met the water quality standards
(ICR, p.14). The target was to achieve 98 percent of regulatory water samples meeting potable water
standards as defined in the national standard. While the ICR does not explicitly give reasons for the
difference in water quality between intakes and the system, the following, based on characteristics of the
system are possible explanations for the differences. The water system not being fully operational could be
one explanation for this quality drop; when there are pressure differences in the water transmission and
distribution system, which is highly likely because the system uses gravity for water supply rather than
pumps, foreign materials can leak into the system from pipe joints. Additionally, there might be measurement
differences between the two laboratories.

Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the objective to improve water quality is rated modest, because of
lower achievement, concerns about the sustainability of the sampling taking and testing system, and the
water supply services not being fully operational.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the sustainability of public water supply services in selected districts of the Syrdarya region.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)




Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 3

“Sustainability” was not clearly defined in the project objective. From the project design, it could be inferred as
financial sustainability and operational—management and technical—sustainability. The main goal of the
project was to merge five, out of nine, district level service providers in Akaltyn, Bayaut, Sardoba, Khavast
and Mirzaobad under the regional Syrdarya Suvokova to establish an Inter-District Unit (IDU) with a single
balance sheet and consolidating various functions and operations. Technical assistance activities under
Component B, such as provision of training on management and operations, provision of utility management
equipment and software, improvement of utility management and operational practices, were expected to
improve the capacity of the reorganized utility resulting in knowledge accumulation and higher staff retaining
ratio. Provision of operation and maintenance (O&M) equipment was to lead to an improvement in the
technical capabilities of the IDU, while the installation of metered household connections, together with the
establishment of information systems, would lead to higher tariff collection rates that would be sufficient to
recover O&M costs. These outcomes were expected to improve the sustainability of public water supply
services. The results framework included one indicator, i.e., “improved financial working ratio for Suvokova,”
capturing the improvement in the financial viability of the utility. The other indicator, i.e., “improved energy
efficiency of the water supply system,” partially captured the improvement in the technical sustainability of the
water supply services. Overall, the result chain from project activities to outputs and outcomes were plausible,
but indirect. The outcomes expected as a result of a major restructuring of the regional utility were overly
ambitious, given that major investment activities to expand the water supply network were to be undertaken
simultaneously as part of the project

Outputs

In addition to the outputs listed under Objectives 1 and 2 above, the project activities resulted in the following
outputs:

      The project provided training to 80 percent (170 members) of the Syrdarya SUE staff, as planned,
       through ten training programs “on various areas of water supply service provision such as
       organization and management, customer service, occupational safety and environmental
       management, water quality, O&M, and so on” (ICR, p.19).

The following activities were financed by the GoU or other development partners:

      A billing system called “Water Control” with integrated customer database was installed. This system
       was prepared with the support of the Asian Development Bank and financed by the GoU.
      The data acquisition part of the SCADA system was installed covering the intake pumping stations at
       Turttom and Sirgali. This activity was financed by SECO.
      Under the uniform national system mandated by the GoU, an accounting system called “1C” was
       installed.

Outcomes

      The project activities did not result in the creation of an IDU, because following the elections in 2015,
       the new government adopted a country-level strategy to reorganize the water supply services sector.
       Under this new strategy, which was more ambitious than the project’s goal to establish an IDU, district

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



                                     and city water service utilities were merged under Suvokova Unitary Enterprises (SUEs) at the
                                     regional level. The project indirectly contributed to the establishment of SUEs through its preparatory
                                     work on the establishment of an IDU in the Syrdarya region. The Syrdarya SUE was established in
                                     January 2016, but the consolidation process was not completed at the time of the writing of the ICR.
                                    The tariff collection rate for households improved from 76 per cent to 90 percent, as planned.
                                    The tariff collection rate for consumers other than households improved from 87 percent to 90 percent
                                     against a target of 100 percent.
                                    The financial working ratio (direct operating expenses divided by cash operating revenues) of the
                                     Syrdarya SUE increased from a baseline of 0.98 to 1.20. The target was to decrease it to 0.90, which
                                     would mean operating revenues were higher than operating expenses. Although the actual value of
                                     this ratio was higher than the target value, there had been a steady improvement in the financial
                                     viability of the utility between 2017 and 2019 when the ratio decreased from 2.5 to 1.2.
                                    As a result of the installation of new pumps in the wells, the energy efficiency of the water supply
                                     system, which is calculated as a ratio of power consumed in kilowatt hours (kWh) per cubic meter
                                     (m3) of water supplied to the network per year, decreased from 1.24 kWh/m3/yr to 0.65 kWh/m3/yr.
                                     The target was 0.69 kWh/m3/yr.

                            Initially the government aimed to keep the tariffs as low as possible and improve the financial working ratio
                            through efficiency improvements in the operation of the water supply services, but towards the end of the
                            project implementation period, the GoU decided to increase the tariffs as a result of “a better understanding
                            that inadequate revenues [had] resulted in continued asset collapse and declining levels of service” (ICR,
                            footnote 13, p.15). Therefore, in addition to the increase in the collection rate, the increase in tariffs
                            contributed to the improvement in the financial viability of the Syrdarya SUE as reflected in the gradual
                            decrease in the financial working ratio. Although the Syrdarya SUE could not achieve a financial working ratio
                            of 0.9 as targeted by the project, the utility, given the gradual decrease in the ratio, could achieve financial
                            stability if the water supply services are fully operational and if tariffs are adjusted to cover operational costs.

                            The results framework did not include an indicator to measure the improvement in the operational
                            sustainability of the utility. It was assumed that with an improvement in the financial working ratio of the utility
                            and training provided under the project, the utility would be able to retain qualified staff. However, after project
                            closing, the institutional capacity of the utility started to weaken; some of the members of staff trained under
                            the project had already left the utility because of other more attractive job opportunities (ICR, p.19). The
                            evidence is insufficient to show that the utility has improved its technical capacity in implementing O&M
                            services for technical sustainability of services.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objective to improve the sustainability of water supply
                            services is rated modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)




  Rationale
  The project was partially successful in completing the project activities and delivering a backbone of water
  production, transmission and distribution network, but the project fell short of achieving the targets set for
  improving the availability of water supply services. The water supply services are intermittent and, although
  the water network is newly built, only 80 percent of the water samples comply with the national tap water
  standards. Despite some improvements in its financial working ratio, the Syrdarya SUE has not achieved
  financial viability to ensure sustainable water supply services and still has institutional capacity issues.
  Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objectives is rated modest.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

A cost-benefit analysis could not be conducted at appraisal because of difficulties in measuring the economic
benefits of the project’s intervention (PAD, pp.15-16). Instead, a least-cost analysis was undertaken to compare
six water supply alternatives (PAD, p.16). The sum of discounted investment and O&M costs was calculated for
each service option, and it was found that the least-cost option was to supply water from the Turttom and Sirgali
wells to the project area by gravity and to rely entirely on Beshbulok well to supply the Gulistan area by pumping
(PAD, p.68).

At the time of the writing of the ICR, a detailed cost-benefit analysis was conducted. However, as the ICR (p.53)
notes, because of data weaknesses, the economic analysis was based on estimates. As explained under the
efficacy section above, the water supply is intermittent and only available for several times a day for limited
periods. The information regarding the likely number of beneficiaries is an approximation, i.e., 210,000 people.
The Syrdarya SUE has not completed the consolidation of district water service utilities; therefore, operating
costs could not be accurately estimated. Despite these weaknesses, the assumptions used in economic
analysis were relevant to calculate the economic rate of return (ERR) of such a water supply project (ICR, pp.54-
55). The benefits were listed as reduction in time spent for collecting water, reduction in the cost of treating
(boiling) water, reduction in the cost of waterborne illnesses and reduction in the cost of water. Costs were taken
as the actual project cost and annual operating costs calculated as two percent of the capital cost. More than
half (57 percent) of the expected benefits were due to reduction in the amount of time spent collecting water and
the remaining 40 percent due to cost reduction in the cost of accessing and treating water. The expected
benefits from a reduction in health costs was estimated to constitute only two percent of total benefits. Based on
these assumptions, the calculations resulted in an ERR of 9.3 percent and a net present value (NPV) of
US$35.0 million at a discount rate of 6 percent over a 30-year project lifetime, consisting of six years of
construction and 24 years of operation. The ERR and the NPV increase to 15.3 per cent and US$101.0 million,
respectively, if the number of beneficiaries increases to 270,000 as estimated at appraisal.

Compared to the minimum expected ERRs of 4 to 8 percent for socio-economically important long-term
infrastructure investments given in the ICR (p.17), the expected ERR of 9.3 percent of the project justifies the
economic viability of the project. However, it should be noted that long-term economic benefits of the project will
depend on the pending investment works not yet fully completed at project closure, mostly household


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



connections, full commissioning of the water supply network, and the financial and operational sustainability of
the water supply services.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project became effective almost one year after the Bank’s board approval because of the requirement to
issue a presidential resolution in Uzbekistan to sign the legal agreements and the delay in the signing of the
subsidiary agreement with the Syrdarya Suvokova, which was a condition for effectiveness. After effectiveness,
the project implementation was further delayed by two years because of the time required for the mobilization of
the project implementation consultant (PIC). Since only the feasibility studies were ready at appraisal—in other
words, project preparation was incomplete when it was approved—the PIC to be hired under the project was to
prepare the detailed designs and bidding documents, without which the project implementation could not start
(ICR, p.21). The project coordination unit in Tashkent had insufficient capacity, which resulted in “delayed
decision-making, weak monitoring, and coordination” (ICR, p.22). The project implementing entity, i.e., Syrdarya
SUE, was supported by technical assistance to improve its project implementation capacity, but the utility could
not retain the trained members of staff, nor was able to attract skilled staff (ICR, p.22). As a result, there were
delays in project implementation, the contract management was weak, the updating of project-related
information was not regular, and the utility was not ready to deliver water supply services. Although the project
design allowed the project implementing entity to do procurement directly with the assistance of the project
coordination unit, the fiduciary aspects of the project were centrally administered causing delays in the
implementation of works. There were also issues with the availability of counterpart funds; these funds were not
released according to the project financing arrangements. This led to the Bank’s decision to allocate 100 percent
of IDA funds for all categories, without counterpart financing, with the expectation that counterpart funds would
be used to finance the remaining works after project closure. The project closed while some works were still
incomplete, especially household connections. These activities were not completed one year after project
closure.



Overall, despite an acceptable ERR compared to sector average, the efficiency of the project in achieving the
project objective is rated modest because of the significant shortcomings in operational and administrative
efficiency of the project and concerns about the long-term sustainability of the water supply network.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     83.64
 ICR Estimate                                              9.30
                                                                                      Not Applicable

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives are substantially relevant to the country context and aligned with the Bank strategy. The
efficacy of the achievement of project objectives is rated modest because the project substantially fell short of
achieving the outcomes expected from its intervention; even one year after the project’s closure, the water
supply network was not fully commissioned and the water supply was intermittent. The project’s efficiency is
also rated modest because of significant shortcomings in the operational administrative efficiency of the project,
despite an acceptable rate of economic return. Overall, the outcome of the project is rated moderately
unsatisfactory, even though it established an infrastructure backbone for water supply services in an area where
there was no such network previously.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Insufficient improvement in the financial situation and institutional capacity of the water utility, i.e.,
Syrdarya Suvokova Unitary Enterprise (SUE), is a substantial risk for the sustainability of water
supply services in the project area. At the time of the writing of the ICR in May 2020, the consolidation of
the Syrdarya SUE was still ongoing. Despite an improvement in the utility’s financial working ratio, the
revenues of the utility are still lower than its operating costs. The utility is finding it difficult to retain skilled
personnel to manage and operate water supply services. The utility has yet to establish a customer-
responsive service. Weak financial situation and institutional capacity can lead to insufficient operation and
maintenance of the system and a rapid deterioration of the water supply network.

Intermittent water supply poses a significant risk for the long-term technical sustainability of the
water supply network. The project was designed to create capacity to produce sufficient water to
continuously supply the project areas. However, the utility prefers to supply water intermittently, arguing that
since the water supply relies on gravity (rather than pressure), customers closer to the supply towers would
consume much more water leaving less water for customers further away from the towers. The utility also
argues that there would be issues in billing and collection from customers who would consume more due to
their proximity to the water towers if water were supplied continuously (ICR, p.53). It is not clear whether
these arguments are valid or not, but if the utility continues with intermittent supply of water, this will likely
increase pipe bursts resulting in higher maintenance costs, worsen the water quality because of inverse
leakage, and shorten the lifespan of the water supply network.

Without additional investments in the water supply network, including household connections, the
economic benefits of the project may not fully materialize. The project was successful in establishing the
infrastructure backbone for water supply services in Syrdarya region where such network did not exist
previously. However, the project closed without completing all investments. The utility’s priority was
expanding the water supply network, rather than establishing household connections, which required
renovating apartment building and village houses to install internal plumbing. Currently, a majority of the

                                                                                                            Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



beneficiaries have access to water through public stand posts. Investments need to continue to expand the
water supply network, including household connections, to increase the economic benefits of the water
supply services to beneficiaries. The water supply network investments should also be supported by sewage
network investments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance of the project was substantial, and its approach was straightforward; the main
  expected outcome of the project was to bring water supply services to a part of the Syrdarya region
  through the construction of a network for water production, transmission and distribution where such
  infrastructure did not exist and rehabilitate a small portion of the existing system to improve service
  delivery quality. The project’s theory of change supported the achievement of these outcomes, but the
  absence of internal plumbing in apartment buildings and houses in villages was overlooked at appraisal.
  The project’s technical preparation was incomplete at the start of implementation; only the feasibility
  studies were available. The project implementation consultant (PIC) to be hired under the project was to
  prepare the detailed designs and bidding documents. The delay in hiring the PIC by two years had a
  cascading effect on the start of project activities. The project implementing unit, i.e., Syrdarya Suvokova
  (later Syrdarya Suvokova Unitary Enterprise-SUE), did not have the capacity to implement the project,
  which was identified at appraisal. This was to be mitigated through technical assistance support to the
  Syrdarya SUE in project implementation and also support from the project coordination unit (PCU) within
  the Uzkommunkhizmat (National Communal Services Agency) located in Tashkent, which was deemed
  to have sufficient experience in project implementation according to the Bank procedures. These
  mitigation measures were overly optimistic; both the Syrdarya SUE and PCU had qualified staff shortage
  as a result of which the project implementation was almost fully delegated to the PIC. The impact of the
  heavily centralized financial management system and the restrictions on foreign currencies on project
  implementation was not sufficiently assessed at appraisal. Releasing of counterpart funds was mostly
  delayed, and when they were released, converting them to foreign currency to process payments to
  contractors took substantial time. Economic aspects of the project could not be adequately assessed
  because of lack of reliable data; however, an assessment was conducted to choose the least-cost
  investment option. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements were adequate to capture the
  achievement of the improvements in the availability and quality of water supply, but there were
  shortcomings in the M&E design in capturing the sustainability of service delivery and the improvement in
  the operational performance of the utility because of the institutional reorganization of the regional and
  district utilities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



 There were only three task team leader (TTL) turnovers during eight years of project implementation,
 positively contributing to the continuity in the project team. Supervision missions were held on average
 twice a year. The Implementation Status Results Reports prepared after every mission were detailed and
 candidly reported project performance and key issues. The project team was predominantly occupied with
 overcoming project implementation issues stemming from delays in procurement. An assessment of the
 water supply and Syrdarya SUE and the project coordination unit for procurement, financial management,
 contract management and safeguards policies, but this assessment did not lead to an institutional capacity
 improvement because of lack of a designated specialist in the implementing agencies and failure of these
 agencies to retain trained personnel.

 There were some significant shortcomings in the Bank’s supervision. First, the monitoring of
 implementation of safeguards policies did not start until the second half of 2016. This resulted in non-
 compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement policy, which lasted through to project closure. Second,
 project restructurings were restricted to reallocation of funds among expenditure categories, rather than
 making the project “more aligned with the country priorities,” such as revising the project’s goal to the
 establishment of Syrdarya SUE rather than the originally planned Inter-District Unit, or to reduce the
 ambition of the project to align the expected outputs and outcomes from the project with what could be
 realistically achieved (ICR, p.32). But it should be noted that major project restructurings were not practical
 since such amendments to the financing agreement required the issuance of presidential resolutions,
 which required long processing times. Third, the decision to close the project before the completion of all
 project activities, with the expectation that pending investments would be completed by the implementing
 agency using counterpart funds, resulted in the Bank’s losing its oversight over project implementation.
 Even almost one year after the closure of the project, some investment activities were still on-going.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The first and second objectives to improve the availability and quality, respectively, of water supply services
 were clearly specified, but the definition of “sustainability” in the third objective—to improve the
 sustainability of water supply services—was not clear. From the project design, this was inferred as
 financial and operational sustainability. The project’s theory of change for the first two objectives was
 simple and the links in the result chain were direct, but the theory of change did not address the internal
 plumbing issue, which was critical to increase the number of household connections. The links between
 project activities and the expected outcomes to improve the sustainability of water supply services were
 plausible, but not direct. The expected outcomes through a major restructuring of the regional utility were
 overly ambitious while implementing major infrastructure investment activities. The indicators, such as
 “number of people provided with access to improved water,” “percentage of regulatory water samples
 meeting potable water standards,” and “increased water consumption of the served population,” were

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



 sufficient to capture the achievement of the first two objectives. These indicators were specific,
 measurable, relevant and time-bound. However, due to the weakness of the theory of change in
 addressing the internal plumbing issue, the indicators were partially achievable. The project’s results
 framework was weak in capturing the achievement of the improvement in the sustainability of water supply
 services. There was only one indicator measuring the improvement in the financial working ratio of the
 utility; the expected outcomes from the activities in the technical assistance component related to the
 reorganization and the institutional strengthening of the utility were not captured. Similarly, the intermediate
 results indicators related to the investment activities were adequate to capture the project’s outputs toward
 achieving objective-level outcomes, whereas the results framework lacked intermediate results indicators
 that adequately captured the outputs expected from the technical assistance activities. The weakness in
 the institutional capacity of the utility in collecting reliable data for the measurement of the indicators was
 identified at appraisal, and this weakness was to be overcome through the installation of a management
 information system (MIS) and supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system. Additionally,
 customer satisfaction surveys were to be conducted to measure the satisfaction of the customers with the
 water supply services through the newly built water supply network. These surveys were to provide
 adequate information about the impact of the project’s intervention on the beneficiaries.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Syrdarya Suvokova Unitary Enterprise (SUE), with the help of the project implementation consultant,
  collected data for the results framework, and the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in Tashkent reported
  these findings to the Bank. However, the MIS and SCADA could not be installed as planned. Only a small
  part of both systems was installed under financing from other donors (ICR, p.27). Therefore, data to
  measure the achievement of the outcome level indicators were either not available or unreliable. Most of
  the indicators were not systematically measured (ICR, p.23). The weakness in the results framework
  related to the measurement of the outcome of the technical assistance in institutional capacity building
  was not corrected during implementation. Four customer satisfaction surveys were conducted between
  2013 and 2017. These surveys “primarily assessed satisfaction levels of the customers on water access,
  pressure, and quality, and their willingness to pay higher services,” but the survey was not repeated when
  the Syrdarya SUE partially started water supply services from the new system constructed under the
  project (ICR, p.27). Therefore, the satisfaction level of the customers with the new water supply services
  is not known. The M&E functions and processes are not likely to improve or be sustained unless the MIS
  and SCADA systems are fully installed, and the Syrdarya SUE attains institutional capacity to operate
  them.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were mostly not available nor reliable to support the achievement of the project
  outcomes. The data used in the ICR were not actual measurements, but estimates based on information
  provided by the project implementation consultant. There was no shift in project implementation direction
  attributable to the M&E activities. The restructurings were mostly related to the reallocation of funds
  between expenditure categories. On the other hand, the M&E estimates were used to provide evidence
  of achievement of outcomes; they were not restricted to only providing evidence of application of inputs
  or achievement of outputs. The M&E findings from this project were used in the preparation of the Water



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



  Services and Institutional Support Project (P162263) that was approved by the Bank’s board in March
  2020.



  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated modest because of significant weaknesses in the M&E design and
  implementation making it difficult to assess the achievement of the stated objectives and test the links in
  the results chain, and in the utilization of the M&E system despite its impact on the subsequent Bank-
  financed project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): An Environmental Assessment (EA) satisfactory to the Bank
   requirements was undertaken at appraisal and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared
   by Uzkommunkhizmat located in Tashkent. The environmental impact of the project was expected at the
   construction stage consisting of assessments of noise and dust to be of limited duration and site-bound.
   There were occasional shortcomings in the implementation of the safeguard policy, such as “workers not
   wearing personal protection equipment, gaps in documentation and record-keeping, low priority given to
   environmental management protocols and occupational health and safety measures, and varying degrees
   of implementing corrective actions and recommendations” (ICR, p.27). The project implementing entity,
   Syrdarya SUE, did not have an environmental safeguards specialist; therefore, the project implementation
   consultant hired under the project was fully responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the
   environmental safeguards policy. The Bank’s project team provided guidance and support in the
   implementation of safeguard policies, but because of the absence of a dedicated environment specialist at
   Syrdarya SUE, the project failed to achieve any capacity-building outcome.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Because of the construction, rehabilitation and replacement of
   water supply infrastructure, some permanent or temporary land acquisition was expected; hence, this
   safeguard policy was triggered at appraisal. The Government of Uzbekistan prepared a Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) to mitigate any negative social impact on individuals due to involuntary resettlement.
   However, in the second half of 2016 when the Bank’s project team started monitoring the safeguards
   policies, it was found that project implementing agencies were not aware of the RPF. There were some
   improvements in the awareness of implementing agencies on social issues towards mid-2017, but the social
   due diligence report was not available through to project closure and the project implementation
   consultant’s reports did not provide information about land acquisitions (ICR, pp.28-29). The land
   acquisition requirement was only about 0.36 hectares for the construction of water distribution centers. In
   order to minimize the social impact of the project, the Syrdarya SUE changed the right-of-way for pipelines,
   coordinated the construction works with farming activity and harvesting season, and reduced the farmers’


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



  annual quota to be submitted to the government to compensate for the loss of agricultural land. A grievance
  mechanism was in place, but because of the absence of a dedicated specialist at Syrdarya SUE, there was
  no systematic analysis or follow-up of the grievances filed by persons affected by the project (ICR, p.29).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project coordination unit (PCU) did not have the capacity to implement financial management in
  accordance with the Bank’s procedures. Sufficient financial management capacity could not be built during
  project implementation because of high staff turnover. There were delays in the submission of interim
  financial reports and audited project and entity financial statements. Expenditures incurred under the
  project were documented with delay. Delays in releasing counterpart funds continued through to project
  closure. The Syrdarya SUE could not convert government funds to foreign currency and make payments to
  contractors according to contractual obligations because of foreign currency restrictions existed until
  September 2017. Despite a gradual and steady improvement in the financial situation of the utility, the
  Syrdarya SUE’s financial working ratio—operating expenses divided by cash operating revenues—was
  1.2, higher than the target value of 0.9. Since the Syrdarya SUE did not incur any new debt during project
  implementation, the debt service coverage ratio set at 1.2 at appraisal for new borrowing was not
  applicable (ICR, pp.61-62). The project team confirmed that all project funds were accounted for at project
  closure.

  Procurement

  The project was faced with procurement issues from the start of project implementation. Despite the
  project design that mandated the regional utility to be in charge of procurement, all procurement decisions
  were centralized according to the government regulation, and the PCU was responsible for procurement.
  Lack of sufficient capacity at the PCU resulted in a very long delay—two years—in hiring of the project
  implementation consultant (PIC). Since the PIC was to prepare detailed designs of the investment projects
  and bidding documents, the delay in hiring the PIC had a cascading effect on procurement for project
  activities. The Bank’s project team supported the PIC in the preparation of bidding documents in
  accordance with the Bank’s procurement guidelines. The Bank declared mis-procurement on one of the
  contracts, because the PCU had signed the contract without receiving no-objection from the Bank, which
  was against the Bank’s procurement guidelines. The training on procurement provided by the Bank to the
  government staff and contractors between March and October 2016, and the project team’s close
  monitoring of large contract procurement had a positive impact on project implementation; by early 2017,
  most of the contracts had been awarded.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.




                                                                                                Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons incorporating material from the lessons listed on page 33 of the
ICR.

Incomplete project preparation at appraisal can result in significant implementation delays
and less focus on capacity building activities. At appraisal, only the feasibility studies were ready
and detailed design and bidding documents were to be prepared by the project implementation
consultant (PIC) to be hired under the project. The procurement of the PIC took for two years, which
had a cascading effect on the procurement of contracts for investment activities. The delay in
procurement, hence in investment activities, resulted in spending more effort to kick-start these
activities rather than focusing on institutional capacity building concurrently. The project coordination
unit and the Syrdarya SUE, the public utility, lacked institutional capacity in project implementation,
financial management and safeguards policy. These responsibilities were mostly delegated to the
project implementation consultant. Hence, the project was not successful in strengthening
institutional capacity.

Closing a project with the expectation that pending activities would be financed by saved
counterpart funding can critically affect the achievement of project objectives and also
weaken the Bank’s oversight over the completion of pending activities. Following the extension
of the project closing date by 18 months, the Bank management decided not to extend the project
closing date again although some investment activities were still ongoing. The decision was part of a
water supply and sanitation (WSS) sector portfolio-wide action plan—the Bank had three WSS
projects in implementation and a fourth one was under preparation—and aimed at closing projects
where the government was expected to complete the pending activities using its own funds. As a
result, the Bank’s oversight over the project activities weakened, and the government prioritized the
expansion of the water supply network rather than connecting households to the system through
metered piped connections. At the time of the writing of the Implementation Completion and Results




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



Report by almost one year after project closure, some transmission and distribution investment
activities were still pending, and the project had failed to achieve most of the outcome level targets.

Absence of internal plumbing in household units in a basically urban water supply project
can adversely impact the achievement of project outcomes and economic benefits despite
the completion of the backbone of the water production, transmission and distribution
network. The project’s theory of change did not address the absence of internal plumbing in
apartment buildings and houses in villages. The beneficiaries in these households could have
access to water from public stand posts, which is not convenient. Despite the achievement of a
significant infrastructure backbone for water supply services in the Syrdarya region where such
network did not exist before, the project significantly fell short of achieving the target number of
metered household connections because of the absence of internal plumbing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  An assessment of this project is recommended in conjunction with other water supply and sanitation (WSS)
  services projects in Uzbekistan to evaluate the impact of the Bank’s interventions on the improvement of WSS
  sector in the country.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a complete critique of the project. The narrative is tightly written, highly evaluative, and
candid in explaining the shortcomings of the project during implementation. The tables were very useful in
supporting the narrative and summarizing the salient points of the analysis. Despite the challenges with the
availability and reliability of data, the ICR sufficiently presents a complete and robust evidence base, including
annexes, to support the achievement, or non-achievement, of the project objectives. There is a well-articulated
theory of change informing the reader as to how the efficacy ratings have been reached. The report is focused
on how activities should have informed outcomes and what the shortcomings were in achieving the project
objectives. The ICR is internally consistent; there is a logical linking and integration of the various parts of the
report and the results are mutually reinforcing. The report is highly consistent with the Bank guidance. The
sections on safeguards, financial management, and procurement are detailed enough to allow the reader to
have a clear understanding of these aspects of the project. The lessons are well articulated, specific, and based
on the experience gained during project’s implementation. The analysis is high quality and supports the ratings,
except the Efficiency rating. The discussion in the Efficiency section supports a modest rating rather than a
substantial one, but this does not have a material impact on the overall analysis or the Outcome rating. Despite
being substantially longer (33 pages) than recommended in the Bank guidance (15 or 20 pages) and having
some minor typos, the ICR, overall, meets the criteria for a quality rating of high.




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SYRDARYA WATER SUPPLY (P111760)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   High




                                                                    Page 21 of 21
