     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022343

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P096367                                    KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-43760,IDA-51030                        31-Dec-2012                                          425,103,255.30

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2007                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            449,347,250.85                                                 0.00

 Actual                                        425,103,255.30                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original PDO: The objectives of the Project, as stated in the Financing Agreement (June 4 2008; p.6), were
   “to (a) increase access to reliable, affordable and sustainable water supply and sanitation services; and (b)
   improve the water and waste-water services in the Project Implementing Entities’ Service Areas”.

   The project objectives, as stated in the PAD (p.5), were similar – but not identical - to the above. According to
   the PAD, the development objectives were “to: (a) increase access to reliable, affordable and sustainable


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



   water supply and sanitation services, and (b) improve the water and waste-water services in the areas served
   by AWSB, CWSB and LVNWSB”.

   Revised PDO: When the project was restructured in April 2012, and additional financing provided, the PDO
   was revised to state that the objective was: “to increase access to water supply and sanitation services in the
   project implementing entities’ service areas”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-May-2012

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1: Support to the Athi Water Services Board (AWSB – subsequently, with their conversion into
   Water Development Authorities, AWWDA): (cost at appraisal: US$71.5 million; increased to US$269.2
   million after additional financing. Actual at completion: US$246.6 million)

   This component financed the rehabilitation and expansion of existing water systems, as well as of existing
   sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities in Nairobi and selected small towns, including informal
   settlements. Also included was technical assistance and capacity building support to the AWSB
   (subsequently termed the Athi Water Works Development Agency) and its Water Services Providers
   (WSPs), the Water Services Regulatory Board (WASREB) and the Water Tribunal (WT).

   2. Support to the Coast Water Services Board (CWSB – subsequently, CWWDA): (cost at appraisal:
   US$45.0 million; increased to US$135.49 million after additional financing. Actual at completion:
   US$140.55 million - )

   This component financed the rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply systems and of
   sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities in selected small towns and informal settlements. Also
   included was technical assistance and capacity building to the CWSB (subsequently termed the Coast
   Water Works Development Agency) and its WSPs.

   3. Support to Lake Victoria North Water Services Board (LVNWSB – subsequently, LVNWWDA):
   (cost at appraisal: US$42.5 million; increased to US$79.58 million after additional financing. Actual at
   completion: US$74.69 million)

   This component financed the rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply systems, and of
   sewerage networks and sewage treatment facilities in selected small towns, hygiene campaigns, on-plot
   sanitation, including expansion of services to informal settlements. The component also financed technical

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



   assistance and capacity building support to the LVNWSB (subsequently termed the Lake Victoria North
   Water Works Development Agency) and its WSPs.

   After restructuring in 2012, in support of the additional financing (AF), the above components were
   revised to reflect the project’s expanded scope in supporting drought emergency response and financing of
   priority bulk water infrastructure for Nairobi. All three components included activities for development of
   bulk water supplies, expansion of water and sanitation infrastructure, drought mitigation measures and
   institutional strengthening. Under the AF, Component 1 focused on the construction of the 11.3 km
   Northern Collector Tunnel (NCT) to support Nairobi’s bulk water supply scheme, rehabilitation and
   extension of water supply systems, drought mitigation measures, and improvement in wastewater collection
   and treatment in the jurisdiction of the AWWDA (formerly the AWSB). Component 2 focused in increasing
   the capacity of the bulk water supply system, and rehabilitation and expansion of water supply schemes in
   areas such as Kilifi, Lamu, and Taita Taveta, and construction of the Sabaki-Kakuyuni pipeline. Component
   3 focused on rehabilitation and expansion of water supply schemes in small towns, and on construction of
   water and sanitation systems in Eldoret. All three components included investments in water and sanitation
   services in informal settlements.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$159.3 million; increased to US$484.3 million
   after additional financing. Actual cost at project completion was US$461.82 million.

   Financing: The project’s cost was financed through an IDA credit, initially of US$150 million equivalent,
   followed by an Additional Financing (AF) of US$300 million equivalent, including US$20 million from the
   Crisis Response Window and cofinancing of US$100 million equivalent from Agence Française de
   Développement (AFD).

   Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution at project approval amounted to US9.31 million in local
   currency financing. A further US$34.30 million contribution from the borrower was included in the financing
   plan for the AF. Actual borrower contribution at project closing amounted to US$36.72 million.

   Dates: The project was approved in December 20, 2007, becoming effective on September 2, 2008. Its
   original closing date was December 31, 2012. The project was restructured on May 10, 2012, to provide an
   Additional Financing, and its closing date extended to December 31, 2015 (eight years from approval). A
   second restructuring on March 30, 2015 further extended this date to December 15, 2017, to allow time for
   completion of works. A third restructuring followed on December 28, 2017, extending the closing date by
   two years, to December 31, 2019, to allow the Borrower to complete critical water supply works and fully
   disburse the credit amount.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context:


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



With a supply of freshwater resources of less than 650 cubic meters per annum, Kenya stood in the
bottom 8 percent of countries in terms of water scarcity, at the time of appraisal in 2007. Though the
country had made large investments in water and sanitation systems during the 1980s and 1990s, due to
poor management and maintenance these did not result in efficient and sustainable service
distribution. The delivery of water and sanitation services was fragmented, with responsibilities allocated
across various Ministries and agencies. Water and sanitation services (WSS) lacked transparency, were
characterized by low coverage and lack of commercial management, and were unresponsive to
customers’ needs. Inadequate service delivery disproportionately affected the poor living in informal
settlements, which accounted for over 30 percent of Nairobi’s population, so that people had become
increasingly reliant on private vendors, paying relatively high prices for their supply, and having to spend
considerable time obtaining water.

The Government’s National Water Policy (1999) had envisaged 100 percent access to safe water for the
country’s population by 2010. Achieving this objective called for institutional reforms and investments in
the sector to alleviate the bottlenecks existing. Towards this end, the Government commenced a
comprehensive reform of the sector in early 2003, via the Water Act (2002), aimed at harmonizing the
management of water resources and sanitation. The Act, which initiated a far-reaching and
comprehensive reform effort, created a new institutional set-up, aimed at harmonizing and streamlining
the management of water resources and water supply and sanitation services. A central tenet of the new
service delivery framework was the separation of functions between each aspect of service delivery –
policy making, regulation, asset ownership/control and service delivery operations – so as to reduce
conflicts of interest and increase transparency and accountability. To implement the Water Act, the
Government reorganized the Ministry of Water and Irrigation into a body focused on policy issues,
established and operationalized new sector oversight institutions, such as the Water Services Regulatory
Board (WSRB), and established seven Water Services Boards (WSBs). Each WSB was mandated to
appoint Water Service Providers (WSPs), which were legal entities responsible for service delivery
operations. Despite some initial setback and delays, the implementation of the plan was proceeding
satisfactorily by the time of project appraisal.


Alignment with Strategy: At appraisal, the project’s objectives were consistent with the Government’s
strategy as presented in its Vision 2030 document – which aimed to ensure that improved water and
sanitation services were available and accessible to the entire population. The project remained similarly
consistent with the Government’s strategy, even with the revision of its objectives after restructuring in
2012, for the purpose of Additional Financing.

By scaling up the World Bank’s financing for WSS, focusing on service expansion, and helping to close
the infrastructure gap, the project directly supported the specific initiatives of the Bank’s Africa Action
Plan (AAP, 2005). At the same time, the project was expected to help strengthen partnership at the
country level through joint operations and coordination with development partners.

The project’s objectives were broadly consistent with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
Kenya 2010-13, whose strategic objectives included unleashing Kenya’s economic growth potential,
reducing inequality and social exclusion, and managing resource constraints and environmental
challenges. The CPS also had a special focus on governance. The project’s objectives were more
directly consistent with the CPS for 2014-18 (which, after its 2017 update, remained in effect at the time
of project closing. The CPS’s Engagement Domain 3: “Consistency and Equity – Delivering a Devolution
Dividend” (CPS, p.24), in particular, included specific outcomes for “Better Provision of Health and

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



               Sanitation Services by Counties” (Outcome 8), to which the project’s objectives were directly aligned, as
               well as outcomes for “Adequate Systems to Monitor Performance of Services Delivered by Counties”
               (Outcome 9) and for “Heightened Transparency and Accountability in the Use of Public Resources”
               (Outcome 10), to which they were partially aligned.

               Prior Experience in the Sector: The Bank Group had a long history of supporting water supply and
               sanitation infrastructure development in Kenya, and had maintained an active dialogue with the
               Government of Kenya on the formulation of new policies and legislation. The Bank supported the
               Government’s efforts to introduce sector reform in 2003, through the Nairobi Water and Sewerage
               Institutional Restructuring Project (NWSIRP) in FY04, which aimed to demonstrate a sustainable
               institutional model, capable of managing, operating and maintaining infrastructure investment. The
               current Water and Sanitation Service Improvement project was intended to scale up support to
               strengthen this institutional model in AWSB, CWSB and LVNWSB, and move to support needed
               infrastructure investments to physically rehabilitate and expand WSS service provision to unserved and
               underserved areas.
               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To increase access to reliable, affordable and sustainable water supply services”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             A fairly direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected
                             outcomes. The activities consisted of (a) Rehabilitation and extension of water supply systems, and
                             construction of water supply infrastructure, (b) Improvements in wastewater collection/treatment facilities, and
                             construction of sanitation infrastructure, and (c) Strengthening of institutions. Resultant outputs included
                             construction of bulk water infrastructure, piped household connections, etc., laying of transmission and
                             distribution pipes, rehabilitation of wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities, sewers
                             laid/replaced, and capacity building trainings to WSPs, wastewater development authorities and the
                             regulatory board. These in turn would be expected to lead to increased access to reliable, affordable and
                             sustainable water services, sanitation services and improved delivery of water and wastewater services (on
                             account of capacity building).

                             While the activities were broadly appropriate to achieving the desired outcomes, the theory of change (TOC)
                             discussion in the ICR does not specifically analyze whether they were of adequate scale to create a critical
                             mass for change. Also, the results framework did not include an indicator to measure affordability. Reliability
                             of service was to be measured in terms of hours per day of service, in addition to access, and sustainability in
                             terms of O&M costs recovered from customers, as well as from increased sales made possible through

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



development of bulk water services. All of these were less than perfect measures, difficult to attribute
specifically to the project. Similarly, an additional indicator that had been included to measure the percentage
of people rating the services provided by the WSPs in the service areas as “satisfactory or better”, was also
found difficult to measure on account of problems in attributing results to project-related activities, and had to
be discontinued. As such, the sub-objectives of reliability, affordability and sustainability were ultimately
dropped during the 2012 restructuring.

After restructuring in 2012, the theory of change remained materially the same, though simplified. Under the
additional financing (AF), the objective of improving water and wastewater services was dropped. A sizeable
portion of the additional resources went towards construction of the Nairobi Collector Tunnel to develop
Nairobi’s bulk water supply and help alleviate its acute water shortages. Other activities, such as
rehabilitation and extension of water supply systems, were scaled up in project areas. In addition, the AF
supported some activities to mitigate the impact of a severe drought that had devastated the country during
2007-09 – part of which was financed under the IDA Crisis Response Window.

Outputs:

Though most of the construction work was on-going at the time of restructuring in 2012, the project did
achieve the following outputs, according to data provided by the Project Paper: (a) Nearly 39,000 new
household connections were made to bulk water infrastructure supported by the project, all of them in the
AWSB area. (b) Over 600 community water points had been constructed or rehabilitated, also in the AWSB
area. (c) The quantity of water billed and delivered to customers had risen from 308,600 cu. m. to 348,800 cu.
m. per day. (The ICR provides figures that are similar, but not identical). Neither ICR nor Project Paper
provides information on targets. However, the PAD had indicated a Year 4 target for the number of new
household connections of 15,000 in the Nairobi (AWSB) area, a target for additional standposts in informal
settlements in Nairobi of 650, and for the quantity of water delivered of 350,000 cu. m., so achievements in
this respect were broadly on track.

Outcomes:

At restructuring, in 2012, as confirmed by the Project Paper, the project was mostly on track to meet its
development objectives. The number of people benefiting from increased access to improved sources of
water (Baseline, 2007: Nil) had reached 368,328 by mid-2011. All three WSBs and most water services
providers had met or exceeded the targets for recovering their costs of operations and maintenance (O&M)
from customers. O&M costs of WSBs recovered were of the order of 147 percent for ASWB, 124 percent for
CWSB and 100 percent for LVNWSB by mid-2011 (Project Paper, 2012, p.22).

However, it was difficult to determine whether the sub-objective of affordability was being achieved. Although
the project helped to strengthen the regulatory Board (WASREB), it was not clear that the water tariffs
adopted were specifically attributable to the project’s activities; nor did the results framework (RF) include a
measure of affordability. To measure reliability of supply, the RF did include an indicator to measure
improved constancy of water supply (hours per day average) which would have been a reasonable proxy
measure; unfortunately, reliable data proved too difficult to collect and the indicator was dropped at
restructuring. The sustainability sub-objective was easier to determine, as the RF included a measure of
Operations & Maintenance (O&M) costs recovered from consumers – and was retained as an indicator, with
minor modifications, in fact being moved up from an intermediate output indictor to a PDO-level indicator after
restructuring in 2012.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



Based on the above, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To increase access to water supply services”

Revised Rationale
After restructuring in 2012, the sub-objectives of affordability, reliability and sustainability were dropped from
the PDO. The project supported construction and rehabilitation of water sources, storage facilities, water
treatment plants, transmission lines and reticulation networks, so as to enhance access to water
services. This included services extended to informal settlements in the areas served by the project’s
implementing agencies. The project also supported technical assistance and training to the water sector
institutions to strengthen their ability to expand networks and maintain services.

Outputs:

- The construction of the NCT was delayed on account of disruptions to the Government of Kenya (GoK)’s
financing budget. The target of 11.8 km to be constructed by project closing (extended to end-2019, during
the 2017 restructuring) was achieved only by mid-2020. The NCT is expected to be completed and
operational by June 2021, until which time the full benefit of the Nairobi bulk water system is not expected to
materialize.

- Notwithstanding the delay in completing the NCT, the project was able to deliver some 38,000 cubic meters
of new bulk water per day, exceeding the target of 33,000 cubic meters set at restructuring in 2017. This
consisted of 24,000 cubic meters per day from the Baricho boreholes and 14,000 cubic meters per day from
the Tiwi boreholes.

A total of 149 boreholes were constructed and made operational to supply water during droughts, against a
target of 120 boreholes. These boreholes were providing 406,000 people with improved access to water
sources during droughts, achieving the 2017 restructuring target of 400,000.

- The project supported construction of reticulation networks, including extensions to informal
settlements. Some 65,000 new piped household water connections (target was 66,000) were made through
these investments, benefiting 661,500 people. Some 4,000 of these connections were made by WSPs to
households in informal settlements. In all, some 11,000 connections were provided to informal settlements,
benefiting 231,000 people (target was 186,300).

- The project constructed/rehabilitated some 1,195 community water points, exceeding the target of 1,171 set
at restructuring in 2017, and nearly twice the target set at the time of the additional financing. Most of the
community water points were constructed at schools. Yard taps were provided in informal settlements in
Mumias and Malindi.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



- Some 1,405,700 people with existing connections were benefiting from more reliable services arising from
the development of new water sources and rehabilitation/expansion of existing water supply
facilities. Continuity of supply (number of hours per day) rose in seven out of eight WSPs receiving water
from infrastructure supported by the project (e.g. Eldoret from 16 to 18 hours per day, Malindi from 12 to 22
hours).

- Though the revised project did not include the objective of improving water and wastewater services, the
project continued to support activities such as studies, training and technical assistance, aimed at
strengthening water sector institutions and increasing their accountability and transparency. It also supported
training and technical assistance for WASREB to strengthen its engagement with consumers. Also, annual
statutory audits were carried out for all three implementing agencies during each year of project
implementation - to demonstrate the transparent and accountable financial management of each agency.

Outcomes:

The objective of providing increased access to water supply services was achieved. The original target of
2.427 million people was met, despite the fact that the target had been revised downwards at restructuring in
2017 (to 2.382 million). This was also significantly higher than the earlier target of 736,000 set out in the
Additional Financing Project Paper. People benefiting included those with access to new community water
points and new household connections, as well as those with existing connections receiving more reliable
water service.

Based on the achievement of the revised objective, but taking into account the fact that the NCT was not
completed on schedule, efficacy is rated as Substantial



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To improve the water and waste-water services in the Project Implementing Entities’ Service Areas”.

Rationale
The project supported training and technical assistance for WASREB to institutionalize social accountability
measures by supporting Water Action Groups to serve as engagement partners between communities and
WWDAs and WSPs. Strengthening WASREB was key to improving performance of the WWDAs and WSPs,
as WASREB was responsible for monitoring and reporting on their performance and for enforcing license
conditions. The project also supported capacity building for the WWDAs and WSPs in various areas,
including corporate governance, utility management, procurement, contract and financial management. It
also financed technical and financial audits of these institutions, to help them identify weaknesses and find
ways to improve performance.

Unfortunately, the ICR provides no details as regards performance towards achievement of this objective up
to restructuring (when the objective was dropped). As pointed out by the ICR, results indicators to track
performance of this objective were “poorly defined” (ICR, p.14). One indicator, relating to the share of

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



                            persons in a survey indicating satisfaction with the services provided, could not be attributed to the project
                            and was dropped in the restructuring. Another, relating to O&M coverage, was a measure of operational
                            efficiency rather than of service improvement. In the absence of any measure of performance, achievement
                            of this objective is rated as Negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            “To increase access to Sanitation Services”

                            Revised Rationale
                            Outputs:

                            - The number of people provided with improved shared sanitation services under the project improved from
                            4,000 in 2011 to 11,560 by close of project (target of 11,180).

                            - The project constructed 17 ablution blocks, including 13 at schools and the remainder in informal
                            settlements or markets.

                            - The project financed rehabilitation of the Dandora sewage treatment plant, which treats 80 percent of
                            Nairobi’s sewage.

                            Outcome:

                            The objective of increasing access to sanitation services was fully achieved. The number of people benefiting
                            from connections to the sewage system reached 343,000 by project closing, against a post-restructuring
                            target of 258,050 (and more than four times the target presented in the AF Project Paper). This was the
                            result of trunk sewers and reticulation networks in the Nairobi region, including in the Matopeni Spring Valley
                            settlements, Riverbank and Huruma. Some 43,000 connections to the trunk sewerage network were made
                            directly through the WSPs, and an additional 7,000 connections made with the support of the Nairobi
                            Sanitation OBA project, which provided subsidies for connections to project-supported sewerage
                            infrastructure in low-income communities in Nairobi region.



                            Revised Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)




  Rationale
  In the period prior to restructuring in 2012. the project substantially achieved its objective of increasing access
  to affordable, reliable and sustainable water services. However, since the achievement of its objective of
  improving water and waste-water services in the project area could not be assessed, overall efficacy of the
  original PDO is rated Modest. In the post-restructuring period, under the revised PDO, the objective of
  increasing access to water supply services was substantially achieved, while that of increasing access for
  sanitation services was fully achieved or exceeded, and hence rated High. Overall efficacy of the revised
  PDO is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

Economic analysis of the project conducted at appraisal, taking into account benefits arising from the value of
time saved in water collection, the value of incremental water produced and sold, and savings in O&M recurring
costs, generated an economic rate of return (ERR) of 20 percent, and a Net Present Value (NPV) of net benefits
of US$101 million. A new analysis prepared at the time of the 2012 restructuring for the additional financing,
estimated the ERR (based on benefits accruing on account of the project’s investments in water supply), at 24.5
percent and the NPV at US$388.7 million. The ERR at project closing, as estimated in the ICRR, worked out to
a slightly higher figure of 28 percent in the base case, declining to 23 percent, over three sensitivity-analysis
scenarios.

The ICR also separately evaluated economic returns to investments in informal settlements and community
schemes. The project invested US$8.6 million in trunk infrastructure for water supply in the informal settlements
of Kayole Soweto in Nairobi, Kisumu Ndogo in Malindi, VOK in Mombasa and some settlements in Mumias, In
the area served by LVNWWDA. The ERR for these investments worked out to a much higher 50 percent in the
base case, declining to 38 percent over three alternative scenarios of costs and benefits. A similar analysis of
the project’s investments in rural community schemes gave rise to an ERR of 56 percent in the base case
(falling to 43 percent over alternative cost-benefit scenarios).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Actual costs at project closing were lower than projected at the time of the AF (US$461.8 million vs. US$484.3
million), or just over 95 percent of the total, and the IDA credit had been disbursed. Most activities were
completed by project closing – the date of which had however been extended by four years from the original
date set at the time of the AF. Reasons for the delays varied - some of which were beyond the control of the
project. In the first instance, the widespread post-election violence that occurred following the disputed elections
that took place on December 27, 2007, just one week after the project received Board approval, and which led
to considerable internal chaos, delayed project effectiveness by about six months. Implementation of the NCT
contract was delayed in February 2015 by six months on account of a legal challenge to the National
Environmental Management Authority on the environmental and social impact assessment license allowing

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



construction of the NCT, leading to a stop order by the court until the challenge was heard. The injunction was
eventually vacated by the High Court, allowing work to continue. Another legal case in the High Court, arising
out of a procurement complaint made by a losing bidder on work relating to implementation of a bulk water
contract, requiring CWWDA to re-evaluate the bids led to a similar eight-month delay, as did flooding of the
Baricho wellfield in 2018, which delayed works by an additional six months. On the other hand, a factor more
directly under the control of the project was that of shortcomings related to compliance with safeguards,
including health and safety standards, at the NCT construction site, which needed to be addressed.

Taking all factors into account, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    24.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                 28.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were highly relevant to the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy for 2014-
18, which – after an update in 2017 - remained in effect at project closing. Overall efficacy was Modest for the
project’s original objectives, and substantial for its revised objectives, with 29 percent of the project’s funds
having been disbursed prior to restructuring and 71 percent post-restructuring. Efficiency was found to be
Substantial. Overall outcome is based on a split evaluation, whereby outcome pre-restructuring is rated
Moderately Unsatisfactory (rated 3 on a six-point scale, where 1 is HU and 6 is HS) and post-restructuring, is
rated Satisfactory (or 5, on the same six-point scale). The overall outcome rating is the average of the weighted
value of outcome ratings, i.e., (US$123.7 million x 0.29) + (US$301.4 million x 0.71) = 0.87 + 3.55 = 4.42, which
translates to Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



The risk to development outcome is considered to be low. At a technical level, the water treatment plants
and associated infrastructure constructed under the project were all based on proven designs that had been
used widely in other parts of the country, and were likely to be operated and maintained without undue
problems. Operation of the NCT was also likely to be a manageable proposition, because – though it was
the largest tunnel in East Africa – such tunnels were being successfully operated elsewhere in the
world. Although, there was a risk of the construction of the tunnel not being completed, this too was low, as
the Government was fully committed to the objective, as a means of addressing Nairobi’s water shortage.

The fact that the project had helped strengthen the capacity of its implementing institutions, through technical
assistance and training, which was helping them to better manage their investment planning, operational and
financial performance, meant that the WSPs were better placed to maintain current services and expand
them in the future.

The COVID-19 situation does pose one element of unforeseen risk, as it has had a strong negative impact
on the finances of the WSPs. To help contain COVID-19, the WSPs have expanded water services to
places that had limited access, which has increased their costs. This has been exacerbated by
governmental directives to provide free water to informal settlements and vulnerable groups and to suspend
disconnections – all of which has had a negative impact in WSP revenues, threatening their ability to cover
their O&M costs, such as the cost of chemicals for water treatment plants, electricity for water pumps, and
spare parts, which could compromise their ability to serve their customers without service disruption. WSP
revenues dropped by some 39 percent between February and April, 2020, alone (see ICR, p.28), and WSPs
did not expect the situation to improve until 2021. However, to try and mitigate the situation, the World Bank-
financed Water and Sanitation Development Project (WSDP) will provide a conditional liquidity support grant
to all 86 public WSPs, to help make up for the steep decline in their revenues and rise in costs during this
emergency.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project benefited from the World Bank’s experience with the Nairobi Water and
  Sewerage Institutional Restructuring Project (NWSIRP) and with previous Bank-financed water &
  sanitation projects in Kenya and other countries. The project itself appears to have been thoroughly
  prepared. The PAD outlined the risks that the project would face and indicated mitigation measures (see
  PAD, pp.17-18), including action plans to address risks that resources would be misused. Procurement
  and financial management arrangements of the implementing agencies were thoroughly assessed, and
  procedures for management of environmental safeguards were agreed, as were arrangements for
  monitoring and reporting. Under implementation arrangements, it was envisaged that the three
  implementing agencies (AWSB, CWSB and LVNWSB) would implement their own component of the
  project, with a Project Coordination Team (PCT) set up to provide overall coordination, ensure timely
  submission of project reports, exchange information, and share experiences and technical expertise.

  The Additional Financing was, for the most part, also well designed and appraised. Major investments for
  Nairobi and the coastal region were identified through bulk water masterplans that were supported under
  tye project. The project’s environmental category was appropriately raised from B to A (on account of


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



  potential cumulative impacts of the NCT). However, the expectation that a complex investment like the
  NCT could be constructed and completed within three years was fairly optimistic.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project appears to have been adequately supervised, with twenty-four supervision missions over
 eleven years – or an average of two per year. The ICR reports (p.26) that the team worked closely with
 the Government to restructure the project, to revise the results framework, reallocate funds between
 categories and provide more time to implement key contracts.

 The ICR also reports that the team produced Aide Memoires (AMs) that were candid and of high quality,
 reporting routinely on progress, covering key issues and providing recommendations on addressing
 challenges. Draft AMs were discussed with the project implementing agencies to ensure they reflected
 a common understanding of issues and challenges. AM conclusions were reflected in Implementation
 Status & Results Reports (ISRs), which consistently rated project performance indicators realistically.

 When it became clear that the NCT and the transmission line would not be completed by project closing,
 the team ensured that the financing gap would be covered and that contracts (agreement being reached
 with the Government that it would allocate US$63 million to cover the cost of the remaining works and
 implementation of the outstanding RAP) would be executed in accordance with Bank guidelines,
 especially as regards safeguards compliance. The Bank and development partner, Agence Française
 de Développment (AFD), agreed to conduct joint supervision missions to monitor safeguards issues.

 That said, the safeguards-related complexities that arose from implementation of the AF (see Section
 10) indicated that closer supervision by the team and earlier resolution would have been useful. The
 project closed with a Moderately Unsatisfactory rating for overall Implementation Progress, on account
 of pending safeguards actions, which in retrospect could have been addressed at an earlier stage.

 Based on this, the quality of supervision of the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



a. M&E Design
 The M&E system was aligned to project objectives and the results chain, which in turn contained indicators,
 some of which - for the original project - were not easily measurable or free of attribution issues (since
 other development partners or even the Government could potentially finance investments in the project
 area). Also, as seen from Section 4, the results framework (RF) did not include a measure of affordability –
 which was an important omission. That said, the RF was revised during the restructuring linked to the
 additional financing, and again in December 2017, which resulted in an improvement in the ability of te
 indicators to track the project’s achievements and impact.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of the M&E system was adequate. An M&E specialist was appointed to the teams of
  each of the implementing agencies – though in some cases the specialists experienced difficulties in to
  collecting data from the WSPs relating to operational performance and numbers of household
  connections (ICR, p.23). The AWWDA did however make considerable efforts to build capacity for M&E
  at the implementing agencies, hiring a consultant to provide technical assistance in M&E to the
  implementing agencies, followed by the hiring of a firm to help compile the project’s quarterly progress
  reports, and a firm to prepare the government’s project completion and results report. The latter firm also
  held focus group discussions with beneficiaries to help assess the project’s impact. The Bank team
  reported regularly on the operation of the M&E system in their Aide Memoires, noting progress and areas
  in need of strengthening.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data collected for M&E were used to monitor the status of the project. Information collected was
  presented in quarterly progress reports and formed the basis for discussion on challenges facing the
  project, during supervision missions. M&E findings were disseminated and used to inform decisions to
  improve project performance and progress towards results. Regular updating of the results framework
  and of target values of its indicators helped ensure that the M&E framework remained relevant as a tool
  for monitoring progress and identifying challenges.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B, with four safeguards policies triggered at
   appraisal, Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Indigenous
   Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project complied with the Bank’s
   Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines, The project’s environmental classification was raised to
   Category A at the time of the additional financing, because the environmental and social impact of one of its
   subprojects, the NCT, were considered to be significant. Accordingly, an Indigenous Peoples Planning

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



  Framework was prepared and disclosed on December 15, 2011, and three additional policies were
  triggered – Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Safety of Dams
  (OP/BP 4.37).

  At closing, compliance with involuntary resettlement and overall safeguards management were rated
  unsatisfactory, having earlier (October 2016) been downgraded from satisfactory to moderately satisfactory
  on account of capacity shortcomings at the Coast Waterworks Development Agency (CWWDA). Similarly,
  the rating for environmental assessment was downgraded to moderately satisfactory because of poor
  management of soil erosion, spoils, health and safety at the NCT construction site. At project closing,
  several activities related to Component 1 remained incomplete, including completion of a comprehensive
  dam safety assessment and dam safety plans for the existing Thika Dam, as a result of which, in December
  2019, the rating for involuntary resettlement and for overall safeguards management were further
  downgraded to unsatisfactory, and the rating for environmental assessment to moderately unsatisfactory.

  In November 2016, a request for investigation of the NCT 1 was submitted to the World Bank’s Inspection
  Panel, based on a claim that the environmental and social impact assessment carried out for the NCT did
  not involve sufficient community participation, and the NCT was constructed without adequate geotechnical
  studies to map rocks, aquifers, water table, etc., which could affect in interrupted groundwater flow paths,
  leading to irreversible environmental impacts. The Inspection Panel conducted an eligibility visit in February
  2017, and subsequently decided against recommending an investigation into the existing mitigation
  measures of the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The project’s implementing agencies generally complied with the Bank’s
  fiduciary policies, though with some shortcomings. Financial Management (FM) arrangements were
  generally adequate during implementation, being rated as satisfactory until mid-2017, when the rating was
  downgraded to moderately satisfactory, on account of internal control weaknesses over imprest funds and
  fixed assets management. There were also occasional delays in disbursement of funds from the
  designated account to the project’s operational accounts, due to delays in processing disbursements at the
  line ministry. Quarterly interim un-audited financial reports and annual audit reports were generally
  submitted on time. The ICR does not specify whether auditor’s opinions on the final audit report were
  unqualified or not.

  Compliance with financial covenants was satisfactory, with all seven covenants being met by the due date.

  Procurement: Procurement compliance was considered to be Satisfactory overall. Procurement systems
  and the implementing agencies’ arrangements functioned reasonably well during implementation, though
  some delays and weaknesses in contract management did arise in-between. By project closing, most
  major works, goods, and consultancy services contracts had been completed and payments made for all
  goods delivered.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



   Implementation of the NCT created opportunities for knowledge generation and learning. One such
   outcome was the establishment of the Tunneling Association of Kenya in 2019, to promote knowledge
   sharing on the use of underground space in Kenya, furthering education and training and improving tunnel
   safety construction and operation.

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. Setting realistic expectations for complex investment components could lead to smoother
implementation: The NCT was the first large water tunnel of its kind in East Africa, and many
aspects related to its construction were unknown at the time of its inclusion in the project. Given the
uncertainties, it would have been better to have erred on the conservative side as regards the
timetable for its construction; in which case a decision might well have been taken to initiate a new
project, rather than to introduce it to the existing operation via an AF. This might have made it
easier to address the complexities around safeguards, and the additional supervision that was
required.

2. Ensuring that the implementing agencies establish a strong safeguards team from the
start of the project would make for a smoother preparation and implementation of
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Environment and Social Management Plans. The
project’s implementing agencies did not initially have strong safeguards teams, which led to some
non-compliance with the Bank’s safeguards policies and delays in preparation of RAPs, ESMPs and
safety procedures. Even after the Bank worked with the agencies to strengthen these teams, the
project closed with several safeguards issues still outstanding.

3. A strong regulator can help achieve transparent and accountable governance of
institutions in the sector: The project helped to strengthen WASREB (Water Services Regulatory
Board) through training and technical assistance, which helped it to become a more effective
institution, in dealing with customer-related issues, enforce license conditions, engage on tariff




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Water & Sanitation Srv Impr (FY08) (P096367)



issues, and establish complaints-handling systems – thereby establishing the value of investing in
strengthening the role and capacity of the regulator.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written, concise and consistent with guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s
activities, including very detailed annexes summarizing Safeguards Compliance and Performance, and
Efficiency analysis. Its analysis is broadly evidence-based. The ICR could however have usefully provided
more details on Bank performance, where the description is relatively concise, especially on the frequency of
supervision missions (including the extent of country office support) and nature of interaction with the
authorities, and the adequacy of supervision inputs (including skills mix) and resources.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
