     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022383

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P115954                                   IRRIG DEVT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50980                                 31-Dec-2017                                         33,335,581.50

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 03-May-2012                               02-Mar-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            36,820,269.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        33,335,581.50                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               J. W. van Holst              Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Irrigation Development Project (IDP) as articulated in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) was to:

   “sustainably improve the irrigation systems and the institutional framework to support increased
   agricultural production for farmers and agricultural producers on about 12,200 ha.”



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



   The PDO for the IDP as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 7) was to:

   “improve the performance of the irrigation systems and the irrigation institutions to support
   agricultural producers in the Project areas.”

   Both PDO statements were identical except where underlined.

   This Review will assess the project outcomes according to the PDO statement as stated in the Financing
   Agreement. The two elements of the PDO will be assessed as one compound objective because of the inter
   relationship between them in irrigation systems.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by three components:

   1. Infrastructure Investment (appraisal cost: US$38.2 million, actual cost: US$37.2 million). This
   component would finance the implementation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure works/equipment in
   the form of about 13 sub-projects (SPs), of which 6 each located in Republika Srpska (RS) and Federation
   of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), and one in DB. The sub-projects would be selected from the long-lists of
   potential sub-projects that were prepared by the two Ministries and the District Brcko (DB). In FBiH this was
   based notably on proposals submitted by the cantons. The sub-projects all took place on existing
   agricultural land that in the past had been provided with irrigation services; in some of the sub- projects the
   first priority would be on restoring or improving drainage to ensure proper water management.

   2. Irrigation Modernization (appraisal cost: US$5.8 million, actual cost: US$1.5 million). This would
   cover strengthening the Ministries, the DB, the Water Agencies, the Irrigation Extension services in RS and
   FBiH, and participating municipalities and cantons in addressing: the new sector policies, establishing and
   facilitating/empowering Water Users Organizations (WUA), the O&M arrangements for the introduced
   infrastructure/facilities, the fee determination, fee collection and management, and related water resources
   and irrigation management. This component would fund the on-farm agronomic and irrigation extension
   services, to help farmers seek credits and/or subsidies for the on-farm equipment, and to optimize irrigation
   use for improved performance (“more crop per drop” and “less drop per crop”).

   This component included three sub-components:

   2.1. Agency-level Strengthening. This subcomponent would support the: (i) Development of the regulatory
   framework for operating irrigation schemes (tariff methodology, benchmarking of financial and technical
   performance, etc); and (ii) Support the preparation of future irrigation strategies for the Entities. It would also
   support establishing a Technical Working Group comprising representatives of both Entities to enhance the
   learning from experiences across the country and help improve policy coordination.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



  2.2. Farm-level Irrigation Advisory Service (IAS) and Modernization. This subcomponent would finance
  (i) Strengthening the knowledge of the Entities field-level advisors on IAS, train WUAs on O&M, including on
  water quality and environmental aspects of irrigation and drainage); (ii) support on-farm demonstrations of
  water-saving good practices (e.g. irrigation re-scheduling, laser land leveling, help WUAs access
  subsidy/credit on low-pressure sprinklers and drip networks); and (iii) finance on-farm water-management
  equipment for each SP serving no less than 1,000 ha (soil-moisture monitoring kits, water-flow meters,
  weather stations on specific/demo SPs to help compute the soil-water balance components, including
  evapo-transpiration, effective rainfall, upward capillary).

  2.3. On-demand training. This would finance demand-driven training for WUAs, related to improved
  agricultural technologies and practices and linking to markets.


  3. Project implementation support (appraisal cost: US$2.4 million, actual cost: US$1.4 million). This
  would cover costs of project management including M&E, safeguards, audits, management information
  system (MIS), procurement and financial management training, and office and mobile equipment.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was expected to be US$47.06 million. The actual total cost reported by
  the ICR (page 1) was US$41.13 million. The difference was due to a lower disbursement amount of the IDA
  Credit (see below).

  Financing. The project was financed through a US$40.00 million IDA Specific Investment Credit (SIC). The
  project would finance investments in the two Entities the Federation of Bosnia Herzegovina (FBiH) and
  Republika Srpska (RS) and the District Brcko (DB). In the FBiH the IDA investment was expected to
  amount to US$18.00 million, US$20.00 million in the RS, while DB would benefit from US$2.0 million. In a
  further communication, the project team explained that DB was not part of the project. The Actual amount
  disbursed according to the ICR (page 1) was US$33.34 million. According to the ICR (page 33) in the FBiH
  the IDA investment amounted to US$14.41 million and in the RS it amounted to US$18.69 million. There
  was no information on the amount disbursed for DB. The ICR did not provide an explanation for the lower
  disbursement of IDA, and it reported the actual disbursement amount as 91.3% (paragraph 72). In a further
  communication, the project team explained that DB was not part of the project, and confirmed that actual
  disbursement reached 91.3% due to the depreciation of the US dollar against the SDR.

  Borrower Contribution. The counterpart financing was expected to be US$7.00 million. This comprised
  financing from the two entities and DB, cantons/municipalities, and/or farmers/WUAs. According to the ICR
  (page 2) actual counterpart financing was US$7.79 million.

  Dates and Restructuring. The project was approved on May 3, 2012 and became effective on March 29,
  2013. The Midterm-Review (MTR) was carried out on July 31, 2015, about 3.5 years after effectiveness.
  The PAD did not specify an exact date for the MTR. The original closing date was on December 31, 2017
  compared to an actual closing date on March 2, 2020. According to the ICR (paragraph 28) the 23 months

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



   extension was to “allow enough time for the implementation of all project financed activities in order to meet
   the PDO.”



   The project was restructured twice both Level 2 restructuring. The first was on June 29, 2017, when the
   amount disbursed was US$11.79 million, in order to change the Results Framework (including amendments
   to two PDO indicators), extend the Loan Closing Date to November 30, 2019, and change the
   implementation schedule. The second was on November 27, 2019, when the amount disbursed was
   US$25.51 million, in order to extend the project closing date by an additional three months to close on
   March 2, 2020. Since neither of the restructurings changed the project’s level of ambition, there was no
   reason for a split rating of outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
 Context at Appraisal. The agriculture sector in the Federation of Bosnia Herzegovina (FBiH) has an
economic comparative advantage due to its closeness to the European Union (EU), a moderate continental
climate, clean and abundant natural water resources, and relatively low factor prices. However, the weak
institutional capacity e.g. for extension services, the low investment rates, and the lack or inoperability of
agricultural and rural infrastructure such as reliable irrigation are serious constraints to increasing the
sector’s productivity. The project aimed to address these constraints through expanded intensive production
at the farm level, rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and improving public services by establishing
proper roles and responsibilities between state, entity, cantonal, municipal, and user level.

At appraisal, objectives were in line with the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy for FBiH (CAS, FY12-
FY15) which identified agriculture production as an area of potential for economic growth and increased
employment. The CAS aimed to increase competitiveness through investments in irrigation, among others,
and improve environmental sustainability, through supporting the sustainable use of natural resources such
as water and land. At the time of appraisal, the FBiH was yet to update its agricultural and rural
development policy and strategy. Objectives were in line with RS strategy for agriculture and rural
development which had six long- term objectives including: (i) increasing the scope and adjusting the
structure of agricultural and industrial production; (ii) optimal utilization of agrarian resources; (iii) balanced
integrated rural and agrarian development; (iv) support a stable market for agricultural and food related
products, with a trend of reducing the share of food related costs in the structure of family budgets; (v)
increasing the level of exports; and (vi) improve of institutional, material, staff related, technical and
technological capacities of agriculture.

At completion, objectives continued to be in line with the current Bank CPF (FY16 - FY20). The CPF has
three focus areas: i) increasing public sector efficiency and effectiveness, ii) creating conditions for private
sector growth, and iii) building resilience to natural shocks. Specifically, objectives were in line with the
focus area 2a (Support a Competitive Business Environment and Access to Finance), and focus area 3.
The Project supported farmers to implement climate smart agriculture by improving the performance of the

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



               irrigation systems including promoting the use of water efficient technology, increasing the productivity and
               competitiveness of the farmers and supporting the job creation in rural areas. The project objective was
               also in line with the Government's Strategic Plan for Rural Development of Bosnia and Herzegovina (2018 –
               2021) which aimed to improve competitiveness of agri-food products and quality of life in rural areas. The
               Plan included 6 strategic goals: strengthening competitiveness of agriculture, forestry and rural areas by
               increasing the level of investments and improving the transfer of knowledge and innovation. This included
               installation of irrigation to increase intensity of use of arable land.

               On the other hand, the project development objective (PDO) aimed at "improving performance" was vague.
               The statement also lacked a connection to objectives for agricultural producers, namely, resilience to
               drought, projected increases in crop yield, crop intensification, crop diversification, and
               enhanced livelihoods of farmers in the project areas. Finally, the Results Framework (RF) lacked adequate
               indicators to assess the extent to which the core elements of the PDO, namely improved performance of
               the irrigation systems and of the irrigation institutions, were achieved when the project closed. Both the
               vague level of ambition and the lack of adequate indicators for the core elements of the
               PDO undermined the validity of the PDO.



               Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the performance of the irrigation systems and the irrigation institutions to support agricultural
                             producers in the Project areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The project aimed to (a) improve the performance of the irrigation systems to
                             support agricultural producers in the project areas and (b) improve the irrigation institutions to support
                             agricultural producers in the project areas. This objective would be achieved through: (i) rehabilitating
                             irrigation and drainage infrastructure, including construction, reconstruction, upgrading, and modernization, on
                             existing agricultural land; (ii) introduction of new technologies in irrigated agriculture; and (iii) institutional
                             development, strengthening of water resources management institutions and introducing a participatory
                             approach to water management (PAD, Annex 2, paragraph 5).

                             To achieve the first element of the PDO (to improve the performance of the irrigation schemes), the project
                             would rehabilitate and modernize the irrigation and drainage infrastructure on existing agricultural land and

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



construct new infrastructure where needed. Also, the project would encourage farmers to use more water-
efficient technologies. To improve on-farm water efficiency, the project would facilitate support to the farmers
to apply for and access credit under different government programs for on-farm equipment and investments.
As a result of these activities, the performance of irrigation schemes was expected to be improved.

To achieve the second element of the PDO (to improve irrigation institutions), the project aimed to improve
the tertiary irrigation regulatory framework and build the capacity of the water management institutions
including the water users' associations (WUAs) and the relevant utility companies. The WUAs were expected
to improve water use efficiency and, to introduce and improve collection of service fees leading to better
operation and maintenance (O&M) of irrigation facilities.

Anticipated long-term impacts included: Improved resilience to drought, increased crop yields, increased
intensification of crop production, increased diversification, and improved irrigation scheme sustainability. All
these impacts were expected to result in improved livelihoods of farmers.

Key Assumptions. The achievement of the ToC for the first element of the PDO was underpinned by the
assumption that farmers would be willing to invest in modern irrigation technologies in order to improve the
overall performance of the irrigation system.

The ToC for the second element of the PDO was underpinned by the assumption that with better tertiary
irrigation systems and active WUAs there would be improved O&M of facilities and equitable water
distribution leading to less tail-end farmers with water shortages, i.e. better water management including
adequate drainage of farmlands.

The above-mentioned activities were directly connected to the PDO. However, achieving overall improvement
of the irrigation system required farmers to invest in modern on-farm irrigation technologies in tertiary
systems. How this was to be achieved was indicated in general terms in the PAD (paragraph 25). Farmers
would have access to "implementation support" including financing estimated at US$7 million from ministries
of agriculture, cantons/municipalities and WUAs in RS and FBiH (PAD, paragraph 25). The ICR was not
clear on the extent to which farmers had received this support. According to the ICR (paragraph 26)
cantons/municipalities did not provide financial support for on-farm irrigation investments and "farmers
equipped their farms using their resources". On the other hand, in discussing ten schemes completed during
the last months of project implementation paragraph 77 of the ICR stated that "The farmers were able to
make the necessary on-farm investments using the existing cantonal/municipality co-financing facility and
financial resources from IFAD". The ICR made no mention of assistance received from ministries of
agriculture.

Following questions by IEG on the ICR the project team explained that:

"The client has reconfirmed that the farmers have benefited from the government subsidy programs, and the
availability of national and local level investment incentives for on-farm irrigation development supported by
donors such as the EU including the procurement and installation of farm-level irrigation equipment. These
incentives range from 25% to 40% of the total costs depending on the age and the gender of the
beneficiary. For instance, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Water Management of the Republika
Serpska granted about 1.7million KM (~$1.1 million US$) during 2014 to 2020 in the project sites. In addition,
in FBiH, the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) funded the construction of secondary



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



network in municipality Foča in Federation BiH (Ustikolina), and Goražde which enables direct access to the
water from the manhole on each plot."

The following outputs and outcomes were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise. Targets
are provided where available.



Outputs



(a) To Improve the performance of the irrigation system to support agricultural producers in the
project areas

      Fourteen sub-projects were implemented (6 in RS and 8 in FBiH); pipes were supplied for an
       additional scheme, Bihac, in FBiH (20% completion). Bihac would be completed with funding from the
       Government. All the schemes had pipeline systems, except for Mastasko Blato which uses canals. A
       total of 285 km of pipelines were installed; 40 km of irrigation canals were rehabilitated; 78 km of
       drainage canals were rehabilitated, and 3 km new drainage canals were constructed; 37 wells were
       constructed and equipped with pumps and 25 pumping stations were constructed; and 30 reservoirs
       were constructed.
      Two of the sub projects had demonstration areas to display improved irrigated agriculture practices
       and to show case different water saving technologies.
      Detailed designs were prepared for five sub projects (4 in RS and 1 in FBiH) to be implemented under
       other funding.

(b) To Improve the performance of the irrigation institutions to support agricultural producers in the
project areas

      The project conducted training workshops on management of irrigation schemes for local stakeholders
       for the schemes in Ljubinje, Bratunac, Gorazde and Mostarsko Blato.
      A participatory irrigation management guideline was prepared for RS and FBiH which would be used
       in the capacity building of the institutions managing the schemes and WUAs in the schemes where
       irrigation infrastructure had been completed.
      A knowledge exchange visit was conducted to Spain for 20 participants from FBiH and another one to
       Italy for 20 participants from RS. The purpose of the knowledge exchange visits was to support
       participants to acquire knowledge about the functioning of the organizations responsible for the
       operation and maintenance of the irrigation systems in Italy and Spain. The study tours focused on the
       implementation and efficacy of Participatory Irrigation Management in the two countries and the use of
       modern technologies for optimization of water use.
      Two irrigation rule books were prepared which detailed the conditions and methodology for financing
       construction, maintenance and management of irrigation systems. These were published in the official
       Government gazette.




                                                                                               Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



Outcomes

(a) To improve the performance of the irrigation systems to support agricultural producers in the
project areas

The achievement of the first element of the PDO was assessed through two outcome level indicators:

(i) The area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services which was further separated into an
area provided with new irrigation or drainage services, and an area provided with improved irrigation or
drainage services;

(ii) The number of beneficiaries without (tail-end) water shortage or drainage problems with a supplemental
indicator on the percentage of female beneficiaries.

By project completion, a total of 10,055 ha were provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services
against a target of 9,000 ha (target exceeded by 11%). In total fourteen schemes were constructed (target:
13). However, ten schemes were completed near the project's close, of which seven were already operational
during the summer of 2020 (ICR, paragraph 37). According to the ICR (paragraph 36) "the improvement in
the abstraction and conveyance systems contributed to an improvement in the performance of the irrigation
systems." The ICR (Annex 1) reported that the incremental irrigation water added, based on four sub-projects
which were in operation for several seasons by project closure, was 21.95 million cubic meters compared to a
target of 25 million cubic meters (88% achievement rate). Other than this estimate based on four sub-
projects, the ICR provided no other evidence of improvements in water conveyance, reduced water loss, or
increased abstraction in the irrigation systems. In summary, the project invested in providing new/improved
irrigation or drainage services on 10,055 ha compared with a target of 9,000 h. However the only information
in the ICR on improved irrigation water supplies or improved is in four sub-projects. There is no other
evidence in the ICR of improved irrigation and drainage services.

With respect to beneficiaries without tail-end water supply and drainage problems (PDO Indicator 2), the ICR
noted that "In the four completed schemes (mentioned above) which were in operation for several years the
beneficiaries were satisfied with the irrigation service delivery and report neither tail-end water shortage nor
drainage problems" (paragraph 37). But the ICR provided no basis, such as a survey of beneficiaries, for this
information.

In response to questions from IEG, the project team explained that:

"The assessment of the beneficiaries in the ICR is based on the surveys that were conducted by the client to
verify the improvements in irrigation service delivery on the four schemes that were operational for several
years. Per client report, the survey was conducted on ‘number of farmers that are already users. The
information is the result of long process of data collection on the field directly, and in close cooperation with
representatives of local community all in line with already expressed needs by farmers themselves’."

Not withstanding the ICR assertion for the four completed schemes, Annex 1 of the ICR (page 22) states that
the project exceeded the total target for PDO Indicator 2 with an estimated 21,406 beneficiaries in the
fourteen schemes constructed compared to a target of 18,000 beneficiaries. However, Annex 1 also states
that it was assumed that all the people in the sub-project areas would not have a tail-end water shortage or
drainage problems when schemes had been rehabilitated or reconstructed. It also clarifies that "The number
of beneficiaries without tail-end water supply and drainage problems is based on the number of households

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



in the schemes, the average household size with an allowance for seasonal workers." In other words the
assertion about the number of project beneficiaries without "tail-end water shortage or drainage problems" is
not based on evidence but based on assumptions of total success for the stakeholders in the project
areas. The total number of direct beneficiaries without "tail-end water shortage or drainage problems" who
were female is also an estimate based on female membership in water users associations WUAs.

This review concluded that the ICR provides no evidence that the project provided new/improved irrigation or
drainage services in the project areas as could be indicated by measures such as improved conveyance,
decreased water losses, and reduced time required by farmers to irrigate their farms. There is also
no evidence in the ICR regarding the number of farmers in the rehabilitated/reconstructed project areas who
were without tail-end water shortage or drainage problems (the PDO indicator). However, work on the
improvement of the tertiaries was not completed and mentioned in the ICR as a risk to the project's
development outcome, which raises questions regarding the alleged evidence for the achievement of the first
and second elements of the PDO in the project areas. Indeed one of the Lessons from the project in the ICR
(paragraph 81) noted that "The Project financed the construction of the network up to the farm gate (main
systems), leaving on-farm improvement works for the cantons/municipalities and the farmers". The lesson
drawn by the ICR was that "In order not to delay the services to the beneficiaries it is advisable to
concurrently implement both the main infrastructure and on-farm improvement works irrespective of who
finances the latter".

Given the lack of credible evidence in the ICR regarding the efficacy with which the project improved the
performance of the irrigation systems to support agricultural producers in the project areas, IEG sought
further information from the Bank project team.

The project team explained the following:

"The systems built by this project were designed to provide irrigation services on-demand. The provision of
irrigation services to beneficiaries “on-demand’’ enables the supply of sufficient water quantities and the
minimum operating pressure at the most distant and most disadvantageously located plots or
hydrants. These systems are operating optimally so typical problems such as “head-tail” that occurs in water
rotation have been avoided. All problems in water flows and pressures at outlets in irrigation system can be
easily detected if they occur since monitoring of water supply and the amount of water used is automatic and
controlled in real time. Thus, given the state-of-the-art technology which inherently guarantees better service
quality to the users and higher distribution efficiency, the need for having separate measures for improved
conveyance, decreased water losses, reduced time required by farmers to irrigate their farms is not required."

Based on the project's team explanation regarding the state-of-the-art technology of the irrigation systems
financed by the project, the efficacy with which the project improved the performance of the irrigation systems
to support agricultural producers in the project areas is rated Substantial.



(b) To improve the performance of the irrigation institutions to support agricultural producers in the
project area

The achievement of the second element of the PDO, was assessed through one outcome indicator which was
the number of end-user O&M agreements signed and adopted. A total of 15 O&M agreements were signed at
project closure against a target of 10 agreements. According to the ICR (paragraph 39), the signed O&M

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



                            agreements emphasized the equitable water allocation principles specified in the irrigation management rule
                            books developed for RS and FBIH. Adoption and implementation of the agreements was expected to reduce
                            the tail-end water distribution inequities. Out of the fourteen schemes developed under the project, eight
                            schemes were managed by utilities with involvement of the WUAs; two schemes in RS were managed by
                            agriculture companies who pay a water concession fee to the public institution in charge of water
                            management, and only four schemes were solely managed by WUAs. According to the (ICR , Annex 1)
                            the rate of O&M fee collection within two seasons after starting the irrigation service reached 65% compared
                            to a target of 70% (93% achievement) and a baseline of 30%. The estimate was based on information from
                            four operational schemes that were completed earlier in the implementation cycle.

                            While the project established a management system and contributed to improving the capacity of the WUAs
                            to support farmers in the project area, there was limited evidence provided in the ICR that point to the
                            achievement of the second element of the PDO. Also, the results framework lacked relevant indicators to
                            assess whether there was an improvement in their performance. One indicator that may have shed some light
                            on whether WUAs and other water management institutions in the sub-projects had improved was the rate of
                            collection of O&M fees. According to Annex 1 (page 25) the rate of O&M fee collection "within two seasons of
                            starting irrigation services" was 65% compared with a target of 70% for the four schemes which had been
                            operating for several years. That said, it is plausible that irrigation institutions improved their support to
                            farmers after the project closed because the project had made efforts to strengthen their capacity and O&M
                            agreements had been signed between the cantons/municipalities and the management entities tasked with
                            the operation and management of the schemes.

                            On this basis the efficacy with which this institutional element of the PDO was achieved is rated
                            Substantial, but only marginally so.

                            To sum up, in light of the explanation provided above by the project team, this review concluded that it is
                            plausible to assume that this project improved the performance of the irrigation systems to support agriculture
                            producers, despite the limited evidence provided in the ICR. Also, there was evidence that irrigation
                            institutions had become more capable and plausibly improved irrigation management substantially after the
                            project closed. Overall, this review has rated the efficacy of the achievement of the PDO as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            According to the ICR the project improved irrigation infrastructure through rehabilitation of existing systems or
                            installing new irrigation systems. The project is reported to have exceeded its target coverage area by 11%
                            and covered more direct beneficiaries than expected at appraisal (21,000 compared to 18,000). However,
                            there were no indicators or other evidence to validate the achievement of an "improved performance of the
                            irrigation systems to support agricultural producers" even for the four schemes that were
                            completed. Furthermore, the envisioned improvements to the tertiary irrigation network at the farm-level were

                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



  not fully achieved, which underlined questions regarding the lack of evidence regarding the achievement of
  the first element of the PDO. There was evidence, however, that the project facilitated improved water
  management systems, and O&M agreements that were signed between the cantons/municipalities and the
  management entities tasked with the operation of schemes. This review concluded that it was plausible that
  the capacity building efforts to strengthen the irrigation institutions would improve WUAs future ability to
  manage the irrigation schemes effectively in the project area.

  In a further communication, the project team explained that: "While we acknowledge that the increase in
  yields was not monitored regularly as part of the project RF to measure the impact of the improved irrigation
  systems since it was envisaged as a long term outcome per the Theory of Change, the client has collected
  and maintained additional data for the purpose of gauging the impact of access to irrigation on crop
  production and farmers income and for the purpose of fulfilling the respective ministries data and monitoring
  requirements. This was done for the four irrigation schemes completed early and for which irrigation has been
  done for several seasons."

  In response to questions regarding the evidence on efficacy mentioned above, the project team provided IEG
  with a better explanation about the technical details of the project-financed rehabilitated and improved
  irrigation systems and their expected impacts. Based on the team's explanations, this review concluded
  that this project improved the performance of the irrigation systems to support agriculture producers, despite
  the limited evidence provided in the ICR. Also, there was evidence that irrigation institutions had become
  more capable and plausibly improved irrigation management substantially after the project closed. Overall,
  this review has therefore rated the efficacy of the achievement of the PDO as Substantial.




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

ex ante

     The overall economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 16.3 %, and the Net Present Value (NPV)
      amounted to US$456,667 using a discount rate of 12%. The analysis was made on two representative
      sub-projects from phase I: the Gorazde (FBiH) and Novo Selo (RS) SPs, identified by BiH as two of the
      four priority SPs selected for IDP support during its early stage.
     Crop and farm models were simulated for the relevant crops using ―with and ―without scenarios, which
      differ on the expected yields and production costs as irrigation was made available and became
      reliable. On average, crop yields were expected to increase by about 50% in the project areas. These
      project improvements were expected to generate increases in household income by about 55 to 134 %,
      depending on the farm size and cropping patterns.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 21
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



      One of the selection criteria for sub-projects, was that the investment cost was not to exceed US$2,000
         per hectare.
      A sensitivity analysis showed that if all investment costs were 20% above the base assumption, the ERR
         would be reduced to 13.4%. While if crop diversification were to be reduced to 50% of the base
         assumption, the ERR would be reduced to 12.5%. Only when both adverse events occur simultaneously
         (which is less likely), would the ERR drop to 9.8%.



ex post

      The overall economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 21% (compared to 16.3% at appraisal)
         using a discount rate of 12%. To ensure comparability of results, the economic analysis was performed
         using similar methodology applied at appraisal and on the same two schemes selected. Updated
         information on labor and input requirements for various operations, capital costs, prevailing wages,
         yields, farm gate and market prices of commodities, input and farm-to-market transport costs were
         collected and used by the analysis. Prices for commodities/inputs reflect annual average and those
         actually paid/received by the farmer. Benefits included in the analysis included: additional production on
         incremental land as a result of irrigation and drainage infrastructure improvements, higher yield levels as
         a result of better, more reliable and increased water delivery, and improved groundwater control and
         earlier spring planting, production of higher value crops as part of a more diversified cropping pattern,
         and reduced pumping costs per cubic meter as a result of reduced losses.
         At project closure the average investment cost for sub-projects was US$4,006 per hectare (including
         project implementation support costs), which was double the appraisal estimate at US$2,000 per
         hectare. The ICR did not explain the reasons behind this jump in costs.
        The financial analysis showed that the IRR of the Gorazde SP was 27.2% and NPV was 5.4 million BAM,
         while the IRR for Novo Selo SP was 26.9 %, and the NPV was 7.6 million BAM, again using a 12%
         discount rate over 20 years.
        The ex post analysis could have benefited from the inclusion of a sensitivity analysis to show the impact
         of different scenarios on the project's ERR, particularly because the data for benefits used in the analysis
         of efficiency were assumptions not based on actual results. In a further communication, the project team
         provided a sensitivity analysis that proved the robustness of the project investments under different
         scenarios.
        The results of the ex post analysis showed that the project was economically viable and generated good
         economic returns. However, even if the assumed project benefits were defensible or completely accurate
         the ex post estimates of rates of return are questionable because there is no evidence in the ICR that the
         improvement of the irrigation systems extended to the farm level as envisioned at appraisal and
         assumed in the economic analysis..

Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

The project was delayed and lasted seven years instead of five years as envisioned at appraisal. It took one
year between Board approval and effectiveness. In addition, there were early implementation delays due to a
lengthy approval process of the various permits, especially in FBiH (ICR, paragraph 52), delays in the
procurement of consultancies for the preparation of detailed engineering designs of pressurized irrigation
systems (ICR, paragraph 53), and implementation delays due to the lengthy time needed to reach out and
locate land owners who had emigrated in order to get their consent to access their land (ICR, paragraph


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



55). Flooding in 2019 caused rivers in BiH to overflow and caused implementation delays, which were beyond
the control of the project.

Overall, the project's efficiency is rated Substantial. This rating is based on the higher ex-post ERR compared to
appraisal and the presumption that the project may ultimately achieve the benefits assumed in the ICR's
economic analysis and that implementation delays, while problematic, were largely beyond the control of the
project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                 16.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              21.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial because although the relevance of the objective to both
government and Bank development strategies was high the vague wording of part of the objective
statement and the inadequate weak PDO indicators undermined the clarity of the objective. The
project improved irrigation infrastructure and exceeded its target coverage area by 11% and covered more
direct beneficiaries than expected at appraisal (21,400 compared to 18,000). While, there were no indicators or
other evidence in the ICR to validate “improved performance of the irrigation system and support to agricultural
producers", the project team provided IEG with an explanation of the technical design and expected benefits of
the improved irrigation infrastructure to the farmers in the project areas. The capacity building efforts of the
project were expected to improve WUAs ability to manage irrigation schemes, especially because the project
also put in place a management system, and O&M agreements were signed between the cantons/municipalities
and the management entities tasked with the operation of the schemes. Overall efficacy was rated
Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial assuming the project would ultimately achieve the benefits adopted
in the economic analysis and despite implementation delays.

Based on these ratings this review concluded that there were minor shortcomings in the project's relevance of
objectives, efficacy and efficiency and has therefore rated its overall outcome as Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed one risk that could potentially impact the Development Outcome.

The risk that the constructed systems were not sustainable. The fifteen signed agreements between
farmers, cantons/municipalities, and entities responsible for managing and operating the schemes included
arrangements for O&M costs. O&M costs were to be subsidized by cantons or municipalities as farmers
need time to take full responsibility of O&M. For this to happen, farmers need to increase agricultural
production, through use of better farming methods including inputs, and diversification to higher value crops-
all of which were outside the scope of this project. Also, BiH is suffering from high immigration rate of its
population, which might negatively impact the number of people willing to engage in farming. This prompted
Cantons/Municipalities to offer incentives for their population to continue farming, e.g. Mostarsko where the
Canton is covering the maintenance costs for the irrigation system. That said, the Government of BiH is
committed to improving irrigation since it requested to include irrigation in the follow-up operation estimated
at US$73 million (BiH Agriculture Resilience and Competitiveness Project, P171266). According to the ICR
“it is expected that some of this money is used for on-farm improvement of the already developed irrigation
schemes (paragraph 77).”




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   The project builds on the Bank's “ECA I&D Strategy Note” which concluded that irrigation and drainage
  (I&D) was a priority in BiH to contribute to modernizing agriculture in preparation for EU entry; and plays
  a role in higher value agriculture. The project objective was in line with Bank's Country Partnership
  Strategy (CPS, FY2012-2015) for BiH (see section 3 for more details). The project benefited from a
  simple design that included three components with activities that directly contributed to the PDO (ICR,
  paragraph 49). Design benefitted from the Bank's experience in I&D projects in the ECA region, and from
  the Bank-funded Small-Scale Commercial Agriculture Development Project (SSCAD 2006-2010) in BiH.
  A notable lesson reflected in the design of this project was the importance of strengthening institutional
  capability and building on the commitment of the farmers to organize themselves into WUAs to
  successfully manage the new/rehabilitated irrigation schemes.

  However, readiness for implementation was limited as only four sub-projects selected for phase one had
  detailed designs and were ready for tendering (ICR, paragraph 51). Also, the project's design
  underestimated the complexity and the time needed to secure various sub-project related permits
  such as water concession permits, urban permits, preliminary water approval, water permits, construction
  permits, and electricity power approval. These permits involved many local, regional and entity
  government institutions and securing their approval caused considerable implementation
  delays, especially in FBiH (ICR, paragraph 52). In addition, the implementing agency had limited
  administrative and technical capacity to implement an irrigation modernization project that required the

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



  preparation of detailed engineering designs (ICR, paragraph 53). Such limited capacity resulted in the
  revision of irrigation designs of some sub-projects during implementation, which compounded
  implementation delays. A notable design shortcoming was the lack of detail for on-farm irrigation
  modernization, which was needed in order to fully achieve system improvements and improve irrigation
  efficiency at the farm-level. While the PAD discussed modernizing on-farm irrigation (sub-component
  2.2), there was no mention on how this was to be done (ICR, paragraph 69). The PAD identified
  three types of risks related to stakeholders, implementing agency, and project-related risks. Overall risk
  was rated moderate and relevant mitigation measures were included in the PAD. However, the ICR did
  not discuss which risk(s) materialized and whether the suggested mitigation measures worked.

  Project design included an adequate economic analysis that provided the basis for analyzing efficiency at
  completion. However, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) failed to identify all
  the necessary permits required for the irrigation sub-projects before final permission was given to utilize
  the systems (ICR, paragraph 71). Finally, M&E had design shortcomings regarding the lack of indicators
  to comprehensively assess the improvement in the performance of the irrigation systems and the
  irrigation institutions (see section 9 a for more details).

  Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating reflects moderate design
  shortcomings that impacted readiness for implementation as well as M&E design shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project faced challenging implementation conditions related to flooding in 2014 and in 2019 (ICR,
 paragraph 56). According to the ICR (paragraph 72) the "Bank conducted semi-annual supervision
 missions and the ISRs show an objective reporting on the implementation issues in the field and
 recommendations on how to address them." Supervision of fiduciary aspects, reviewing audit reports and
 supporting the procurement activities were adequate, and according to the ICR there was no significant
 fiduciary issue during implementation (ICR, paragraph 73). The Bank also supervised and ensured social
 safeguards compliance. In 2019, with lagging implementation and a slow disbursement rate, the Bank
 resorted to holding monthly co-ordination and remote implementation support meetings with the project
 teams to address any issue arising and to improve decision making. This arrangement resulted in
 improved implementation and the disbursement rate increased from 58% in May 2019 to 91.3% (83%
 according to this review) at project closure. The Bank worked with the borrower to extend the closing date
 by three months to ensure the completion of ongoing works.

 The project was supervised by four Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the project implementation period.
 According to the ICR (paragraph 72) the borrower viewed such TTL changes as frequent, and "disruptive to
 team dynamics". The ICR also noted that a new TTL usually required a transition period to learn about the
 project, which sometimes slowed down decision making. While the Bank closely supervised the project
 and presented recommendations to address challenges, these were often not implemented in time by the
 project authorities (ICR, paragraph 74). This could have been partially due to the limited technical capacity
 of the staff at the implementation unit as well as the municipalities/cantons (ICR, paragraph 74). Finally, the
 Bank could have used the restructuring to address M&E design weaknesses to better assess the

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



 improvement in the performance of the irrigation systems and the irrigation institutions as a result of the
 project intervention.

 Supervision quality is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings, namely disruptive
 changes in TTLs and inaction on improving PDO indicators .

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating reflects moderate shortcomings for
 both Quality at Entry and Bank Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC), which was not required at the time of appraisal.
 Nonetheless, the ICR (page 7) included a ToC that reflected the connections between the project activities,
 outputs, outcomes and long term impacts. The ToC also reflected the assumptions that underpinned the
 achievement of the PDO. The first element of the PDO (to improve the performance of the irrigation
 systems to support agricultural producers in the project areas) was to be assessed through two PDO level
 indicators: #1. Incremental areas with improved irrigation systems, and #2. Direct beneficiaries without
 (tail-end) water shortage or drainage problems. Both indicators were relevant, measurable, and indirectly
 linked to the PDO. On the other hand, the Results Framework (RF, PAD Annex 1) lacked any indicators to
 assess the second element of the PDO (to improve the performance of the irrigation institutions to support
 agricultural producers in the project areas).

 The RF included four intermediate outcome indicators, three of these were to track intermediate changes
 that would eventually result in the improved performance of the irrigation schemes and institutions under
 components 2, and one indicator on the incremental irrigation water added (in water volume per year,
 compared to the additional irrigation-water requirements that correspond to crop maximum yield) was to
 measure the efficiency under component 1. These intermediate indicators were measurable and directly
 connected to the project activities and included clear end targets. However, baseline data were missing.
 There were no indicators to assess the improvement in drainage in project areas.

 In summary, M&E design had shortcomings. First, the RF lacked PDO level indicators to validate the
 improvement in irrigation systems, e.g. increased yields, and to assess the second element of the PDO.
 Second, the RF could have benefited from including more intermediate outcome indicators to assess the
 improvement in irrigation, such as the time needed for irrigation water to reach the farm gate, and the
 improvement in conveyance that resulted from the new/rehabilitated irrigation infrastructure, among others.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (paragraph 59), progress reports were prepared by the two PIUs (FBiH-PIU)
  and (RS-APCU) every six months to track progress against the RF. In FBiH, the indicator on the
  incremental irrigation water added was tracked for only Mostarsko Blato system, which irrigated for three
  years and was measured volumetrically; while in RS the same indicator was tracked for three schemes
  out of six. There were two intermediate indicators to track progress on the second element of the PDO (to
  improve the performance of the irrigation institutions to support agricultural producers in the project
  areas). Intermediate indicator #2 measured the rate of O&M fee collection within two seasons after
  starting irrigation. While this was an adequate indicator of the performance of the management
  structures, most of the systems did not have two seasons of irrigation due to implementation delays.

  Changes to Indicators. The number of female beneficiaries was a supplemental PDO level
  indicator based on the demographic makeup of the beneficiary communities, and it estimated the number
  of females in the beneficiary households. At the MTR stage, this indicator was changed to count the
  number of female headed households served by the project and/or the number of females engaged by
  the project (as part of WUA or not) to undertake active roles throughout the sub-project preparation-
  execution-evaluation cycle. This change was relevant and made the indicator more specific.

  While M&E implementation was marginally acceptable, the collected data
  were limited because implementation delays resulted in late completion of work on the improvements to
  the systems.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 60) biannual reports prepared by the entities reflected the progress of
  procurement and implementation of the works. This information in addition to the RF informed the
  decision to restructure the project in 2017and extend the closing date by 23 months and later to extend
  the project closing date by three months in 2019.

  While the ICR provided a brief discussion on M&E utilization, it implicitly stated that M&E data informed
  the project management to take corrective actions.



  Overall, M&E Quality is rated Modest. This rating reflects design shortcomings (lack of PDO level
  indicators to assess the second element of the PDO) that were not rectified during implementation,
  despite the project having been restructured twice.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as a Category B project requiring a Partial Environmental Assessment. Three
   safe guard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Involuntary
   Resettlement OP/BP 4.12, and Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50. The project schemes (being
   of a small size) were not expected to pose significant additional demands on the water bodies. Therefore,
   the majority of environmental impacts associated with the project were limited to simple and standard
   reconstruction works such as: dust, noise, disruptions, waste generation (PAD, paragraph 60). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed in the
   country. Also, site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared for four priority sub-
   projects.

   The ICR did not provide explicit statements on the compliance of the project with the Bank's safeguard
   policies.

   Environmental Compliance. The analysis of phase1 sub-projects showed that there would be no impact
   on the quantity or quality of the water available to the riparian countries and the project was exempted to
   the notification requirement under OP7.50. Also, analysis of phase 2 and phase 3 sub-projects showed that
   they would not have an impact on the international waters, except for the Vrbas-Osrona sub-project in
   RS. However, Vrbas-Osrona was designed under the project but was not constructed (ICR, paragraph 62).
   The ICR (paragraph 63) stated that: "there were no infractions and all mitigation activities in the EMPs were
   implemented."



   Social Compliance. While the project triggered OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, there was no land
   acquisition under the project. According to the ICR (paragraph 64) "all private properties were accessed
   with written agreements of the owners." The ICR (paragraph 64) noted that RS failed to report on social
   safeguard compliance for sometime which resulted in safeguard implementation being rated moderately
   unsatisfactory. This rating was upgraded to satisfactory when RS started providing the social safeguard
   compliance reports.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 66) "the financial management systems,
   including accounting, budgeting, organization and staffing, internal controls, counterpart funding, audit and
   financial reporting, was adequate for both entities and satisfied the Bank’s requirements." Semi-annual
   interim un-audited financial reports (IFR) were regularly submitted, and were found to be of acceptable
   quality according to the Bank standards. The project accounts were audited by external auditors annually,
   and the audited financial statements were unqualified (ICR, paragraph 66). However, the issue of payment

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



   of IDA credit expenditures from Governments accounts was flagged twice as a problem. To address this
   issue, the FBiH PIU was advised to balance the payments from various sources of funding to be in line
   with the relevant credit agreement.



   Procurement. According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "both implementation units had adequate procurement
   management arrangements for the project implementation, and each hired a fulltime procurement officer
   with adequate experience in World Bank procurement procedures." The ICR provided mixed messaging on
   procurement because on one hand it stated that there were delays in the procurement of consultancies for
   the preparation of detailed engineering designs of pressurized irrigation systems (ICR, paragraph 53), but
   on the other hand it stated that there were no implementation delays due to procurement-related issues
   (paragraph 65). The last procurement post-review revealed a few minor irregularities concerning some
   documents that were not dated accurately. These were brought to the attention of the respective PIUs
   (ICR, paragraph 65).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not provide information on this topic.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  M&E design shortcomings and
Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Modest                    failure to rectify them despite
                                                                                  two restructurings.
Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



       The design of irrigation projects needs to include on-farm improvements, such
        as tertiary systems, to ensure delivery of irrigation services to farmers. The project
        financed the construction of the network up to the farm gate (main systems), leaving on-farm
        improvement works for the cantons/municipalities and the farmers to complete,
        which delayed the start of scheme operations. The lesson is that in order not to delay
        improved irrigation services to the beneficiaries it is advisable to concurrently implement both
        the main infrastructure and tertiary on irrigation improvements irrespective of financing
        arrangements
       There is need for a policy or master plan to guide investments in agricultural water
        management. The project experience showed that implementation issues arose due to lack
        of a coherent vision for agricultural water management in both FBiH and RS. The lesson is
        that there is need for an investment strategy or policy vision document that will guide
        implementation of the next generation of irrigation investments.
       To ensure local buy-in, local partnerships need to be built into the implementation
        arrangements. In order to solve the potential causes of project implementation delays
        (mainly in FBiH), the national implementation teams engaged directly with mayors and
        municipalities. Roundtable discussions and clear communications and agreements on mutual
        expectations and responsibilities with frequent follow up, accelerated the issue of work
        permits, co-financing was mobilized, location of absentee farmers were identified and all
        social safeguards issues were resolved. The lesson is that these partnerships and
        discussions resulted in rapid progress on the rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes/systems.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  An assessment would investigate the extent to which irrigation infrastructure and the capacity of water users'
  associations were improved to support increased yields for major crops on irrigation farms in the project
  area and the impact on farm incomes.




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. M&E design had considerable shortcomings, and there were implementation delays that
prevented the collection of data on some schemes.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR did not provide clear linkages between the project’s activities and results because
of the lack of evidence. The evidence reported on the improvement in the performance of the irrigation systems
and institutions to support agricultural producers in the project area was very limited. Evidence of the
project's performance was almost always based on assumptions and not measured facts even though four of

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IRRIG DEVT (P115954)



the schemes in the project had been functional for several years. In addition, the ex post analysis could have
benefited from the inclusion of a sensitivity analysis since the analysis of efficiency was based on assumptions
and actual results.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were well based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a limited discussion on the two elements of the PDO due to limited real
evidence.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated. On
the other hand, as mentioned in Section 4 of this review, the ICR was not consistent its text on the extent to
which farmers had received support for investing in on-farm structures and equipment to improve water
management in the tertiary irrigation system.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the available data-to the extent possible to justify the assigned
ratings. Discussion of outcomes was thorough, and the efficiency analysis was reasonable where some
assumptions were appropriate given that the rehabilitation/reconstruction activities in more than half of the
schemes in the project areas were not concluded until shortly before the project closed .

Conciseness. The ICR provided an adequate coverage of the implementation experience and reported on
shortcomings. The outputs in Annex 1 lacked targets, and the ICR could have discussed whether the
recommended risk mitigation measures worked. Also, the sections on M&E implementation and utilization could
have benefited from more details. Finally, the ICR did not include an explicit statement on the project's
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial but marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 21 of 21
