     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022203

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P131049                                  MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                               Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14031                                 31-Dec-2018                                        14,704,595.49

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2013                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          15,000,000.00                                  15,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                  14,704,595.49

 Actual                                       14,704,595.49                                  14,704,595.49




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan                Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Strategic Climate Fund Pilot Program for Climate
   Resilience Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the Project Appraisal Document (page 6) was:

   "To strengthen hydrological and meteorological information services to deliver reliable and timely
   climate information to local communities, and to support economic development".



                                                                                               Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



   This assessment is based on the two sub-objectives: (i) To strengthen hydrological and meteorological
   information services to deliver reliable and timely climate information to local communities: and (ii) To support
   economic development.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 8 - 9).

   1. Strengthening Hydrological Information Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$10.3
   million (of which, US$8.8 was financed by the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) Fund). The
   actual cost was US$9.4 million.

   This component planned to finance investments for managing hydrological information. Activities in this
   component included: (i) institutional strengthening and training the staff of the respective agencies: (ii)
   enforcing quality control and standards through protocols, operating guidelines, and information
   management frameworks for collecting, processing, and monitoring data: (iii) optimizing the physical
   hydrological monitoring networks through civil works activities (rehabilitating/upgrading and
   standardizing stations): (iv) implementing an integrated hydrological and meteorological information
   management platform for transmitting and managing data: (v) improving the hydrological modelling,
   forecasting, and early warning systems of the National Directorate of Water Resources Management
   (DNGRH) and the Regional Water Authorities (ARAs) and (vi) developing hydrological information products.

   2. Strengthening Weather and Climate Information Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$11.1 million (of which, US$4.2 million was from the PPCR Fund).

   This component planned to finance activities for supporting meteorological information services. Activities in
   this component included: (i) Institutional strengthening of the National Institute for Meteorology (INAM)
   and training their staff: (iii) upgrading their Quality Management System (QMS): (iv) optimizing the physical
   meteorological monitoring network, through rehabilitation of existing stations and installation of new ones:
   (v) upgrading INAM's existing data management systems for transmitting and managing data: (vi)
   strengthening meteorological modelling for forecasting, predicting weather and early warning systems: and
   (vii) developing access to meteorological information.

   3. Piloting resilience through delivery of improved weather and water. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$2.0 million (fully financed by the PPCR Fund).

   This component planned to finance piloting activities aimed at delivery of hydro-meteorological information
   to key users. Activities in this component included: (i) delivery of early warnings along the Zambezi,

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



  Limpopo and Incomati River Basins through dissemination of weather forecasts: (ii) dissemination
  of weather and water forecasts to farmers in Gaza and Inhambane provinces: (iii) enhancing access to
  weather information for ports, commercial, maritime and artisanal fishery communities in the coastal areas
  of Inhambane: and (iv) evaluation of innovative ideas for enhancing delivery of hydrological and
  meteorological services.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$22.5 million. The actual cost was US$14.7 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by a grant of US$15.0 million from the Pilot Program for
  Climate Resilience (PPCR) Fund. The amount disbursed was US$14.7 million.

  The Nordic Development Bank (NDB) was to provide US$6.0 million for financing complementary Technical
  Assistance (TA) activities to the National Institute of Meteorology (INAM). Procurement delays on the TA
  activities contributed to project implementation delays. Following the project restructuring on May 12, 2017,
  INAM assumed responsibility for implementing the NDB related activities, and NDB funds were delinked
  from this project.

  Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution was estimated at US$1.5 million at appraisal. There was no
  borrower contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project approved on April 25, 2013, became effective on September 2, 2013, and was
  scheduled to close on December 31, 2018. The project closed an year behind schedule on December 31,
  2019.

  Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings during the project's lifetime.

  The following changes were made through the first restructuring on May 12, 2017, after the Mid-Term
  Review (MTR) of the project on September 2016.

        The project scope was reduced, with some activities dropped. Activities aimed at developing and
           piloting technological solutions and other innovations to improve delivery of hydrological and
           meteorological services to beneficiaries in the targeted vulnerable districts (parts of Zambeze,
           Limpopo and Incomati floodplains) were dropped, as no progress had been made until then by the
           implementing agencies in identifying possible pilots.
          The results framework was modified. Two PDO indicators, that were not aligned with the project
           activities were cancelled. These indicators were: (1) monitoring satisfaction of hydro met services
           through user surveys. This indicator was cancelled as there was no baseline, and realization that
           effectiveness and satisfaction related to project activities could only be measured after substantive
           use, which was beyond the project timeframe: and (2) changes in budget allocations at the national
           level for issues relating to climate variability and climate change.
          One new indicator - approval of standards for hydrological data by the National Directorate of Water
           Resources Management (DNGRH) and Regional Water Authorities (RWAs) - was added.
           Targets for some indicators were revised (discussed in section 4).
          Funds from the Nordic Development Bank (NDB) were delinked from this project.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



   The closing date was extended by a year from December 31, 2018, to December 31, 2019, through the
   second restructuring on December 14, 2018, for completing component two and three activities, that had
   been subject to procurement delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Mozambique is one of the countries most at risk from water and weather-related
hazards in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The risks from floods, storms, and cyclones are further
aggravated by the fact that, more than 60% of its population and 37% of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
are concentrated in flat areas along flood-prone rivers and coastal zones. Average annual losses from
floods were estimated at US$17.5 million in housing and shelters, US$0.7 million in road damages, and
US$4.25 million in maize production. Further, climate scenarios indicated significant changes in
temperature and hydrological regimes, further exacerbating water and weather risks in the coming years.

Sector context. The hydrological and meteorological (hereafter referred to as hydro-met)
sectors were facing several challenges in the years before appraisal. The challenges, included poor quality
and calibration of monitoring standards due to fragmentation of institutional mandates and weak inter-
agency coordination, poor data for forecasting and early warnings, and insufficient technical and staff
capacities to operate and maintain the hydro-met activities. Few monitoring stations were operational to
meet user needs, and the sectors were financially unviable. Given the potential of hydro-met services to
enhance productivity in sectors such as, agriculture, fisheries and maritime activities, hydropower,
transportation, infrastructure planning and health, strengthening the hydro-met sectors capacities
to provide reliable and timely climate information to local communities and thereby support economic
development, was important to the government strategy.

Government strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Government's strategy articulated in the
Mozambique National Development Strategy for 2015 - 2035. The pillar on innovation and technological
development in the strategy, highlighted the need for supporting management of natural resources (water,
agriculture and fisheries). At appraisal, the PDOs were relevant to the Government's strategy for growth
and development as articulated in the Poverty Reduction Action Plan (PARP). The plan underscored the
need for preventing and adapting to climate change. The PDOs were also relevant to: (i) the Government's
2013 -2025 National Strategy for Adaptation and Mitigation to climate change, which identified priority
actions to reduce climate risk, strengthen early warning systems and increasing capacity to respond to
climate risks: (ii) the draft strategic plan for Meteorological Services (2020 - 2025): and the National Water
Resources Management Plan.

Bank strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank strategy. The second pillar of the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2012 - 2015 highlighted the need for building resilience, adapting to the
negative effects of climate change, and reducing risks of natural disasters. The Bank's current Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017 -2021, reiterated the need for addressing key ongoing challenges
associated with reducing vulnerability to weather-related shocks and climate change, by strengthening
hydro-met services. A focus area of the CPF explicitly underscored the need for "enhancing sustainability
and resilience" through improving disaster risk management and reinforcing social and economic resilience.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



               Bank prior experience. The Bank has executed several projects that are complementary to this project.
               For instance, the Mozambique Climate Change Development Policy Operation approved on January 2013,
               aimed at supporting implementation of institutional and policy reforms, and contained two hydro-met policy
               actions. This project was also closely aligned with the objectives of the ongoing National Water Resources
               Project (NWRP), which aimed at enhancing the planning, management and development of national water
               resources. This project's activities aimed at strengthening hydro-met information was expected to aid the
               NWRP project.

               Although the PDOs were well-aligned with the Government and the Bank strategies, the project scope was
               overly ambitious, given the existing implementation capacity and relatively tight time frame for
               implementation. As indicated in section 2, following the Mid Term Review, some project activities were
               cancelled, and targets of some indicators were revised during implementation in the face of realities on the
               ground (discussed in section four). The relevance is hence rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To strengthen hydrological and meteorological information services to deliver reliable and timely climate
                             information to local communities.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The links between project activities (which included actions to improve the monitoring of
                             weather, climate, water resources, and improving delivery of hydro-met services), their outputs, and
                             outcomes were logical. Physical improvements aimed at rehabilitating/upgrading stations combined
                             with technological improvements aimed at improving hydro-met modelling and
                             prediction capacities, expanding access to hydro-met information and developing hydro met products, were
                             intended to strengthen the evidence-base for climate resilience in policymaking. Activities aimed
                             at institutional strengthening of respective agencies in water, climate and hydro-met sectors, were aimed
                             at improving the agencies' capacities to deliver reliable and timely information to local communities on
                             impending climate-related natural disasters and issuing early warnings to local communities. These activities
                             were likely to provide a critical mass sufficient to achieve the desired results of strengthening delivery of
                             hydrological and meteorological information services. The intended outcomes which were attributable to
                             project activities, were monitorable.

                             Outputs. (ICR, pages 27 - 37).



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



These activities were completed as targeted.

      The National Directorate of Water Resources Management (DNGRH) and the Regional Water
         Authorities (ARAs) adopted standards for hydrological data.
         250 DNGRH staff were trained, exceeding both the original and revised targets of 50 and 150
         respectively.
        80 hydrological monitoring stations were reporting real time information at closure (as compared to
         eight at the baseline). This exceeded the target of 40.
        70% of the river gauge stations were reporting hourly information at closure (as compared to 37% at
         the baseline). This exceeded the revised target of 60%, but was short of the original target of 80%.
        60 synoptic weather stations were reporting information at closure, as per the revised target, but short
         of the original target of 90.
        65 real time meteorological monitoring stations were reporting continuously at closure. This exceeded
         the revised target of 25, but was short of the original target of 80.
        28 daily weather forecasts were provided at downscaled areas at closure. This exceeded the revised
         target of six, but short of the original target of 50.
        70% of the climatology data was entered in the World Meteorological Organization's (WNO) Global
         Observation System (GOS), exceeding the target of 50%. (WMO's GSO refers to a coordinated
         system of methods and facilities, operated by the WMO country members, to make meteorological
         observations at a global scale in support of WMO programs).
        131 staff pf the National Institute of Meteorology (INAM) were trained, exceeding both the revised and
         original targets of 50 and 130 respectively.
        The INAM's Decree on Data Standards, Modelling and Forecasting were approved and implemented.
        At project closing, the National Integrated Water Resources Management Information System
         (NIWRIMS) database hosted information from 717 water stations, 17 reservoirs, 1389 rainfall stations,
         7,686 borewells, 3,598 National Directorate for Water Supply and Sanitation (DNAAS) sites and 428
         water use licenses.
        Hydrological models and frameworks were developed for generating flood forecasts for the Zambezi
         and Limpopo Basins. The Hydraulic Engineering Center's River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) for
         Limpopo and Zambezi was installed and operational, when the project closed.
        26 Automated Weather Stations (AWS) and one maritime AWS were upgraded as targeted. Three
         automated weather observing systems were installed at the airports of Beira, Nampula and
         Lichinga. Fiberoptic connections and internet broadband connections were installed in the National
         Meteorological Institute and decentralized centers throughout the country as targeted.
        The Inter-Ministerial Protocol on data sharing was approved and implemented.
        The project facilitated the staff of the implementing agencies to learn from other novel and best
         practices through enabling them to participate in international events and regional platforms (such as,
         the African Ministerial Conference on Meteorology (AMCOMET) in 2018, the Southern African
         Development Community (SADC) Conference on Disaster Risk Protection in 2018, and the
         International Conference on Climate Services in 2013 and 2020).

As discussed in section 2, the activities associated with developing and piloting technological solutions and
other innovations to improve delivery of hydrological and meteorological services to beneficiaries in
the targeted vulnerable districts were dropped at restructuring, as no progress had been made by the
implementing agencies in identifying possible pilots.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



Outcomes.

The project activities were expected to provide timely and reliable hydrological and meteorological information
to local communities.

      There was an 80% increase in the accuracy of flood forecasts in Zambezi and Limpopo basins as per
       the revised target, when the project closed, exceeding the original target of 50%. The forecast lead
       time for appropriate decision-making and taking action increased from 24 hours (one day) to 72 hours
       (three days). The accuracy of rainfall information forecasts improved from one day to two days.
      The accuracy of meteorological forecasts for temperature increased by 85% relative to the baseline,
       when the project closed. This exceeded both the original and revised targets of 50% and 70%
       respectively.

Efficacy is rated as substantial, given that the revised targets were either realized or exceeded.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To support economic development.

Rationale
Theory of change. Activities under the project aimed at strengthening the capacity for climate resilient
planning at the national, sectoral and local levels, and were likely to contribute to providing reliable and timely
hydrological and meteorological information, increase the lead time for appropriate decision-making and
action, and issuing early warnings of flood forecasts and other weather-related natural disasters to farmers
and fishermen. Given the importance of these sectors to the economy, the activities were likely to provide a
critical mass to achieve the intended result of supporting economic development, by helping in minimizing the
negative impacts of extreme weather-related events in these sectors. The links between the project activities,
outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

In addition to the outputs discussed above, the following outputs were relevant to this objective.

      312,941 people (farmers and fisherman targeted by the pilots receiving hydro-met information in
       Mabalone, Inharime and Massinga headquarters), benefitted from project activities at project
       closure. This exceeded both the original and the revised targets of 6,000 and 167,488 respectively.
      The ICR (page 35) notes that the Bank team also sought to gather information through anecdotal and
       qualitative evidence through interviewing local government representatives of different sectors, site
       visits, exchanges with local officials, air control staff, and representatives of commercial airlines in
       Lichinga, Nampula and Beira Airports. Interviews with representatives of commercial airlines


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



                                    confirmed that real-time meteorological information was used for all flight plans. Interviews with
                                    government authorities highlighted the safety of maritime navigation, due to the installation
                                    of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS). Government officials also confirmed that the real-time hydro-
                                    met information was also being used by the academic and the public sector.

                            Outcomes.

                                  65% of the farmers were receiving flood forecasts in the targeted areas of Gaza province. This
                                   exceeded the revised target of 60%, but fell short of the original target of 80%.
                                  93% of fishermen were receiving daily weather forecasts and early warnings in the target areas of
                                   Inhambane, as compared to none at the baseline. This exceeded both the revised and original targets
                                   of 70% and 80%.

                            Efficacy is rated as Substantial, given that the revised targets were realized and project t activities provided
                            substantive support to farmers to help mitigate the adverse impacts of weather-related disasters, thereby
                            providing support to economic development.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the two objectives - to strengthen hydrological and meteorological information services
                            to deliver reliable and timely climate information to local communities and to support economic development,
                            is rated as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


   Economic analysis. A Benefit- Cost Benefit Analysis (BCA) was conducted both at appraisal and at closure for
   activities associated with strengthening delivery of hydrological and meteorological services. These activities
   accounted for 92% of the project cost. The potential economic benefits were estimated to come from positing
   economic values to: (i) households based on Willingness to Pay (WTP) method for improved forecasts and
   warning systems: (ii) the economic value of lives saved due to the reduction of hazards and natural disasters:
   and (iii) the enhanced productivity on major sectors. The BCA estimates indicated a total Net Present Value

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



(NPV) of 46.4 million over a 50 year period, at a 3% percent Social Discount Rate at project closure. As such,
the NPV estimated at closure was way below the NPV of US$391. 2 million estimated at appraisal, as reported
in the PAD (paragraph 50). The ICR does not provide any reasons why a discount rate as low as 3% was used.

Administrative and operational shortcomings. Events on the ground (which included emergency response to
the flooding in the Limpopo Basin) caused significant delays, with project execution mostly dormant during the
first two years of implementation. This was exacerbated by procurement delays. Activities under component two
(meteorological services) and component three (pilot projects for hydro met services) were significantly behind
schedule, and some of these had not yet commenced, when the Mid-Term Review held in September 2016.
These delays were due to a combination of factors including limited fiduciary capacity and changes in key
management positions in the relevant implementing agencies, and Bank leadership changing four times over a
six year implementation period. These factors necessitated reduction in project scope, with some activities
cancelled and targets for some indicators being revised downwards after the Mid-Term Review. However, the
reduced scope of project activities was met when the project closed, with a year's extension of the project
closing date.

In sum, efficiency is rated as modest, given the weak economic justification for the project and administrative
and operational shortcomings during implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategy is Substantial. Efficacy of the two objectives was
rated as Substantial, as the revised targets were either realized or exceeded. Efficiency is modes, in view of the
weak economic justification of the project and administrative and operational shortcomings during
implementation. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory,
reflecting moderate shortcomings in the project's efficiency and relevance.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment and political risk. The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that the policy environment in
Mozambique 68) remains conducive for strengthening hydro-met services and climate information for
supporting resilience to hydro-met risks. The government commitment is also demonstrated by consistent
funding to the respective agencies at the central level. The protocols and decrees developed under the aegis
of this project for inter-agency data sharing were further expected to improve policy coordination, and
thereby reduce the risk associated with the unclear and fragmented mandates of the relevant government
agencies.

Technical risk. The technical risk is rated as low. The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that the it is unlikely that
functioning of the hydro met stations constructed under this project, could be undermined by vandalism and
external environmental risks, given the way the physical structures were designed.

Institutional risk. The ICR (paragraph 71) notes that although there is consistent source of funding from the
government to the central hydro-met agencies, it is unclear if there is adequate and earmarked source of
funding for maintaining the hydrological and meteorological infrastructure investments made at the
subnational levels. Given this, maintenance of infrastructure at the subnational level could be
compromised, without adequate subsidies or funding from the central government.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the lessons from similar projects under the Pilot Program for Climate
  Resilience (PPCR), and from prior Bank-financed projects in Mozambique. Lessons incorporated at
  design included, adopting an approach that combined investments in institutions and infrastructure
  investments for sustainability of outcomes, focusing on adapting to both climate variability and longer-
  term issues pertaining to climate change at the national level and seeking senior level government
  endorsement to ensure collaboration between the hydro-met agencies. (PAD, pages 10 -11). The
  implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Administration and Monitoring Team
  (PAMT) established in the National Institute of Meteorology (INAM) - the agency responsible for
  coordinating the national meteorological services in Mozambique's ten provinces and 128 districts (PAD,
  paragraph 38). Several risks were identified at appraisal including high risk associated with sustainability
  of outcomes. Mitigation measures at design included, seeking greater political endorsement during
  implementation. With mitigation measures, overall project cost was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD,
  page 14). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate
  (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings affecting Quality-at-Entry. For one thing, the design was ambitious,
  given weaknesses in implementation capacity and the tight time frame. This necessitated reduction in


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



  scope of project activities during implementation. (ii) For another, there were shortcomings in M&E design
  (discussed in Section 9).

  Based on the above, Quality-at-Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Fourteen Implementation Status Results Reports (ICRRs) were filed during the project implementation
 period of six years, implying on average twice a year supervision missions. The ICR (paragraph 64) notes
 that supervision missions included frequented visits to project areas to ensure that effective mechanisms of
 quality control were in place. The supervision team included multi-disciplinary specialists. Following the
 recommendations of the Mid-Term Review at the end of 2016 which identified the weaknesses in the
 capacities of the implementation agencies, the project was restructured with a reduced scope. This aided in
 completion of the revised scope of project activities. Following the Mid-Term Review, which identified the
 weakness in M&E design, the indicators were modified and targets were revised. This aided in effective
 monitoring of the revised scope of project activities. The support provided by the team aided in safeguards
 and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

 There were minor shortcomings in supervision. The continuity of leadership was not maintained, with four
 Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over the project time frame of roughly six years. This added to the
 implementation challenges during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 64) notes that some proactive
 measures could have been taken earlier in the project, to solve implementation bottlenecks.

 Based on the above, supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The M&E framework included indicators from the global Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PAD,
 paragraph 43). The M&E framework envisioned building on the existing reporting procedures set up by the
 Project Administration and Monitoring Team (PAMT), as part of the prior Bank-financed National Water

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



 Resources Development Project, to avoid duplication of efforts and to provide for a more consistent system
 for evaluating project performance (PAD, paragraph 43).

 The original results framework was somewhat optimistic, given weaknesses in implementation capacity. An
 original indicator - Measurement of Satisfaction through user surveys was found to be inappropriate, as
 effectiveness and satisfaction related to the project activities could only be measured after substantive use,
 which was beyond the project timeframe.



b. M&E Implementation


  The ICR (paragraph 55) notes that Mid Term Review held on May 12, 2017, identified the shortcomings
  in M&E design. Indicators which were clearly beyond the project time frame were dropped (such as
  measuring satisfaction through user surveys) and targets were revised downwards in line with the
  realities on the ground through the first level 2 restructuring. This enabled better monitoring of the revised
  scope of project activities. Better mentoring of focal points and training the staff of technical units could
  have aided in ensuring a consistent framework across implementing agencies.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that the project-generated data was utilized to support implementation
  and Bank supervision and reporting, and disseminating progress. The results were evaluated against
  indicators.

  In sum, M&E is rated as Substantial, Although there were shortcomings in the M&E framework, these
  were identified at the Mid-Term Review and corrective actions taken through the first Level 2
  restructuring. This allowed for better monitoring performance of the revised indicators.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank safeguards
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment and Natural Habitats. The ICR (paragraph 66) noted that the adverse
   environmental impacts of the civil works activities financed by the project (rehabilitation and installation of
   equipment for monitoring hydrology and meteorology), were expected to be minor and confined to the sites
   of the monitoring equipment and their vicinity. The safeguards on natural habitats was triggered, as the

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



   planned works could affect natural habitats. An Environment and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed to address issues pertaining to environmental and natural
   habitats safeguard. The ICR (paragraph 58) noted that Environmental and Social Management Plans
   (ESMPs) and standard Environmental and Social Rules for contractors to civil works were prepared during
   implementation.

   The project was in compliance with environmental and natural habitats safeguards (ICR, paragraph 58).
   The ICR also notes that the Government appointed an Environmental and Social focal point to
   systematically monitor and report safeguards performance during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 70) notes that land acquisition may be required for
   installing new stations and for accessing stations. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to
   address issues pertaining to involuntary resettlement. The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that the project did not
   entail any land acquisition or physical displacement of people.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. A financial management assessment of the Project Administration and
   Monitoring Team (PAMT) in the National Directorate of Water (DNA) was conducted at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that the financial arrangements of the DNA were satisfactory and met the Bank's
   requirements (PAD, paragraph 61). The ICR (paragraph 60) notes that there was financial management
   compliance throughout the project. Financial management supervision was carried out by the Bank on a
   timely basis. The ICR provides no information on whether the audits were unqualified

   Procurement. An assessment of the PAMT to address procurement issues was conducted at appraisal.
   The assessment concluded that the procurement arrangements of PAMT were satisfactory. The
   procurement risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 63). The ICR (paragraph 51) noted
   that the lack of consistency in the approach to procurement (such as, due to the poor quality of
   procurement packages and delayed procurement for large packages), due to the lack of fiduciary capacity,
   contributed to procurement delays during implementation. The ICR also noted that at the onset of the
   project, procurement challenges ultimately resulted in the cancellation of the weather radar in Xai-Xai. The
   ICR reports no case of misprocurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               Shortcomings in M&E design
                                                                               were identified at the Mid- Term
                                                                               Review and corrective measures
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Substantial               were taken through the first
                                                                               Level 2 restructuring. This
                                                                               enabled better monitoring of the
                                                                               revised indicators.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. A comprehensive and programmatic sector engagement can have a transformational
impact on the hydro-met agenda. This project had strong links to the broader sector
agenda (including through a prior Bank-financed Development Policy Operation, a pilot program for
climate resilience) and other investments in water resources. This engagement proved effective in
providing the setting for sustainability and sector impact.

2. Hydro-met investments targeting local level beneficiaries must ensure their early and
continuous engagement, through tailoring hydro-met information to end user needs. In this
project's pilots, early and proactive engagement resulted in an effective coordination between
government entities at various levels and the beneficiary communities. At the same time, the early
engagement with local level beneficiaries enabled setting effective systems were adapted to the
local reality.

3. Developing pilots can demonstrate how to effectively advance innovative concepts to real
life solutions and provide the basis to locking in strong financial sustainability. The impact-
based approach followed in this project provided an effective example of impact-based forecasts
daily to end users. The implemented pilots further demonstrated implementing agencies can adopt
new technologies with better information.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Hydro-Met PPCR (P131049)



The ICR is well-written and provides a clear exposition of the activities and their links to the intended outcomes.
The theory of change outlined in the ICR is clear and the ICR candidly acknowledges the faults in the results
framework. The ICR also candidly acknowledges the shortcomings in the design of the monitoring and
evaluation framework and how they were addressed following the Mid-Term Review.

However, there were some shortcomings. The ICR provides no explanations for why a low social discount rate
was used for the economic analysis The ICR does not use the appropriate methodology for the split rating. The
ICR provides no information on the quality of audits and on whether the Task Team Leaders were based in the
field or at headquarters.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
