     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022192

1. Program Information



 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Nepal                                        Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                            Approved Operations
 0                                             0

 Operation ID                                  Operation Name
 P133777                                       NP: Financial sector stability DPC2




 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-57010                                   31-Dec-2015                                          99,422,640.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2015                                 31-Dec-2015
                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                               100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                100,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                              99,422,640.00                                           0.00




P156960_TBL
 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Nepal                                        Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation

 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P156960                                      Financial sector stability DPC3 ( P156960 )




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-57010,IDA-58750                         31-Mar-2018                                             97661685.98

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Mar-2017                                 31-Mar-2018

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                              97,661,685.98                                            0.00



 P159547_TBL
 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Nepal                                        Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation

 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P159547                                      Fourth Financial Sector Stability DPC4 ( P159547 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-58750,IDA-63040                         30-Jun-2019                                             99330255.62

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Aug-2018                                 30-Jun-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                              99,330,255.62                                            0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            J. W. van Holst                Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD
                              Pellekaan



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



a. Objectives

The objective of the Nepal Second (DPC2), Third (DPC3), and Fourth (DPC4) Financial Sector Stability
Development Policy Credit, a programmatic series of three operations, was "to support the medium-term reform
program in the financial sector to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector and increase its
transparency." This statement of the program objective remained the same across all three Program Documents
(DPC2, page v; DPC3, page i; and DPC4, page iv).

The First (DPC1) Financial Sector Development Policy Credit, which preceded this three-operation programmatic
series, was a stand-alone operation and is not covered by this ICR Review.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had four policy areas:

Enhancing Financial Sector Development aimed to assist the government in establishing a strengthened
coordination framework for the design and implementation of financial sector reforms by preparing a Financial
Sector Development Strategy that balanced the goals of financial stability, efficiency, and inclusion.

Restructuring and Consolidating the Financial System was expected to result in: the recapitalization and
restructuring of the Rastriya Banijya Bank (RBB), the largest commercial bank and fully government-owned, and
the Nepal Bank Limited (NBL), the first commercial bank and majority government-owned; the divestment
of state control in NBL; and the recapitalization and consolidation of the banking system through a reduction in
the number of financial institutions and with all banks being either compliant with capital adequacy requirements
or under prompt corrective action (PCA) or resolution programs.

Strengthening the Legal and Regulatory Framework for Crisis Management, Banking Supervision, and
Payment Systems would build on preparatory steps taken under DPC1 and following the recommendations of
the Nepal Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) of 2014 to strengthen the legal framework and
institutional capacity for bank supervision, bank resolution, financial crisis management and the development of
the financial sector safety net, bank deposit insurance, and the elimination of settlement risk in the payments
system.

Enhancing the Governance and Transparency of the Banking System supported increased transparency of
the financial system and improved governance of banks and financial institutions.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost: DPC2 was estimated at appraisal to cost Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 72 million (US$100
million equivalent), DPC3, SDR 70.6 million (US$100 million equivalent), and DPC4, SDR 71.1 million (US$100
million equivalent. The total estimated program cost was SDR 213.7 million (US$300 million equivalent).

Financing: DPC2 was financed with an SDR 72 million credit (US$99.4 million equivalent disbursed) from the
International Development Association (IDA), DPC3, an SDR 70.6 million credit (US$97.7 million equivalent
disbursed), and DPC4, an SDR 71.1 million credit (US$99.3 million equivalent disbursed). The total program
financing was SDR 213.7 million (US$296.4 million equivalent disbursed). The differences in the U.S. dollar

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



amounts estimated at appraisal and disbursed during implementation were due to changes in the SDR/US$
rate.

Dates: DPC2 was approved on June 29, 2015, became effective on September 20, 2015, and closed as
scheduled on December 31, 2015. DPC3 was approved on March 2, 2017, became effective on May 8, 2017,
and closed as scheduled on March 31, 2018. DPC4 was approved on August 7, 2018, became effective on
December 30, 2018, and closed as scheduled on June 30, 2019.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The program objective "support the medium-term reform program in the financial sector to reduce the
 vulnerability of the banking sector and increase its transparency" aimed to address vulnerabilities that the
 Nepal FSAP of 2014, a joint assessment by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Bank,
 had determined were significant risks to financial stability and serious impediments to economic growth.

 Context. The FSAP diagnostics and recommendations were triggered by the liquidity crisis of 2011 when the
 real estate and stock market bubbles burst and remained the relevant challenge through to the disaster in
 2015 when an earthquake damaged the central bank's physical facilities, threatened banks with capital
 erosion, stressed the balance sheets of insurance companies, and resulted in the insolvency of many
 microfinance institutions and financial cooperatives.

       Liberal licensing policies of the past had allowed the banking sector to grow rapidly to 30 commercial
        banks (Class A), 86 development banks (Class B), 56 finance companies (Class D), 35 microfinance
        institutions (Class D), as well as 17,000 financial cooperatives and many small financial non-
        government organizations (NGOs), yet access to finance remained limited. The banking sector,
        which dominated the financial system (88 percent of the system's assets) reported decent capital
        adequacy and asset quality figures, but the headline numbers were doubtful in view of evidence
        of widespread ever-greening of bad loans, a practice that under-stated non-performing loans and
        over-stated capital and reserves. State-controlled banks were a significant part of the banking sector
        (21 percent of assets) but lacked clear mandates, suffered high overheads, and performed very
        poorly. The balance sheets of smaller commercial banks and development banks were thought to be
        weaker. Overall, the banking sector required recapitalization and consolidation.
       In the non-bank sector, financial cooperatives were important providers of financial services especially
        in rural areas (the 17,000 cooperatives offered savings and credit to some 3.3 million members) but
        several had become problematic in the absence of regulatory frameworks and lack of adequate
        supervision. Meanwhile, many small financial NGOs with low capital requirements maintained small-
        scale operations but were too connected to the formal financial sector (through bank on-lending) to
        trigger contagion in crisis periods. In addition, potential contagion from the insurance to the banking
        sector remained an issue, centered on questions about the capacity of insurance companies to
        reimburse banks which were the beneficiaries of insurance contracts. Like the banks, the non-
        bank sector needed recapitalization and restructuring.
       The legal, regulatory and institution framework for banking and finance remained generally weak,
        contributing to the fragility of the financial sector. Bank supervision was compliance-based, under-
        resourced, and fragmented, with a record of late intervention and a lack of an enforcement

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



       culture. Implementation of laws on insolvency and debt enforcement were ineffective, with
       inconsistencies in the laws leading to disputes. Risk management was difficult because risk
       management practices were inadequate at many financial institutions. Deposit insurance lacked a
       formal legal framework, operating on the basis of bylaws rather than specific legislation. The
       payments system lacked redundancy and was handicapped by the limited use of electronic methods,
       reducing the efficiency and safety of the payments infrastructure.
      Overall, the financial system remained fragmented and shallow, unable to perform financial
       intermediation effectively and unable to channel resources to meet the country’s investment needs in
       infrastructure and for long-term finance.

Program. The program objective was consistent with the strategy of the Bank Group in Nepal.

      At appraisal, the Country Partnership Strategy for Nepal FY 2014-2018 (CPS) advocated two "pillars":
       "increasing economic growth and competitiveness" and "increasing inclusive growth and opportunities
       for shared prosperity." The program objective was related to the third outcome of the CPS first pillar -
       -- "improved environment for private sector investment, including increased financial sector
       stability." The CPS stated that "support to the financial sector will aim to address economic risks
       stemming from the sector’s rapid expansion and associated distress in the banking sector. To
       address financial-sector vulnerabilities, the Bank has been providing technical assistance in the areas
       of crisis management, bank resolution and deposit insurance. A DPO, developed closely with DFID
       and the IMF, helped to address some of the root causes of the sector’s difficulties. A follow-up DPO –
       building on a joint WBG-IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program as well as a DFID-supported
       banking sector diagnostic – will aim to consolidate banking sector stability and pave the way for
       developing a more robust and inclusive financial sector."
      At program closing, the Country Partnership Framework for Nepal for the Period FY2019-2023 (CPF)
       identified three "transformative engagement areas": "public institutions", "private-sector led jobs and
       growth", and "inclusion and resilience". The program objective was related to the third objective of the
       CPF second engagement area --- "improved financial sector stability and financial inclusion." The
       CPF stated that the Bank "will continue to support efforts to consolidate progress in financial sector
       stability and enhance financial inclusion and long-term finance. Nepal’s financial system is commercial
       bank-dominated and fragmented. While capital adequacy and asset quality figures appear robust, the
       data may not fully reflect reality. There are concerns of underfunded safety nets, ever-greening of bad
       loans, and vulnerability to exogenous shocks. Moreover, the financial system is not efficient in
       financial intermediation or in channeling long-term financing for investment."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The prior actions were consistent with the program objectives. Fourteen prior actions were listed for DPC2,
10 for DPC3, and 12 for DPC4, with many designed as two- or three- or four-part actions. Many of the prior
actions that aimed to strengthen the legal, regulatory, and institutional frameworks for banking and finance
consisted of sequences of related actions --- Cabinet approval and submission of draft laws to Parliament,
Parliamentary enactment of the bills into law, and executive agency issuance of the rules and regulations to
implement the new laws.



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



Prior Actions to Reduce the Vulnerability of the Banking Sector - By Restructuring Banks, Financial
Cooperatives, Microfinance Institutions, and Insurance Companies - Satisfactory

      Endorsement of the Nepal Financial Sector Development Strategy. The endorsement by the
       Ministry of Finance of the Nepal Financial Sector Development Strategy (FSDS) (DPC2, Prior Action
       1) was consistent with the objective to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector as the FSDS
       would lay out a comprehensive long-term plan to foster the health and stability of the financial sector
       and to broaden and deepen access to financial services. Informed by the FSAP, the FSDS would
       provide strategic guidance for the development of the financial sector.
      Implementing the Second Phase of the RBB Recapitalization Plan. Following the first round of
       recapitalization supported by DPC1, implementation of the second phase would help the RBB to meet
       key prudential requirements for capital adequacy, liquidity, credit concentration, aggregate real estate
       lending, and loan loss reserves. Designed to recapitalize the RBB (the bank had been insolvent with
       a capital adequacy ratio of -21.8 percent in January 2012) and return it to profitability, the prior actions
       included: (a) the conversion of preference shares with a nominal value of Nepalese rupee (NPR) 787
       million into common shares; (b) the conversion into capital of a dividend of preference shares in the
       amount of NPR 86.57 million; (c) the sale of non-banking assets for NPR 30.9 million; and (d) the
       retention of earnings in FY2012/13, FY2013/14, and nine months of FY2014/15 of NPR 7.21 billion
       (DPC2, Prior Action 2).
      Implementing the Second Phase of the NBL Recapitalization Plan. Following the first round of
       recapitalization supported by DPC1, implementation of the second phase would help the NBL to meet
       key prudential requirements for capital adequacy, liquidity, credit concentration, aggregate real estate
       lending, and loan loss reserves. Designed to recapitalize the NBL (the bank had been insolvent with
       a capital adequacy ratio of -8.5 percent in January 2012) and return it to profitability, the prior actions
       included: (a) the conversion a loan from the government of NPR 2.49 billion into capital; (b) the sale
       of non-banking assets for NPR 708 million; and the retention of earnings in FY2013/14 and six
       months of FY2014/15 of NPR 1.1 billion (DPC2, Prior Action 3). More importantly, two additional prior
       actions would pave the way for the divestment by the government from the NBL, following the
       strategic decision to keep government control only of the RBB. The government would announce, in
       the Budget Speech of July 2014, the decision to divest control of the NBL to a bank strategic investor
       (DPC2, Prior Action 4). The Ministry of Finance would endorse the NBL Strategic Divestiture Plan
       and submit it to the Secretariat of the Privatization Committee (DPC3, Prior Action 1).
      Preparing for the Recapitalization of All Banks. Three prior actions were consistent with the
       objective to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector by raising the capital at all banks. The
       Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB), the central bank and bank regulator, would complete the first phase
       (DPC2, Prior Action 5) and the second phase (DPC3, Prior Action 2) of a diagnostic of the banking
       system by ordering special inspection reports for 27 financial institutions and approving PCA
       or resolution programs for those found to be under-capitalized The special inspections program had
       been tested by the NRB on 20 financial institutions in 2012-13 to identify significant weaknesses in the
       asset quality, corporate governance, risk management, and financial reporting of the institutions using
       in-depth diagnostics and stress tests. Using the services of international auditing firms, the extension
       of the special inspection program to another 27 institutions would allow the NRB to also identify major
       prudential risks to the banking system. The NRB would issue a directive to increase of the minimum
       paid-up capital of all banks and financial institutions (DPC 3, Prior Action 4). Commercial banks
       (Class A) would be required to have minimum capital of NPR 8 billion, development banks (Class B),
       NPR 0.5 billion (operating in 1-3 districts) to NPR 2.5 billion (operating nationally), and finance
       companies (Class C), NPR 0.4 billion (operating in 1-3 districts) to NPR 0.8 billion (operating in 4-10
       districts).

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



      Accelerating the Consolidation of the Banking System. The NRB would impose a moratorium on
       new license applications for Class A, B and C financial institutions and adopt a new bylaw to facilitate
       the acquisition of banks and financial institutions by other banks and financial institutions (DPC2, Prior
       Action 7). The licensing moratorium would reinforce the policy adopted by the NRB in 2011 to
       rationalize and consolidate the banking system. Mergers of weaker or under-capitalized banks with
       stronger institutions had reduced the number of banks from a peak of 199 in January 2012 to 162 by
       January 2015, but further consolidation was necessary.
      Ordering the Conversion of Financial Non-Government Organizations to Micro-Finance
       Institutions. The issuance by the NRB of an order requiring all NRB-authorized financial non-
       government organizations to convert to microfinance institutions (Class D) by mid-July 2015 (DPC2,
       Prior Action 8) would set the stage for the consolidation of the microfinance and the cooperatives
       sectors. The program objective had not been stated to include the non-banks, but the non-bank and
       banking sectors were linked and a financial crisis in the former (with the 12 percent of the assets of
       the financial system) could readily spill over into the latter. Prior to the issuance of the notice, the
       NRB supervised all microfinance institutions, but only 15 of the 17,000 cooperatives and some 27
       financial NGOs. The Registrar of Cooperatives licensed most cooperatives but had no supervisory
       authority or resolution power of its own. The failure of a large number of financial cooperatives in
       2013-14 exposed the gravity of a rudimentary problem --- the lack of a resolution mechanism for, and
       the absence of effective regulation and supervision of, financial cooperatives.
      Preparing for the Recapitalization of Insurance Companies. A two-part prior action was
       consistent with the objective to reduce the vulnerability of the insurance sector. The Nepal Insurance
       Board (NIB), the industry regulatory authority, would complete in-depth diagnostic assessments to
       identify institutional-level risks of companies that represented 60 percent of assets in the insurance
       sector and would implement PCA or resolution programs for the under-capitalized insurance
       companies (DPC4, Prior Action 2). The diagnostic would identify weaknesses in areas including
       valuation, liabilities, internal controls, and corporate governance. The NIB would then issue a
       directive raising the capital requirement to NPR 2 billion for life insurance companies and NPR 1
       billion for non-life insurance companies by mid-July 2018.

Prior Actions to Reduce the Vulnerability of the Banking Sector - By Strengthening the Legal, Regulatory, and
Institutional Framework for Bank Supervision, Bank Resolution, Bank Risk Management, Deposit and Credit
Insurance, and the Payments and Settlement System - Satisfactory

      Enactment of the Amendment to the NRB Act. Three prior actions would begin to strengthen the
       bank supervision system, and hence foster the stability, and reduce the vulnerability, of the financial
       sector. The Cabinet would approve and submit the NRB Act Amendment Bill to Parliament
       (DPC2, Prior Action 9) and Parliament would pass the Amendment to the NRB Act (DPC3, Prior
       Action). The amendment would strengthen the bank supervisory powers of the NRB, in line with
       international best practice, and clarify its bank resolution powers, following the recommendations of
       the FSAP of 2014. The NRB would approve the specification of the new Supervisory Information
       System (SIS) (DPC4, Prior Action 4). The SIS would provide bank and financial institutions with an
       automated data management system that would require them to submit data to the NRB in standard
       format and thus give the NRB timely information to better perform its supervisory function.
      Issuance of Regulations to Implement the Provisions on Bank Resolution. The NRB would
       issue the regulations to implement the provisions pertaining to bank resolution contained in the
       Amendment to the NRB Act (DPC4, Prior Action 3). The provisions on bank resolution aimed to
       discourage regulatory arbitrage, which banks had frequently resorted to in the past, amid ambiguity in
       the law over the resolution power of the NRB.

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



 Enactment of the Cooperatives Act. Parliamentary approval of the Cooperatives Act (DPC4, Prior
    Action 11) would strengthen the legal and regulatory framework for cooperatives. The Act would
    designate the Department of Cooperatives as the regulator and supervisor of cooperatives, but
    allow the NRB to monitor cooperatives with savings greater than NPR 500 million, supervise
    cooperative banks, and close any if necessary. Moreover, the Act would mandate each cooperative
    to reserve at least a third of its board membership for women, injecting a gender dimension to the
    financial sector stability operation.
   Executive Approval of the Insurance Bill. Cabinet approval of a new Insurance Bill for submission
    to Parliament (DPC4, Prior Action 8) would begin to modernize the legal framework for the regulation
    and supervision of the insurance industry. The proposed law would authorize the NIB to take
    corrective action to resolve under-capitalized insurance companies, encourage a shift from to
    compliance-based to risk-based supervision, and help tighten financial reporting requirements. A
    stronger legal and regulatory framework would help the industry mitigate risks to the industry arising
    from the recent spate of natural disasters triggered by climate change.
   Conduct of Assessments of the Impact of the 2015 Earthquake. In the context of the 2015
    earthquake, two prior actions would assist the NRB to identify potentially weakened banks and
    financial institutions and provide a basis to determine strategies that would be needed to stabilize the
    banking system. The NRB would require banks and financial institutions to conduct an assessment of
    the impact of the earthquake on their loan and collateral assets as well as on their physical
    infrastructure (DPC2, Prior Action 6). The NRB would complete its own assessment of the impact of
    the earthquake on banks and financial institutions in affected districts (DPC3, Prior Action 3).
   Issuance of a Directive on Risk Management. The NRB would issue a new directive on risk
    management to the commercial banks (DPC4, Prior Action 1). The directive would
    mandate commercial banks to establish processes for the identification, measurement, monitoring,
    management, control, and reporting of risks and their impact on capital allocation and firm
    valuation. The NRB had issued risk management guidelines for voluntary compliance in 2010 but
    found implementation to be lacking.
   Enactment of the Deposit and Credit Guarantee Fund Act. Four prior actions would strengthen
    the bank deposit insurance system. The Deposit and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DCGC) was
    established in 1974 not by a specific law but under the Companies Act and had since been
    operating under its own bylaws. The Cabinet would approve and submit the Deposit and Credit
    Guarantee Fund (DCGF) Bill to Parliament (DPC2, Prior Action 10) and Parliament would enact the
    Deposit and Credit Guarantee Fund Act (DPC3, Prior Action 6). The new law would increase the
    authorized capital of the DCGF, increase premiums paid by banks and financial institutions if needed,
    and authorize additional special contributions from private sector members. Subsequently, the
    DCGF and NRB would execute a memorandum of understanding governing cooperation and the
    exchange of information (DPC3, Prior Action 7). The Cabinet would approve regulations pertaining to:
    the DCGF’s relationship with banks and financial institutions; the guaranteed deposit verification
    process; and the reporting, payout, and reimbursement of guaranteed deposits (DPC4, Prior Action
    5). Finally, the Cabinet would approve a plan to raise the capital of the DCGF to NPR 10 billion and
    the DCGF, the NRB, and the Ministry of Finance would enter into an agreement for contingency back-
    up funding and liquidity support for the deposit insurance system (DPC4, Prior Action
   Approval of the Payments and Settlement Bill. Three prior actions would culminate in the
    endorsement of the Payments and Settlement Bill. The NRB would approve the Nepal Payments
    System Development Strategy (NPSDS) (DPC2, Prior Action 11) which aimed to develop a safe,
    efficient and modern payments and settlement infrastructure and address concerns with settlement
    risk arising from the Electronic Check Clearing System. To begin to implement the strategy, the NRB

                                                                                               Page 8 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



         would take three measures to reduce payments system risk: align the operating hours of the
         NRB banking department with the operating hours of the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial
         Telecommunication (SWFT), the network that enables financial institutions worldwide to send and
         receive information about financial transactions; implement transfers of funds between NRB branches
         online; and implement a pre-settlement file system (DPC3, Prior Action 8). Finally, the NRB
         would adopt an oversight framework for the payments systems, while the Ministry of Finance
         would endorse the Payments and Settlement Bill to Parliament (DPC4, Prior Action 7).

 Prior Actions to Increase the Transparency of the Banking Sector - Satisfactory

       Issuance of Guidelines for the Eventual Adoption of the Nepal Financial Reporting
        Standards. Two prior actions were consistent with the transparency objective. The NRB would issue
        a guideline governing the transition of financial reporting by banks and financial institutions to the
        Nepal Financial Reporting Standards (NFRS) (DPC2, Prior Action 12). The NRB would issue a
        directive on a Chart of Accounts and amend existing directives to comply with the NFRS (DPC4, Prior
        Action 9). The eventual adoption of the NFRS, following a four-year staged transition process which
        these prior actions supported, would improve accounting standards, enhance financial reporting,
        and improve the transparency of the banking and financial system as the NFRS was compliant with
        the International Financial Reporting Standards.
       Enactment of the Banks and Financial Institutions Act to Ensure Compliance with the Fit and
        Proper Criteria and Other Governance Standards. Three prior actions were consistent with the
        transparency objective. The Ministry of Finance would endorse the proposed Banks and Financial
        Institutions Act (BAFIA) to the Cabinet and, in the interim, the NRB would revise and reissue Directive
        6/071 on the governance of banks and financial institutions (DPC2, Prior Action 13). Parliament
        would approve the BAFIA (DPC3, Prior Action 9). And, the NRB would issue the bylaws and
        implementing rules for BAFIA (DPC4, Prior Action 10). The BAFIA aimed to strengthen adherence to
        the fit and proper tests and other professional qualification and experience requirements for directors
        and chief executive officers (CEOs) of banks and financial institutions, including by removing the
        exemptions previously granted to directors and CEOs of state-controlled banks.
       Enactment of Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism Laws to
        Prevent Blacklisting by Financial Action Task Force. Two prior actions were consistent with the
        transparency objective. Parliament would enact three anti-money laundering and combating the
        financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) laws to strengthen the transparency and safety of the banking
        system: the Mutual Legal Assistance Act; the Extradition Act; and the Prevention of Organized Crime
        Act (DPC2, Prior Action 14). To implement these laws, the Cabinet would approve the Asset (Money)
        Laundering and Prevention Regulations (DPC3, Prior Action 10) and the NRB would revise
        relevant directives to banks and financial institutions to implement these regulations (DPC4, Prior
        Action 12). The new laws and regulations would to help Nepal from being blacklisted by the Financial
        Action Task Force (FATF) because of a weak AML/CFT framework.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)




Rationale

The program defined 18 results indicators to measure attainment of the program outcomes. In general, the
results indicators reflected the program objectives (see Section 3.A), could be attributed to the program actions
(see Section 3.B), and were clearly defined and measurable. At least two results indicators could have been
more specifically defined, however.

Outcome Indicators for the Objective to Reduce the Vulnerability of the Banking Sector by Restructuring Banks,
Financial Cooperatives, Microfinance Institutions ,and Insurance Companies

      The results indicator "strengthened coordination framework for design and implementation of financial
         sector reforms is established" was imprecise. The Program Document left it to the ICR to define this
         indicator to mean that the FSDS was adopted and the coordination bodies were established by the
         government.
        A restructured RBB would be evidenced by the bank: having a capital adequacy ratio greater than 10
         percent; posting positive net income for the preceding four quarters; and having all members of its board
         of directors meet the professional qualifications required by the new BAFIA and NRB Directive 6/071.
        A restructured NBL would be evidenced by the same results indicators. In addition, the bank would have
         "decreased" government ownership. The target "decreased" was imprecise; any number marginally
         lower than the 63 percent at baseline would have sufficed. With the Bank dropping the DPC3 indicative
         trigger "divestment by the government of its controlling stake in NBL" in favor of the DPC4 prior action
         "endorsement by the Ministry of Finance of the NBL Strategic Divestiture Plan," a precise target
         consistent with the divestment plan would have been preferable.
        A restructured and more stable banking system would be evidenced by all banks being compliant with
         the new capital requirements, or, if any were under-capitalized, being in NRB-approved PCA or
         resolution programs.
        A consolidated banking system would mean a reduction in the total number of banks and financial
         institutions from their bloated numbers before the program, the target being set at 130 or less.
        The conversion of all financial NGOs to microfinance institutions (Class D), licensed by the NRB, would
         evidence a successful restructuring of the microfinance sector.
        And the compliance by all insurance companies with the new capital requirements or, if any were under-
         capitalized, being in PCA or resolution programs would evidence a successful restructuring of the
         insurance sector.

Outcome Indicators for the Objective to Reduce the Vulnerability of the Banking Sector by Strengthening the
Legal, Regulatory, and Institutional Framework for Bank Supervision, Bank Resolution, Bank Risk Management,
Deposit and Credit Insurance, and the Payments and Settlement System

      A stronger supervisory capacity at the NRB would be reflected in the subscription by the central bank to
       four additional BCPs and in the implementation of the new SIS.
      Following the passage of the Amendment to the NRB Act, a modernized legal framework for bank
       resolution would mean the NRB had issued the implementing rules to the new law.
      Passage of the new Cooperatives Act enabling the Department of Cooperatives, acting as Registrar of
       Cooperatives, to resolve troubled cooperatives would provide evidence of having a resolution framework
       for cooperatives. The program added a gender outcome and target to the governance of cooperatives ---


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



                     the representation of women (minimum one third) in the boards of directors of cooperatives (target 90
                     percent of all cooperatives).
                    Passage of the new Insurance Act enabling the NIB to resolve troubled insurance companies would
                     provide evidence of having a resolution framework for insurance companies.
                    An improvement in financial risk management would be measured by having a framework for
                     contingency back-up funding for bank resolution.
                    An improvement in operational risk management would be measured by having both a framework for
                     business continuity planning at commercial banks and a disaster site at the NRB.
                    Following the passage of the DCGF Act creating the DCGF to replace the DCGC, a stronger framework
                     for deposit insurance would be evidenced by an increase in the capital of the DCGF and the full payment
                     by all banks and financial institutions of the required insurance premium for the preceding four quarters.
                    An improvement in the safety and efficiency of the payments and settlement system would be measured
                     by assessments of the quality of large-value payments reaching “medium-high”, from "medium-low"
                     previously.

  Outcome Indicators for the Objective to Increase the Transparency of the Banking Sector

                  The implementation by all commercial banks (Class A) and development banks (Class B) of the NFRS
                   would indicate achievement of the transparency objective in financial reporting.
                  The observance by all members of the board and CEOs of all banks and financial institutions, including
                   state-controlled banks, of the fit and proper criteria, as defined in the new BAFIA and NRB directives,
                   would measure achievement of the transparency and governance objective.
                  Exclusion from the FATF grey list, as a result of passage and observance of the new AML/CFT laws and
                   regulations, would indicate the achievement by Nepal of the transparency and integrity objective.



  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To support the medium-term reform program in the financial sector to reduce the vulnerability of the banking
               sector.

               Rationale
               The program met all seven outcome targets for the objective to support the medium-term reform program in
               the financial sector to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector by restructuring banks, financial
               cooperatives, and insurance companies.




                                                                                                                Page 11 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)




  Strengthened Coordination Framework for Financial Sector Development. The target for a
     strengthened coordination framework for the design and implementation of financial sector reforms
     was met with: the approval by the Cabinet of the FSDS in January 2017; the appointment of a high-
     level Financial Sector Coordination Committee; and the formation of two committees to monitor
     progress with the FSDS recommendations, one headed by the Governor of the NRB and the other by
     the Minister of Finance.
    Restructuring of the RBB. The capital adequacy ratio of the RBB was raised to 13.15 percent by the
     second quarter of FY2020, exceeding the target of 11 percent. In the baseline, the bank had been
     under-capitalized, with a capital adequacy ratio of 5.6 percent, lower than the regulatory norm of 11
     percent. The bank posted positive net income in the four quarters ending in the second quarter of FY
     2020, totaling NPR 5.1 billion, meeting the target that it register positive net income in the four
     quarters preceding the program closing date. The board of directors of the RBB met the required
     professional qualifications, achieving the target that the bank comply with the new BAFIA rules and
     NRB Directive 6/071 on professional qualification standards for bank directors.
    Restructuring of the NBL. The capital adequacy ratio of the NBL was raised to 17.4 percent by the
     second quarter of FY2020, meeting the target of 10 percent. The bank had been under-capitalized,
     with a capital adequacy ratio of 5.26 percent in the baseline, lower than the regulatory norm of 11
     percent. The bank posted positive net income in the four quarters ending in the second quarter of
     FY2020, totaling NPR 2.3 billion, meeting the target that it register positive net income in the four
     quarters preceding the program closing date. The board of directors of the NBL met the required
     professional qualifications, achieving the target that the bank comply with the new BAFIA rules and
     NRB Directive 6/071 on professional qualification standards. The government cut its ownership of the
     NBL to 51 percent, meeting the target for a "decreased" government ownership of the bank. In the
     baseline, government ownership of the bank was 63 percent.
    Capital Adequacy at Banks. All banks in Nepal met the minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10
     percent in FY2020 --- an average 13.7 percent at commercial banks (Class A), 15.3 percent
     at development banks (Class B), 19.4 percent at finance companies (Class C), and 13.9 percent at all
     finance institutions. The target was for all banks to be compliant with the capital adequacy
     requirement or be in an NRB-approved PCA or resolution program. In the baseline, capital adequacy
     ratios averaged 12 percent for commercial banks, 15.6 percent for development banks, and 15.9
     percent for finance companies. Under-capitalized banks were not in a PCA or resolution program,
     and supervision was inadequate to identify potential risks.
    Consolidation of Banks. Following 47 mergers, 53 acquisitions and 16 corrective actions involving
     108 banks and 120 financial institutions, the total number of banking and financial institutions was
     reduced to 72 in FY2020, meeting the target that the number of banking and financial institutions be
     reduced to 130 or less by the program closing date. In the baseline, the number of banks and
     financial institutions reached 199 in January 2012 and 167 in July 2014. Banking regulations at that
     time impeded the use of acquisitions to consolidate the banking system.
    Conversion of Financial Non-Government Organizations to Micro-Finance Institutions. All
     NRB-authorized financial NGOs were converted to microfinance institutions (Class D) by March 2020,
     meeting the target. The new Cooperatives Act, passed in 2018 (part of the prior actions),
     assigns supervisory and resolution powers over cooperatives to the Department of Cooperatives,
     acting as Registrar of Cooperatives. In the baseline, the NRB supervised only 15 financial
     cooperatives out of 17,000 that were operating in the country. The Registrar of Cooperatives licensed
     the remainder, but did not have any supervisory authority or resolution power over the
     cooperatives. The NRB had also licensed 47 financial NGOs.


                                                                                            Page 12 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)




      Recapitalization of Insurance Companies. The target that all insurance companies are adequately
       capitalized --- the new capital requirements are NPR 2 billion for life insurance companies and NPR 1
       billion for non-life insurance companies --- or are subject to a PCA or resolution program
       was met. The NIB determined that three of the country's 39 insurance companies did not
       meet minimum capital requirements. The two state-controlled insurers that did not were directed to
       raise their capital, while the sole private insurer that did not, Gurans Life, started a rights offering. The
       insurance companies had implemented the NFRS as of October 2019. In the baseline, the NIB lacked
       the financial and risk data to identify troubled insurance companies (as well as to assess the impact
       of the earthquake of 2015 on the insurers' capital and technical reserves).

The program met six of the eight outcome targets for the objective to support the medium-term reform
program in the financial sector to reduce the vulnerability of the financing sector by strengthening the legal,
regulatory, and institutional framework for bank supervision, bank resolution, financial crisis management,
operational risk management, deposit and credit insurance, and the payments and settlement system. The
first part of the outcome target for the cooperatives sector (on the resolution framework for cooperatives) was
met, but the achievement of the second part (on the membership of women in boards of directors of
cooperatives) could not be assessed. The outcome target for the insurance sector (on the passage of the
new Insurance Act) was not met .

      Strengthened Supervisory Capacity for the NRB. The NRB launched the Supervisory Information
       System (SIS) in October 2019, with all commercial banks connected to the system on real-time basis
       beginning in December 2019, meeting the target to implement a new SIS. In the baseline, the NRB
       lacked an adequate information technology system to support its supervision function. Reports from
       banks and financial institutions were processed manually, resulting in errors. The NRB announced
       the observance of four additional Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (BCPs)
       beginning in FY2020, meeting the target that the NRB be "largely compliant" with four more BCPs by
       the program closing date. The IMF determined that the NRB was "largely compliant" with the new
       BCPs. Formulated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervisors, the BCPs are the de facto
       minimum standard for the sound prudential regulation and supervision of banks and banking
       systems. The four additional BCPs adopted by the NRB included: standards on banks’ internal control
       systems (BCP14); the prevention of fraud and money-laundering (BCP15); the overall framework for
       on-site and off-site bank supervision (BCP16); and maintaining increased contacts with bank
       management and staff (BCP17). In the baseline, the NRB was judged to be "non-compliant" or
       "materially non-compliant" with many BCPs.
      Modernized Legal Framework for Bank Resolution. The legal framework for bank resolution was
       modernized and the target met with the approval by Parliament of the Amendment to the NRB Act in
       September 2016. Resolution is the restructuring of a bank by an authority through the use
       of resolution tools that safeguard public interest, including the continuity of the bank's critical functions,
       the stability of the financial system, and the minimization of the costs of resolution to taxpayers. The
       NRB issued the regulations to implement the Amendment to the NRB Act. In the baseline, the legal
       framework was outdated, incomplete, and had conflicting provisions, limiting the ability of the NRB to
       resolve problem banks and providing the banks with the scope to challenge the authority of the NRB.
      Legal and Regulatory Framework for the Resolution of Cooperatives. The new Cooperatives Act
       established a new resolution framework for problem cooperatives, meeting the target that a resolution
       framework for cooperatives be available by the program closing date. In the baseline, there was no
       resolution framework for problem cooperatives. Women were represented in the boards of directors in
       40.1 percent of 13,578 registered savings and credit cooperatives by March 2020, according to

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



     Cooperatives Statistics 2018. However, it could not be determined if each of the cooperatives
     had women for one-third of their board membership. Thus, the achievement of the target that 90
     percent of cooperatives meet the gender requirement could not be verified. In the baseline, women
     were under-represented in the governance structure of cooperatives.
    Legal and Regulatory Framework for the Resolution of Insurance Companies. Parliament had
     not passed the new Insurance Act, which aimed to modernize the legal and regulatory framework for
     the supervision and regulation of the insurance sector. According to the ICR (pages 18-19), the bill is
     expected to be on the agenda of Parliament after completion of the deliberations over the Budget for
     FY2020-21. Under the current regulatory framework, the NIB has authority to resolve insurance
     companies with the approval of the Ministry of Finance, which is vested with the ultimate power to
     appoint the liquidator. These powers are derived from the current Insurance Act, 2049 and from the
     Companies Act,1964. The draft bill gives the NIB the power to intervene and take control of a failing
     insurance company.
    Legal and Institutional Framework for Financial Crisis Management. A framework for back-up
     funding of bank resolution was established, meeting the target. Under the framework, a back-up
     funding arrangement would come from the central bank, while the Ministry of Finance would support
     the deposit insurer under a financial sector safety net. In the baseline, the financial crisis
     management architecture was limited to having a high-level financial sector committee coordinating
     the government response to a financial crisis, but without having intervention powers. Moreover, any
     emergency liquidity assistance was limited.
    Institutional Framework for Operational Risk Management. A business continuity framework for
     all commercial banks and for the NRB was established, meeting the target. A disaster risk site was
     also established, meeting the target. Business continuity refers to an organization's ability to ensure
     that operations and core business functions are not severely impacted by a disaster or unplanned
     incident that takes critical systems offline. Both the business continuity framework and the disaster
     site would serve to minimize operational risk arising from a natural disaster or other national
     emergency. In the baseline, operational risk in the banking sector was considered high, as the
     business continuity framework was inadequate and the NRB lacked a disaster risk site.
    Establishment of the Deposit and Credit Guarantee Fund. The legal and regulatory framework for
     deposit insurance was established with the creation of the DCGF as administrator of the deposit
     guarantee fund, replacing the DCGC. The paid-up capital of the DCGF was also increased to NPR 10
     billion by the fourth quarter of FY2019. In the baseline, the legal and regulatory framework for the
     deposit insurance system was weak and incomplete, based mainly on the bylaws of the DCGC. By
     March 2020, all banks and financial institutions had made the required deposit guarantee premium
     payments for the preceding four quarters, meeting the target.
    Legal and Regulatory Framework for the Payments and Settlement System. The legal and
     regulatory framework for the payment system was established with the passage of the Payment and
     Settlement Act in March 2019. According to the new law, all bank and non-bank institutions involved
     in payment transactions, including retail payment systems, payment service providers, and payment
     system operators, are to be governed by regulations issued by the NRB. According to the ICR (page
     43), the quality of large-value payments improved from “medium-low” to “medium-high” as a result
     of the operationalization of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) in November 2019, meeting the
     target that the safety and efficiency of large-value payments be assessed as "medium-high" by the
     program closing date. An RTGS is specialist funds transfer system that allows for the instantaneous
     transfer of money and securities in a continuous process of settling payments on an individual order
     basis without netting debits with credits across the books of the central bank. In the baseline,
     regulation of the payment system lacked a firm legal foundation. Many different regulators exercised

                                                                                             Page 14 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



       patchwork supervision over the system, with little coordination. As a result, financial institutions faced
       settlement risk. The quality of large-value payments was also assessed as "low".



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the medium-term reform program in the financial sector to increase the transparency of the
banking sector.

Rationale
The program met all three outcome targets for the objective to support the medium-term reform program in
the financial sector to increase the transparency of the banking sector.

      Adoption of the Nepal Financial Reporting Standards. The NFRS was implemented by all
       commercial banks (Class A) and development banks (Class B) as of October 2019, meeting the target
       that all commercial and development banks implement the NFRS by the program closing date. Issued
       by the Nepal Accounting Standards Board in 2013, the NFRS provides the common rules to be used
       by accountants in Nepal to make company accounts understandable to internal and external users
       and comparable across companies. Prepared in line with the International Financial Reporting
       Standards (IFRS) of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), the NFRS consists of 13
       standards for accounting and reporting on the financial performance and financial position of
       firms. The NRB had not issued NFRS-compliant regulations in the baseline and, therefore, no
       financial institution could be recognized to have had implemented the NFRS at that time.
      Compliance with the Fit and Proper Criteria. All members of the board of directors and the CEOs
       of all banks and financial institutions, including state-controlled ones, met the fit and proper criteria
       defined in the new BAFIA and in NRB directives as of March 2020, meeting the target. A standard
       concept in the corporate governance of financial institutions, the fit and proper criteria pertains to the
       capacity and competence of managers, directors, and shareholders to fulfill their duties ("fitness") and
       have integrity and suitability ("propriety"). According to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
       supervisors should assess whether financial institutions observe the fit and proper principles to help
       ensure that the institutions are soundly and prudently managed and that key shareholders are not a
       source of weakness to these institutions. In the baseline, governance provisions in banks were weak,
       giving rise to conflicts of interest among bank directors who lacked independence from
       shareholders. Moreover, professional qualification requirements were limited, with government-
       appointed directors and CEOs at state-controlled banks being exempt from even these scant
       requirements.
      Steering Clear of the Financial Action Task Force Grey List. Nepal remains off the FATF grey list
       in March 2020, meeting the target. The FATF is the intergovernmental institution, founded in 1989, to
       combat money laundering, terrorist financing, and financial crimes. Officially known as the
       "Jurisdictions Under Monitoring", the FATF grey list includes countries that represent a high risk of

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 24
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



                          money laundering and terrorism financing but have formally committed to working with the FATF to
                          develop action plans that address their anti-money laundering and combating the financing of
                          terrorism (AML/CFT) deficiencies. Countries in the grey list are subject to increased monitoring by the
                          FATF, which either assesses them directly or uses FATF-style regional bodies to report on the
                          progress made towards AML/CFT goals. While not as negative as the black list classification (those
                          which the FATF considers non-cooperative in the global effort to combat money laundering and the
                          financing of terrorism), countries on the grey list may still face economic sanctions from international
                          institutions and may experience adverse effects on trade. Nepal was not in the FATF grey list in
                          the baseline and has remained off the list since.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The program achieved the objective to support the medium-term reform program in the financial sector to
reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector with the recapitalization of the RBB, the recapitalization of, and
partial divestment from, the NBL, and the recapitalization and consolidation of the rest of the banking
system. Financial NGOs were converted to microfinance institutions and the capital requirements at insurance
companies were raised. The program resulted in a stronger legal, regulatory and institutional framework for: (a)
bank supervision, with the introduction by the NRB of the SIS and adoption of additional BCPs; (b) bank
resolution, following the passage of the Amendment to the NRB Act, designation of the Registrar of
Cooperatives as regulator following the passage of the new Cooperatives Act, and the assignment of resolution
powers to the NIB in the proposed new Insurance Act; (c) financial crisis management, with approval of a back-
up funding arrangement for bank resolution; (d) operational risk management, with the adoption of a business
continuity framework for banks and creation of a disaster risk site; (e) bank deposit insurance, with the creation
and recapitalization of the DCGF following the passage of the DCGF Act; and (f) the payments and settlement
system, with the operationalization of the RTGS following the passage of the Payments and Settlement
Act. The program achieved the objective to support the medium-term reform program in the financial sector to
increase the transparency of the banking sector. All commercial and development banks implemented the
NFRS, the financial reporting system designed to be compliant with the IFRS, and met the fit and proper criteria,
as defined by the new BAFIA, in the appointment of their boards of directors and CEOs. Following the passage
of three key AML/CFT laws -- the Mutual Legal Assistance Act, the Extradition Act, and the Prevention of
Organized Crime Act -- Nepal steered clear of the FATF grey and black lists.



Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The objective "to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector and increase its transparency" was relevant to
the priorities advanced in the Nepal FSAP of 2014 and aligned with the Bank Group CPS for FY2014-18 and
CPF for FY2019-23. The prior actions were consistent with the program objectives and the results indicators
were valid and reliable measures of the expected outcomes of the program. The degree of achievement of the
objective to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector is assessed as satisfactory. The degree of
achievement of the objective to increase the transparency of the banking sector is assessed as satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

With the program delivering marked improvements in the legal, regulatory, and institutional framework for
banking and finance, the challenge moving forward is to have regulators, supervisors, bankers and
insurers enforce and observe the new laws and regulations. There are several risks to the sustainability of the
program outcomes.

Political Risk. The inauguration of a new government with a five-year term in 2018 (the Prime Minister changed
four times from 2014 to 2017) and the commitment by the government to federalism has moderated the political
risk arising from the opposition, staged three years earlier in the southern Terai region, against the Nepal
Constitution of 2015. While differences among and within political parties on constitutional issues are expected
to persist, there has been broad consensus, at least, on economic policies and priorities for the nation. In
particular, structural reforms aimed at reducing financial sector vulnerability and fostering financial sector
development have received broad political support beginning with DPC1 in 2013. An international tender for
NBL was the only DPC3 indicative trigger that did not become a prior action for DPC4, owing reportedly to
political sensitivities, but, even then, the government managed to reduce its ownership of NBL from 63 to 51
percent (see Section 5). Over the medium-term, as the political transition toward a federal state with
autonomous sub-national government progresses, it is expected that a well-functioning federal structure will help
support political stability and economic growth and reinforce the commitment to financial sector stability.

Macroeconomic Risk. The macroeconomic framework had been adequate for the reform program, well before
the COVID-19 pandemic. Economic growth had been strong in recent years, supported by greater political
stability, improved electricity supply, and reconstruction activity following the earthquake in 2015. The IMF Staff
Report on the 2020 Article IV Consultation, prepared in January 2020, reported that there has been a welcome
narrowing of the current account deficit, stabilization of gross official reserves, and slower credit
growth. However, GDP growth was expected to moderate amid slower growth in India, sluggish remittances,
and weaker agricultural production. Downside risks remained, including renewed balance of payments
pressures and increased financial sector risks if credit growth were to increase sharply or if remittances were to
slow down abruptly (remittances were 29 percent of GDP in 2018). To address these challenges, the IMF

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



recommended additional measures to support inclusive growth, while safeguarding macroeconomic and
financial stability. Fiscal policy would need to remain prudent, and the transition to fiscal federalism carefully
managed. Macroprudential measures would have to remain in place to limit any buildup of financial sector risk.

COVID-19 Risk. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a severe impact on Nepal’s economy. In recent months,
remittances have fallen considerably, tourist arrivals have collapsed, and domestic activity has contracted. To
address the pandemic, the Government has taken measures to increase health spending, strengthen social
assistance, ensure adequate liquidity in the financial system, and support access to credit. In April 2020, the
Bank approved a $29 million COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Project to
help Nepal respond to the pandemic and strengthen its public health system. In May 2020, the IMF approved a
disbursement equivalent to SDR156.9 million (US$214 million) under the Rapid Credit Facility to help cover
urgent balance of payments and fiscal needs stemming from the pandemic. Moreover, the IMF had earlier
determined that Nepal was eligible for debt service relief under the Catastrophe Containment Window of the
Catastrophe Containment and Relief Trust.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The programmatic series was informed by the FSAP of 2014, prepared jointly by the IMF (which conducted the
stability assessment) and the Bank (which conducted the development assessment) in
2014. The FSAP identified significant vulnerabilities in the country's financial sector, asserting that the under-
capitalized banking system, largely unsupervised cooperative sector, fragmented bank supervision, weak bank
resolution framework, and limited financial infrastructure posed significant risks to financial stability and
were impediments to economic growth (see Section 3). The FSAP laid out a number of key recommendations
on financial stability, financial sector oversight and crisis management, and financial development and
infrastructure that formed the basis for many prior actions supported by this Bank series and were integrated into
IMF surveillance.

Apart from the FSAP Main Report, other analytic products associated with the assessment underpinned the prior
actions, according to the Program Documents for DPC2 (pages 33-34), DPC3 (pages 23-24), and DPC4 (pages
18-19), including the: Technical Note on State-Controlled Banks; Technical Note on Stress Testing, Technical
Note on Crisis Preparedness, Technical Note on Financial Safety Net, and Technical Note on Payments &
Settlement System.

In preparing the programmatic series, the Bank also drew support from technical assistance provided by DFID,
under the latter's Financial Sector Stability Project and Financial Sector Program, and by FIRST. DFID
assistance consisted of the: Special Inspection Program Report (2016) and Fast Diagnostics of Banks and
Financial Institutions (2016), both provided by the consulting firm KPMG; Technical Consultation to the
NRB, Advisory Services in Drafting the DCGF Bill, and Technical Consultation to the NRB and DCGC (2015), all
provided by the consulting firm Adam Smith International; and Review of Draft DCGF Bill, provided by the
consulting firm PriceWaterhouseCoopers. The FIRST assistance were conveyed through technical assistance
projects for Nepal: Contingency Planning (2010), Crisis Preparedness (2011), Bank Resolution Capacity

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



Building (2014), Strengthening Banking Supervision (2015), and Insurance Sector Strengthening (2016).

The Bank vetted questions about the capacity of the authorities to implement the reform program. According to
the Program Document for DPC2 (page 41), the Bank realized that the preoccupation by the Constituent
Assembly with the Nepal Constitution of 2015 posed risks to the legislative initiatives supported under this
program and hence decided to limit the legislative actions under DPC2 to two items --- the submission to
Parliament (the Constituent Assembly transformed to become the Parliament after completing drafting the
Constitution) of the NRB Act Amendment bill and the Deposit and Credit Guarantee Fund bill. In general,
staging the reform program over three operations in five years afforded the authorities the time to strengthen the
institutional and technical capacities of the agencies responsible for implementation the reform program --- the
NRB, the Department of Cooperatives, NIB, DCGF, and the Ministry of Finance.

The Bank examined the potential poverty, social, gender and environmental impacts of the series.

      According to the Program Document for DPC2 (page 36), DPC3 (pages 25-26), and DPC4 (page 21),
       this program would help mitigate poverty impacts of financial sector instability by: (a) safeguarding bank
       deposits through a stronger deposit insurance system; (b) supporting the least-cost solution to bank
       failures (shareholders and unsecured creditors, rather than depositors, would bear the costs of a bank
       failure); (c) ensuring that the retail payment system was efficient and reliable; and (d) encouraging banks
       to promote financial inclusion. For Nepal, having a stable financial sector was vital because a financial
       crisis could send two million people below the poverty line for a period of 10 years, according to DFID.
      Passage of the new Cooperatives Act, a prior action in this program, would yield a positive gender
       impact. The law required savings and credit cooperatives to raise the representation of women in their
       boards of directors. Passage of the new Settlement and Payment Act, another action under the
       program, would also yield a positive gender impact. Most remittance recipients in the country were
       women, and integrating remittance services with the payments system would yield benefits to women.
      According to the Program Document for DPC2 (page 36), DPC3 (page 26), and DPC4 (page 21) actions
       proposed under this operation were not expected to have any negative effects on the
       environment. Rather, certain prior actions would helped enhance climate adaptation through: (a) the
       inclusion of climate-related risks in risk management guidelines issued by the NRB to banks, (b) support
       for insurance industry's ability to rehabilitate property damaged by natural disasters, and (c) the
       promotion of digital financial services that would strengthen the economy's resilience in the face of
       natural disasters. The Program Document for DPC4 (page 21) estimated that the climate co-benefits
       from the operation could reach some US$20.8 million.

The Bank considered the risks to this programmatic series and proposed mitigation measures.

      The Bank rated political and governance risk to be high because of the repeated changes in government
       over 2014-17, the contentious drafting of the Nepal Constitution of 2015, and the transition to a federal
       structure beginning in 2018. However, the Bank noted that even in an uncertain political environment,
       the authorities had made crucial decisions supportive of the program objective during the preparation for
       DPC1 and DPC2 --- the closure of distressed financial institutions, the decision to proceed with in-depth
       diagnostics of the banking system, and the approval of the recapitalization plans for the RBB and the
       NBL, including large capital injections into the two banks. To mitigate any escalation of the political and
       governance risk, the Bank recommended intensive policy dialogue between the IMF, the Bank and DFID
       and the highest levels of the government and the bureaucracy, including with leaders across the political
       spectrum, to confirm multiparty support for continuing financial sector reforms.


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



      The Bank considered institutional capacity risk to be substantial across all three operations. In response,
       the phased preparation and execution of the reform program would match the implementation capacity of
       the authorities, including the legislature. The Bank also recommended the provision of extensive
       technical assistance to various government agencies and financial institutions. The Bank, IMF, DFID
       and FIRST, as well as the International Finance Corporation (IFC), provided sustained technical
       assistance to various parties, including the private sector (private partner banks of the IFC), to help
       upgrade their institutional and technical capacity to implement the program.
      The Bank also considered stakeholder risk as substantial across all three operations. Under-capitalized
       banks and financial institutions might resist resolution and corrective actions. In response, the Bank
       called for regulators to stay firm with their PCA and resolution decisions. According to the Program
       Document for DPC2 (page 41), the divestment by the government from the NBL could be resisted by the
       NBL unions or by some NBL shareholders. The Bank thought that majority ownership by the
       government of the NBL vested it with ultimate control of the privatization decision. The government
       could extend financial benefits to NBL staff. It could also limit the ability of other shareholders to interfere
       with the divestment decision and find a reputable strategic partner for the bank.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

In addition to the technical assistance delivered during program preparation, the Bank also provided technical
assistance to Nepal during program implementation. The Bank's Legal Counsel and the IMF's General Counsel
delivered the Review of the Draft Bank and Financial Institutions Act and the Review of the Draft NRB
Amendment Act to aid in the deliberations of the proposed laws.

Capacity building activities during program implementation benefitted three organizations: (a) the high-level
Financial Sector Coordination Committee, created earlier in 2011 to address the liquidity crisis at that time,
would hence guide and monitor progress with the FSDS; (b) a new Financial Sector Management Division at the
Ministry of Finance to review policies and programs related to the financial sector, assuming the previous
functions of the Economic Policy and Analysis Division; and (c) the DCGF, with a stronger legal framework (than
the older DCGC) consistent with the principles of the International Association of Deposit Insurers.

The Bank worked closely with the Ministry of Finance, which served as coordinator of the program activities for
the government, and maintained very close cooperation with the NRB. On the donor's side, the Bank
collaborated closely with the IMF, DFID, FIRST and the IFC.

The Bank maintained flexibility during program implementation, dropping three indicative triggers (that would
have become prior actions for the succeeding operation) and revising two others

      "Approval by the FSDS Steering Committee of Subsector Financial Sector Development Strategy action
       plans" was dropped as a prior action to DPC3.


                                                                                                       Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



      The "issuance by the NRB of a new licensing policy for banks and financial institutions in line with Basel
       III" was revised to become a stronger prior action for DPC4 --- the "issuance by the NRB of a directive on
       the increase of the minimum paid-up capital for all banks and financial institutions."
      "Divestment by the government of its controlling stake in NBL" was revised to become a different prior
       action for DPC3 --- the "endorsement by the Ministry of Finance of the NBL Strategic Divestiture Plan
       and submission of the plan to the Secretariat of the Privatization Committee" (see Section 7).
      "Publication of an international tender for the sale of the government’s stake in the NBL" was dropped as
       prior action to DPC4, a logical extension of the foregoing decision.
      "Establishment by the NRB of a National Payments Council" was dropped as prior action to DPC3.

In supervising the program, the Bank maintained continuous policy dialogue with the government. The Bank
monitored progress towards outcome targets regularly, with Bank team members located in the field.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The program design was well-informed by extensive policy analysis and research produced by the Bank, IMF,
DFID and FIRST. The Bank collaborated closely with other development partners and with the principal
government agencies engaged in this policy and structural reform program. The Bank and other development
partners provided valuable technical assistance and expert advisory services, which also helped with
institutional and technical capacity building at government agencies, both during preparation and
implementation. Implementation was well supervised, with the program fully achieving 16 of 18 results targets.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR (page 27) argues that: (a) the financial stability program helped mitigate the adverse effects of the
earthquake in 2015 by supporting the resumption of credit and economic activity, with positive benefits for the
working population including the poor; (b) the deposit insurance system, which insures NPR 300,000 in deposits
per account holder and covers 82 percent of all deposit accounts in the banking system, has also benefitted the
poor, since its protects what could be their sole and life-time savings; and (c) overall, a more stable financial




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



sector reduces the risk of a financial crisis, which in Nepal, would worsen the living standards of the bottom 40
percent of the population and significantly swell the ranks of the poor. The ICR did not quantify these effects.



b. Environmental

The ICR (page 29) stated that the climate co-benefits from the operation were assessed to be US$20.8
million. With the amount equal to that cited in the Program Document for DPC4, it is not clear that the ICR had
made an independent determination of the benefits or simply re-stated the figure at appraisal (see Section 8).



c. Gender

The ICR (page 27) reiterated the assertion made in the Program Documents that the passage of the new
Cooperatives Act and the new Payments and Settlement Act have positive gender impacts. The former
improves the representation of women on the boards of financial cooperatives, where they constitute more than
half of the membership. The latter provides better access to banking services to women, who are the main
recipients of remittances (see Section 8).



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR offers a succinct record of this 36-prior action, 18-results indicator, four-policy area, three-operation
programmatic series. The document summarizes the achievement of the program objectives plainly in roughly
two-pages of discussion (pages 23-25), supported by a table of details running 12 pages in a lengthy annex
(pages 34-45). The details of DPC1 in Annex 5 (pages 55-59) is also instructive.

The discussion of the efficacy of the program is candid. All records of achievement are presented in the context
of, and in contrast with, the prevailing problems in the banking and financial system before the program. The
document calls attention to two of the 18 outcome targets that were either not met (the new Insurance Act had
not been approved by Parliament by program closing) or could not be conclusively determined were met (data
on the total number of women -- 39,205 -- in the boards of directors of 13,578 savings and credit cooperatives is
available, but not on the individual cooperative basis required by the results indicator). The ICR (page 23) rates
the efficacy of the program as moderately satisfactory, a rather harsh conclusion, unless the ICR counts the
inability of the government to completely divest from the NBL as a minus against the program, which it does not.

The discussion on the relevance of the prior actions is also candid. The prior actions are related to the
objectives of the program, broken down into the policy areas. The ICR rating of satisfactory for the relevance of



                                                                                                    Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



the prior actions is well substantiated.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                  The program fully met 16 and
                                  Moderately
 Outcome                                               Satisfactory               partially met one of 18 outcome
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                  targets.
 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                  ---                  Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are offered, including two adapted from the ICR (page 32).

Close collaboration among major donors is vital to the success of broad national reform programs,
particularly where the institutional and technical capacity for program design and implementation needs
augmenting. In this program, the Bank and the IMF jointly prepared the Nepal FSAP of 2014 which informed
the prior actions supported by this program. The legal departments of both organizations also helped review the
draft BAFIA and the draft NRB Amendment Act. DFID and FIRST provided significant technical assistance and
advisory services through their staff and international consultants. According to the ICR, the close collaboration
between the Bank and DFID was exemplary, starting in 2012, and consisting of joint missions, employment of
experts, capacity-building activities, and large resource contributions for program design and implementation.

Reform champions in a country's bureaucracy are needed for the implementation of complex reform
programs where the political environment is uncertain and potentially volatile. In this program, the Bank
worked closely with reform champions in key positions at the Ministry of Finance and the NRB who were
knowledgeable about the financial sector, held strong convening power over stakeholders, and made compelling
arguments for policy and structural reform. These key executives kept their organizations well informed of the
program rationale, design, and implementation plan. The reform-minded bureaucracy at the Ministry of Finance
and the NRB pressed on with the medium-term program notwithstanding the political uncertainty from frequent
changes in the national leadership and the civil disturbance related to the drafting of the country's new federalist
Constitution.

Governments can successfully take advantage of the opportunities offered by crisis situations to
motivate reform programs. In this program, the liquidity crisis of 2011, the failure of many financial
cooperatives in 2013-14, and the devastating earthquake in 2015 exposed the vulnerability of Nepal's banking,

                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Financial sector stability DPC2 (P133777)



cooperatives, and insurance sectors to macro-financial shocks and to natural disasters. In response, the
authorities committed to a comprehensive reform program to recapitalize and restructure the country's financial
institutions and to strengthen the legal and institutional framework for bank supervision, bank resolution,
financial crisis management, operational risk management, deposit insurance, payments and settlement, and
transparency. The demand for post-crisis recovery helped firm up broad political support for the reforms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 24
