     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022216

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P101578                                    PG - Energy Sector Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Papua New Guinea                           Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52010                                  31-Jan-2018                                           6,381,153.08

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Feb-2013                                31-Jul-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              7,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               7,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           6,381,153.08                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the Financing Agreement on page 6 and in the PAD on page 10, the objectives of the project
   were to (i) strengthen policy development and strategic framework for renewable energy and rural
   electrification; and (ii) attract investors for sustainable development of new hydropower generation to supply
   the Port Moresby electricity grid. The Global Environment Objective (GEO) as stated in the Grant Agreement
   (p.3) was "to support the development of a framework, information exchange, and consensus building to



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



   launch a national effort on development of renewable energy‐based mini-grids and rural electrification". The
   above-mentioned project development objectives remained unchanged until the project's closure.

   In accordance with the Bank's guidance, this review will assess the PDO as defined in the Financing
   Agreement, and will focus on the efficacy toward the two PDOs as delineated below:

         (i) To strengthen policy development and strategic framework for renewable energy and rural
          electrification; and
         (ii) To attract investors for sustainable development of new hydropower generation to supply the Port
          Moresby electricity grid.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components as detailed below:

   Component 1: Institutional and Policy Development for Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification
   (Cost at appraisal of US$2.0 million, with US$0.930 million from IDA, and US$0.855 million from the
   Global Environment Facility (GEF); Actual of US$1.18 million, with US$0.35 million from IDA, and
   US$0.83 million from GEF).

   Original component: This component intended to fund three categories of activities supporting: (i) the
   preparation of a renewable energy policy and a rural electrification policy for the country, (ii) the preparation
   of a strategic environmental and social assessment of the above policies and a rural electrification
   strategy, and (iii) the strengthening the capacity of country's institutions, including effective and efficient
   operational management, procurement and financial management.

   Revised component in 2016: Changes in the Component 1 included the addition of (i) the preparation of a
   natural gas master plan, and (ii) the amendment of a project covenant related to the establishment of a
   panel of experts for the proposed Naoro Brown Project.

   Revised component in 2017: The revised cost was reduced to US$1.25 million, including a counterpart
   financing of US$0.25 million. Key changes included: (i) the cancelation of the development of a renewable
   energy policy and a rural electrification policy and replacement by the development of a national energy
   policy,(ii) the support to the strategic environmental and social assessment in the context of the rural
   electrification strategy instead of the energy policy development; (iii) the cancellation of the development of
   the natural gas master plan, and (iv) the removal of the support for the Department of Petroleum and
   Energy (DPE) regional offices.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



   Component 2: Technical Assistance for Preparation and Planning for Port Moresby Hydropower
   Supply (Cost at appraisal of US$5.740 million, with US$5.740 million from IDA, with actual of US$6.3
   million from IDA). Key activities that were to be funded by this component included (i) the preparation of
   the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project for Port Moresby, and (ii) the completion of an improved planning
   related to hydropower supply for Port Moresby.

   Revised component in 2017: Changes included three cancelations of the project's support to (i) the Dam
   Safety Expert Panel, (ii) the selection of the Naoro Brown Project Developer through financial close, and (iii)
   the three-basin inventory study of the Brown, Vanapa and Angabanga Basins.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. At project closing, the actual project cost amounted to US$7.21 million. At appraisal, the
   project cost was estimated at US$9.25 million.

   Financing. At appraisal, the project financing was estimated at US$7.3 million from an IDA
   credit and US$0.9 million from a GEF grant. At project closing, actual disbursements amounted to US$6.38
   million from the IDA credit and US$0.83 million the GEF grant.

   Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the borrower's contribution was estimated at US$1.2 million; but
   there was no actual contribution from the borrower, reflecting both Government's budget constraints and
   financial issues within the energy utility, and limited Government's commitment.

   Restructurings: There were two project restructurings.

         First Restructuring (Level 2-June 29, 2016): This restructuring was prompted by the need to
          extend the project implementation by 18 months to catch up with the accumulated delays and to
          implement the revised activities under Component 1 as detailed under Section 2.d above.
         Second Restructuring (Level 2-August 15, 2017): This restructuring arose from the need to
          reallocate project resources to incorporate the reconfiguration of project activities, and the changes
          in the evolving project costs.

   Dates: The project was approved on February 2, 2013 and became effective on November 27, 2013. The
   Midterm Review was completed on November 30, 2015. The project closed on July 31, 2019, 18 months
   after the original closing date set at appraisal. The reasons for closing date extension have been outlined in
   the first restructuring entry above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: Despite the country's large hydropower potential and gas deposits, the country's power
system largely depended on expensive diesel fuel for power generation, which were being used by private
sector developers for power generation at a high cost. The country lacked a comprehensive policy to


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



               address the issues, and this factor was a major reason for designing the project with a policy‐oriented
               component to provide a framework for subsequent energy planning and development. The WBG has been
               supporting the Government’s ambitious energy sector goals regarding access and renewables, including
               the provision of : (i) TA to identify least-cost options plan for generation and transmission; (ii) support for
               mapping renewable energy resources, with a focus on wind; and (iii) technical support on gas negotiations
               and on gas-to-power options. While the project represented a continuation of the Bank's support in
               modernizing the country's electricity planning and generation, implementation readiness was insufficient,
               because of weaknesses in the Government system to swiftly execute identified activities, particularly as
               regards to the advanced development of a financing stage for a hydroelectric project with PNG Power.

               While the PDOs were in line with the Borrower's national priorities at appraisal, the Government
               shifted away from the second PDO at project closing. Because of the low rate of electricity access
               (about 20 percent), increasing electrification rate was among the top priority goals of the government. To
               address country's energy challenges, the Government adopted an ambitious goal in the 2017-2027 National
               Energy Policy document (see pages 1-5), which aimed to "provide sufficient, accessible, reliable and
               affordable energy in a manner that is competitive, sustainable and environmentally friendly". Several
               principles of the Policy were in line with the project's PDOs, including the Principles 2 and 4, which
               respectively intended to "(i) develop an integrated planning process for sustainable energy supply and
               utilization, and (ii) ensure energy resources are developed and delivered in an environmentally sustainable
               manner". Moreover, strategies developed under each of the above principles were consistent with the
               project's activities. However, although the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project was among the least‐cost
               power generation options in 2019, the Government's focus shifted away from hydropower generation
               toward gas generation.

               The PDOs were consistent with the World Bank's strategies at project closure: The project was
               congruent with the 2019-2023 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) which explicitly identified the key
               focus areas, including supporting people’s access to electricity and promoting renewable energy. The CPF
               Objective 2.4 aimed "to improve planning and operational capacity for achieving government’s electrification
               targets (CPF, page 50-51)". The project pinpointed two categories of activities supporting the strengthening
               of the country's energy policy, and the development of a project aimed to increase the availability of
               renewable energy and opportunities for better energy access. Overall, the project objective was aligned
               with the key pillars of the country's strategy at closing.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives was substantial. While PDOs were consistent with the World Bank
               country's CPF and country needs, there were signals that the Borrower was shifting from hydropower to gas
               source of electricity at closure, and implementation readiness was insufficient.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To strengthen policy development and strategic framework for renewable energy and rural electrification.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1

The project intended to provide technical assistance to the Department of Petroleum and Energy through the
hiring of a renewable and rural energy adviser, strategic environmental and social assessment, and stock-
taking using geographic information systems (GIS). The expected outputs of technical assistance were (i) a
renewable energy and a rural electrification policy, (ii) a rural electrification strategy, and (iii) increased
institutional capacity through training. The outputs would be expected to lay the foundation for a
strengthened strategic framework for the development of renewable energy and increasing rural
electrification. Expected long-term impact was increased access to clean energy.

While the links between the activities and the expected outcomes were plausible, the project results were at
the output level rather than outcome. The short-term goal of the project was to establish a comprehensive
policy formulation and strategic framework and strengthen institutional capacity that were absent for the
development of large hydropower potential for electricity generation and increasing access to electricity. The
project’s development impact would be expected to materialize in the medium- to long-term depending on the
commitment of the government to implement the policies and strategies developed under the project.

Outputs

      A National Energy Policy (NEP, 2018–2028) and a rural electrification strategy were completed and
         approved by the Cabinet in 2018, including the next steps for the National Electrification Roll‐Out Plan
         (NEROP) Implementation in 2019;
        A geospatial mapping and investment prospectus were completed under the NEROP, and allowed the
         determination of the least cost renewable energy based mini‐grid concessions for the population living
         in rural and urban areas;
        The strategic environmental and social assessment was completed and incorporated into the rural
         electrification strategy; and
        A resource mapping exercise to measure commercial grade wind data and determine alternative
         renewable energy sources to support the Government’s access target was completed.
        The Government officially launched the Energy Policy 2017- 2027 on August 20, 2020, firming its
         intentions on the carbon free energy generation, especially the renewable resources including
         hydropower.

Outcomes

      The key contribution of the NEP was to provide an overall panorama of the energy sector and to set
       forth the foundation for significantly improving the country's access to electricity aimed to attain the 70
       percent goal by 2030;
      The completed energy policy and strategy provided a framework for the Government’s electrification
       program toward meeting its access targets and attracted development partners to participate in
       building consensus for the implementation of NEROP.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



Overall, the key achievement was the completion of the National Energy Policy (NEP, 2018–2028), and the
preparation of the National Electrification Roll‐Out Plan (NEROP) Implementation. The above was a first step
toward developing the policies of the country’s energy sector. According to the additional information provided
by the project team, the PNG government, in October 2020, requested the Bank’s support through an
International Development Agency credit for the implementation of NEROP to increase access to electricity in
the country. This is a positive outcome of the project’s intervention that the PNG government now moves to
the second stage of the implementation of NEROP prepared under the project. Therefore, the efficacy of the
achievement of Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To attract investors for sustainable development of new hydropower generation to supply the Port Moresby
electricity grid

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The key activity was the provision of technical expertise to Papua New Guinea (PNG) for the preparation of a
hydropower supply plan for Port Moresby and the development of 80MW Naoro Brown Hydropower Plant
Project . Expected outputs were to include (i) project documents, such as power purchase agreement,
request for proposal, and environmental and social impact assessment, for the Naoro Brown Hydropower
Project; (ii) the three-basin inventory study to prepare a hydropower power supply plan for Port Moresby; and
(iii) training for PPL staff. The key expected outcome was the selection of an investor that would undertake a
sustainable development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Plant to increase affordable and reliable electricity
supply to Port Moresby grid, and reduce the country’s reliance of electricity produced by diesel generators by
implementing the hydropower supply plan.

The links between the project activities/outputs and expected outcomes were plausible, and achieving
financial closure for the Naoro Brown Hydropower Plant Project to be developed by a private investor was
measurable. However, the achievement of this outcome within four years was unrealistic given the lack of
institutional capacity of the PNG Power to implement such a complex transaction process, including
safeguards aspects, and the various risks that would have to be addressed to achieve a bankable scheme for
the development of the hydropower plant by a private investor. According to the results framework in the PAD
(p.29), the developer would have been selected by the end of the second year of project implementation, and
the financiers’ due diligence would have been completed by the end of the fourth year.

Outputs

      The following required studies necessary to provide the necessary documents to initiate a search for
       potential developers were completed: (i) the draft bidding documents, (ii) the transaction options
       report; and (iii) the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA);


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)




      A Panel of Experts report was also completed to provide insight into technical aspects and reduced
       uncertainty surrounding the development;
      Many staff were trained and gained experience in the preparation of hydropower projects;
      The three-basin study that would form the basis for the hydropower supply plan for the Port Moresby
       grid was dropped in 2017 because the Government’s focus shifted from hydropower development to
       gas-to-power to utilize the large gas reserves in the country, and funds were insufficient (ICR, p.15);
       and
      The transaction advisory could not be provided, and some studies, such as hydrology gauging, could
       not be completed because of insufficient funds.

Outcomes

The achievement of this objective was to be measured by reaching an advanced financing stage for the
Naoro Brown Hydropower Project and engaging an investment bank that would select a developer. The
above indicator was adequate to capture the achievement of the objective “to attract investors” for the
development of new hydropower generation to supply the Port Moresby electricity grid. The three-river basin
study that would form the basis for the hydropower supply plan for the Port Moresby area was expected to
facilitate the development of future hydropower projects and the selection of investors, assuring
the “sustainability” condition of the objective.

While originally the project targeted financial closure for the hydropower project, after the 2017 restructuring,
the target was lowered to the preparation of a financing package and its approval by the
government. Additionally, as reported in the outputs above, the three-basin study was dropped in
2017. Despite these changes in the project scope and the targets, the project objective was not revised. The
approval of the financing package by the government in 2018 does not provide sufficient evidence for the
achievement of this objective, because there is uncertainty about the effective development of the project by
the government. Additionally, according to the findings of the Least-Cost Power Development Plan, which
was financed by the Bank and completed in 2018, the rehabilitation of existing hydropower capacity and
development of gas-to-power projects are lower cost options compared to new hydropower development
which requires long preparation and development duration (ICR, p.12). As of the writing of this review, the
government had already put a hold on the development of hydropower projects to supply electricity to Port
Moresby area.

Even if the government decides to move forward with the development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower
Plant, as the ICR (p.20) reports, there are outstanding activities to be completed before promoting the project
to be developed by private investors, such as hydrology gauging, sediment flow/rainfall equipment and
installation, update of project costs for the generation facility and components, access road and cost
estimates, sediment tests, transmission corridor surveys and cost estimation, and geotechnical investigations.

Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of this objective is rated negligible for the following reasons: (i) there
is no investor selected for the development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project; (ii) the development of
the hydropower project depends on the preparation of other technically necessary project documents; and (iii)
the uncertainty about the future of the project since the government’s focus has shifted from new hydropower
development toward gas-to-power projects based on the findings of the Least-Cost Power Development Plan.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)




                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s performance in achieving the first objective was substantial. The National Energy Policy was
                            prepared, which forms the foundation for the development of energy sector, including increasing access to
                            electricity under National Electrification Roll-Out Plan (NEROP). The NEROP is expected to move to the
                            second stage, i.e., implementation under a follow-on project to be financed by the Bank.

                            The achievement of the second objective is rated negligible, because the project was not successful in
                            attracting investors for hydropower development, and additionally, the government’s focus has shifted from
                            new hydropower development to gas-to-power projects and rehabilitation of existing hydropower plants
                            according to the findings of the Least-Cost Power Development Plan.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   This was a technical assistance project and no economic analysis was prepared at project appraisal. For
   efficiency analysis, the ICR used a “reasonable cost” approach to compare the project cost to similar projects in
   the Dominican Republic and Vietnam, combined with a “value-for-money” approach (p.44) to assess the quality
   of project outputs in relation to the costs incurred (ICR, p.21). Based on these two approaches, the US$1.18
   cost incurred in producing the National Energy Plan (NEP) and National Electrification of Roll-Out Plan (NOREP)
   against the appraisal estimate of US$2.0 million was reasonable and the quality of the outputs is evidenced by
   the decision of the PNG government to move to the second stage of NEROP implementation aimed
   at increasing access to electricity in the country. The project’s efficiency in strengthening policy development
   and strategic framework for rural electrification was substantial.

   Additionally, the economic benefits of the project were assessed by calculating the expected greenhouse gas
   (GHG) emissions reduction that would arise from the implementation of renewable energy strategy and the
   commissioning of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Plant (NBHPP) substituting diesel power (ICR, pp.45-46).
   However, according to the Least-Cost Power Development Plan (LCPDP), both the NBHPP and renewable
   power are considered as the least-cost options in the medium to long-term, not in the short-term. Given the
   findings of the LCPDP, it is not clear whether the PNG government will prioritize the development of NBHPP or
   the renewable power projects. Therefore, although the economic benefits presented in the ICR in terms
   reduction of GHG emissions can be used to justify the development of the NBHPP and the renewable power
   strategy under the project, there are serious concerns that those economic benefits might not materialize.

   Moreover, the administrative and operational efficiency of the project significantly suffered from the unconducive
   country environment and the weak technical and institutional capacity on the ground. While this was a small

                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



project, it took a long time to implement (2013-2019). Because of implementation delays, the project closure
occurred 18 months after the original closing date. In addition to the changes in and the cancellation of original
project activities, there were inconsistencies in what the project intended to do during implementation: for
example, in the first restructuring development of a natural gas master plan was added to the project scope, but
it was deleted in the following restructuring in 2017, because there was no progress and the government was
considering to develop this plan under a separate funding (ICR, p.14). Because of insufficient funds, important
activities and technical studies related to the development of new hydropower in the country could not be
undertaken or were cancelled (ICR, p.12 and15). Lastly, some contracts required more financing than initially
estimated at appraisal, such as the safeguards works for the NBHPP (ICR, p.2).

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated modest based on the achievements
and shortcomings listed above.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s performance in achieving the first objective was substantial. The National Energy Policy was
prepared, which forms the foundation for the development of energy sector, including increasing access to
electricity under National Electrification Roll-Out Plan (NEROP). The NEROP is expected to move to the
second stage of implementation under a follow-on project to be financed by the Bank.

The achievement of the second objective is rated negligible, because the project was not successful in
attracting investors for hydropower development, and additionally, the government’s focus has shifted from new
hydropower development to gas-to-power projects and rehabilitation of existing hydropower plants according to
the findings of the Least-Cost Power Development Plan.

Project efficiency was modest because of a mix of reasonable costs and value-for-money achievements, and
significant shortcomings in administrative and operational efficiency of the project.

Overall, the project’s outcome rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Most achievements with the project's support were outputs which include the following: (i) a National Energy
Policy, (ii) a National Electrification Roll‐Out Plan, (iii) multiple studies and reports, and (iv) many trained
staff. For the above achievements to be sustained and lead to progress toward second generation reforms
and concrete outcomes in the areas of renewable energy and rural development and development of new
hydropower generation, the Government will have to display the political will and ability to stay the
course with the policy orientations, and to mobilize the needed resources to generate the thrust of promoting
renewable energy and rural electrification, and attracting investors for sustainable development of new
hydropower generation.

The ICR did not provide a convincing case regarding the Government's commitment and ability to move
ahead with the reforms and to mobilize the needed resources to fund and press ahead with the agenda of
promoting renewable energy and rural electrification and attracting investors for sustainable development of
new hydropower generation. As an illustration, the ICR indicated on para 80 that " there is a risk that no
developer may be interested in the NB HPP, and that this development outcome may not materialize".
Moreover, the Government has shown its preference to move ahead with an IPP gas generation, instead of
supporting the Naoro Brown Hydropower project. The failure to structure a bankable hydropower project in a
country where there are risks ranging from country risk to off-take risk indicates that the risk of attracting a
developer is real.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was a simple technical assistance project aimed at strengthening the policy and institutional energy
  sector framework, and expected results consisted of studies and reports preparation requiring
  only easy fiduciary and monitoring actions. The project's goal was strategically relevant and its design
  reflected lessons learned by the World Bank in designing sustainable hydropower plants and was
  supported by several initiatives such as the visit to other countries to examine the experience in
  hydropower development. Key development partners were consulted to ensure that the project
  design is coordinated with their planned energy sector interventions.

  However, the country's implementation capacity and readiness were insufficiently appraised during
  design, and project funds were not enough to implement some very important project activities (see
  Section 4). The absence of a Least-Cost Power Development Plan was a shortcoming, because when it
  was completed, it was found that the new hydropower was not the least-cost option in the
  hindsight. Moreover, the statement of the PDOs, and the setting of the PDO indicators and targets were


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



  challenging. While the project objectives were simple, their clarity and the results and monitoring
  framework could have been improved, aiming at more precisely setting the adequate project's outcomes
  and PDO indicators and targets. For instance, the second objective related to the selection of a developer
  of the hydropower plant was overambitious, because of limited existing capacity and insufficient project's
  allocated resources.

  Key agency and project risks were rated high during the preparation phase and mitigation measures were
  identified, including training in procurement and FM, and support on the social and environmental front to
  address eventual reputational risk for the World Bank. Moreover, technical, financial, and economic
  aspects of the project were analyzed through complementary sector studies and forecasts in order for the
  project to address the issues of the growing dependence on diesel generation and the shortcomings of
  existing hydropower units. Some attention was reserved to the environmental and social aspects to
  ensure environmentally and socially sustainable management of the implementation of the supported
  policies, and given the global environmental benefits that would arise from the implementation of the
  Naoro Brown hydropower in particular.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were long delays in the procurement of firms and consultants, and implementation progress was
 mostly rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory due to delays which led to low levels of disbursement. The
 Bank’s project team initiated hand-holding solutions to mitigate the weaknesses in the implementation
 teams through hiring several planned and unplanned experts to support in the areas of procurement,
 safeguards and financial management of the project.

 The Bank’s project team fielded 18 missions to supervise different aspects of the project and to help
 support the project implementation, including the preparation of 12 Implementation Status and Results
 Reports (ISRs), which also updated the status of PDO and intermediate target indicators. For instance,
 when it became apparent that the Department of Petroleum and Energy (DPE) and power utility faced
 implementation shortcomings, there was a concerted effort to help the project find a procurement adviser
 after the second restructuring in 2017. The Bank’s project team worked closely with the power utility team
 to recruit a series of the needed experts and consultants. The World Bank also assisted the power utility in
 identifying international experts that accompanied the utility team until the cabinet approves the Naoro
 Brown financing structure, and the ESIA final reports. Finally, the World Bank specialist helped to hire an
 expert with an accounting background who provided support to the DPE during the last two years.
 However, the Bank team continued to support the Naoro Brown hydropower project, although the
 Government had shifted its focus toward an IPP gas generation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were adequately specified, and the links in the theory of change were plausible, but
 the project’s expected results were at the output level rather than outcome, as is the case in most of such
 technical assistance projects. However, the second objective had a clear outcome to attract investors for
 sustainable development of hydropower generation, but this was an overly ambitious goal for such a small
 technical assistance project.

 Most of the outcome and intermediate results indicators were specific, measurable, relevant and time-
 bound, but they were mostly at the output level and did not capture the outcome impact of the technical
 assistance activities nor measured the quality of the products (ICR, Table 4, p.25); the indicator, i.e.,
 “Financing for the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project is at an advanced stage measuring the achievement of
 the second objective with a target of “financiers’ due diligence completed” and the related intermediate
 results indicator of “Developer for Naoro Brown Hydropower Project selected following transparent
 process” with a target of the mobilization of the developer in the third year of the project were not
 achievable. The M&E design did not fully capture the expected outcome of the project activities in
 strengthening the institutional capacity in the energy sector, which were mostly “conceived as ongoing
 trainings” (ICR, p. 26).

 Regarding M&E arrangements, the project management unit would be responsible for monitoring the
 achievement of the indicators and report them quarterly, with support from consultants to be selected for
 the preparation of the documents and other deliverables.



b. M&E Implementation
  The revised outcome level indicators, i.e., “National Energy Policy and rural electrification strategy
  finalized by the Department of Petroleum and Energy following participatory process” and “Financing
  structure for the Naoro Brown Hydropower Project is approved by government,” were more relevant and
  achievable compared to the original indicators, but they did not encompass the expected outcomes of the
  project objectives; the project objectives were not revised while the ambition of the project was
  substantially lowered. The indicators were easy to measure since they consisted of monitoring the
  development of the documents. The consultants contracted to develop these documents reported the
  progress regularly. On the other hand, the shortcomings in the M&E design in capturing the impact of the
  technical assistance activities on institutional strengthening were not corrected during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were shared with key stakeholders and they led to project restructurings adjusting “the
  project scope to the resource requirements, which exceeded the allocated budgets” (ICR, p.28). The
  M&E data were used to provide evidence for the application of inputs and achievement of outputs, rather

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



  than the achievement of the outcomes. This was mostly because of the weaknesses in the M&E design,
  which did not fully encompass the expected outcomes of the project objectives. On the other hand, the
  M&E findings were used in the preparation of an approved Electricity Utility Performance Reliability
  Improvement Project, and an electrification project under preparation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category B operation, but environmental and social (E&S) safeguards were
   prepared as if the project was a category A project. While the proposed project was to finance technical
   assistance and not investments, the project had activities aimed at catalyzing the development of the Naoro
   Brown Hydropower Project, which would have social and environmental impacts. That is why several social
   and environmental safeguard policies were developed in the PAD to deal with situations that would arise
   from the materialization of the Naoro Brown Hydropower project, although they were not triggered.

   At project appraisal, only the OP 4.01: Environmental Assessment was triggered. But other social and
   environmental policies were developed in the PAD to preempt the situation whereby the Naoro Brown
   hydropower moves quickly to fruition, and were triggered during implementation. Social safeguards policies
   triggered during implementation included: (i) OP 4.10: Indigenous Peoples; and (ii) OP 4.12 Involuntary
   Resettlement. The environmental safeguard policies that were triggered during implementation were as
   follows: (i) OP 4.04: Natural Habitats; and (ii) OP 4.36: Forests, and (iii) OP-BP 4.37: Safety of Dams. The
   social and environment safeguards documents that were to be prepared to preempt the situation once the
   Naoro Brown Hydropower project Developer is in place are: (i) the Environment and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF); (ii) the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); (iii) the Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF); and (iv) Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The only key social and environmental
   study completed was the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), which reflected the
   consultations conducted with the communities, and their interest in the benefits associated with employment
   opportunities and the launch of the Naoro Brown Hydropower project.

   The ICR provided insufficient documentation on E&S safeguards developments during project
   implementation. Overall, six E&S policies were triggered at appraisal and during implementation and
   documented in ISRs, but the ICR did not reflect these developments. Additional information from the Bank
   team indicated that although the project was classified as Category B at appraisal and only triggered one
   policy (OP/PB 4.01), all work was carried out during preparation as if the project was classified as Category
   A. A private Consultancy firm undertook the ESIA work to cover all the safeguards policies that were
   triggered when the project was implemented. Some of the work under the ESIA included Environment
   inception report, social screening, communication strategy, environment and social management plan.
   Some of which were implemented under the ESIA work such as the social screening and communication
   strategy. The ESIA has been released by the consultant.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). Both implementation units displayed FM weaknesses and could not grasp
   the procedures and discipline required to account for project expenses. During implementation, the World
   Bank dedicated significant resources to achieve the desired level of precision in improving the handling of
   the project’s accounts, including bringing the interim financial reports (IFRs) up to date, but the 2017 and
   2018 audit reports were still outstanding at project closure. By the ICR closure, the 2019 audit was also still
   outstanding. Training of the implementation units staff did not lead to an improvement in financial
   management (ICR, para 75).

   Procurement. Throughout project implementation, procurement transactions were challenging due to
   limited expertise within the implementation units. While the project supported the hiring and training of the
   needed personnel, the quick rotation in the procurement team did not allow the development and retention
   of any institutional knowledge. As a result, there was poor procurement support from these entities
   throughout the project cycle. Implementation delays that led to the extension of the closing date arose
   predominantly from weaknesses in the procurement area. An external procurement adviser was hired and
   provided some support but could not overcome the structural obstacles associated with institutional setup
   of the units.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately              Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    The Quality at Entry is rated
                                                                                    Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    because of shortcomings at
                                                                                    appraisal, such as inadequate
                                Moderately              Moderately                  appraisal of the implementation
Bank Performance
                                Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory              capacity of the borrower, overly
                                                                                    ambitious project objective,
                                                                                    insufficient funds because of low
                                                                                    estimation of the project cost,
                                                                                    and weaknesses in the M&E


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



                                                                                 system. Since the Outcome
                                                                                 rating is in the unsatisfactory
                                                                                 range, the Bank Performance is
                                                                                 rated Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 per Bank guidance, although the
                                                                                 Quality of Supervision is rated
                                                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR has identified a number of important points listed on pages 32-33, but most of them are
either findings or recommendations. Drawing from the ICR's material, this review identified the
following lessons:

Ensuring implementation readiness can better lead to results than trying to build the needed
capacity during project implementation: At appraisal, institutional and technical capacity
weaknesses were identified in the project implementation units, particularly in the fiduciary areas.
Mitigating measures were ineffective, and this situation led to delays in the project
implementation, restructuring and extension of the project closing date. The project implementation
experience confirms that ensuring that implementation units are ready in terms of staff quality and
fiduciary expertise is essential for the timely project launch and implementation performance. Having
the technical and institutional expertise in place ahead of project launch is better than trying to
remedy the situation in the course of project implementation.

Matching the scope and size of the project activities to existing institutional capacity may
better contribute to achieving the expected outcome. A key goal of this project was to achieve a
bankable scheme for the development of the hydropower plant by a private investor. In hindsight,
this outcome ended up being a very ambitious attempt, because of the absence of the required
institutional capacity. The achievement of this outcome within four years was unrealistic given that
such was a complex transaction process that had to tackle multiple challenges. The developer was
expected to be selected by the end of the second year of project implementation, and the financiers’
due diligence to be completed by the end of the fourth year. Because of the country's institutional
weaknesses, progress toward outcome was minimum, and the Government opted to discontinue the
hydropower plant idea in favor of an IPP gas generation.

The completion of studies analyzing the aspects surrounding the project activities can help
design a more realistic project. The development of the Naoro Brown Hydropower Plant Project
was a major undertaking requiring a comprehensive grasp of the country's power context. The
construction of the new hydropower plant required a detailed preparation and development,
including the completion of the three-river basin study that would form the basis for the hydropower
supply plan for the Port Moresby area, as well as the Least-Cost Power Development Plan. The
absence of a least-cost power development plan resulted in an unrealistic project design,
because the 2018 findings of the Least-Cost Power Development Plan supported the rehabilitation
of existing hydropower capacity and development of gas-to-power projects are lower cost options

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PG - Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)



compared to the option of launching the Naoro Brown Hydropower Plant Project. It is essential to
complete the required key studies before embarking on any hydropower project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed narrative of the project context and the achieved limited results; and is generally
evidence-based and internally consistent, as it provides a complete set of data, information and annexes that
cover key aspects of the project design and implementation. However, the ICR has several weaknesses as
follows: (i) the quality of analysis was reduced by the weaknesses of the theory of change and the results
framework, (ii) the assessment of the efficiency was not fully consistent with Bank guidelines, as there was no
need for the calculation of economic benefits and GHG emissions reduction due to absence of investments,
(iii) the ICR could have been more concise (30 pages against the 15 required), and (iv) the reporting
on safeguards compliance was incomplete.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
