     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022110

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P113416                                   EG-Wind Power Development

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Egypt, Arab Republic of                   Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-79270,TF-95224,TF-96929,TF-          31-Dec-2015                                         182,612,935.76
 96930

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jun-2010                               30-Jun-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          219,750,000.00                                  150,490,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           182,612,935.76                                  124,823,517.33

 Actual                                       182,612,935.76                                  124,823,517.33




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p.5) dated November 4, 2010, the project objective was “to develop the
   infrastructure and business models which will enable the development of wind power within the Borrower’s
   territory” where Borrower was defined as the Arab Republic of Egypt. The formulation of the project objective
   in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) was different, but there was no material difference in the substance



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



   of the objective: “to develop infrastructure and business models for scaling-up wind power in Egypt” (PAD,
   p.12).

   At the first restructuring in July 2014, the project objective was revised. According to the Amendment to the
   Loan Agreement dated October 26, 2014, the revised project objective was “to develop business models and
   required transmission facilities for scaling-up wind power in Egypt, and increase transmission capacity in
   targeted areas.”

   Despite the change in the formulation of the project objective, there is no material difference between the
   original objective to enable the development of wind power in the country and the first part of the revised
   objective to scale up wind power. The introduction of the second objective to increase transmission capacity
   in targeted areas and the drop in the outcome target of additional installed wind power generation capacity
   from 2,250 megawatt (MW) to 750MW would require a split evaluation of the achievement of the project
   objectives, but since the disbursement rate at the time of the restructuring was about five percent—which
   would result in a negligible weight for the achievement of the original objective on the outcome rating—a split
   evaluation will not be undertaken in this review.

   The project objective will be evaluated as consisting of two sub-objectives*:

        1. To develop business models and required transmission facilities for scaling-up wind power in Egypt;
          and
        2. To increase transmission capacity in targeted areas.

   * The first objective was “to scale up wind power”, which was to be achieved through the development of
   business models, i.e., the build-own-operate model, and the construction of critical transmission infrastructure
   connecting the to-be-built wind power plants in the Gulf of Suez area to the national electricity grid at the
   center of the country. The second objective, which was added at the first restructuring, was to increase the
   transmission capacity in the Nile Delta Governorates. Due to the geographical difference, the two objectives
   will be evaluated separately.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Jul-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components:



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



A. Transmission Infrastructure. (Appraisal cost: US$342.3 million including physical and price
contingencies; actual cost: US$277 million)

Under this component, transmission investments were to be financed to connect future wind power plants in
the Gulf of Suez to the national electricity network. This component included the following investment
activities:

    1. Construction of a 500 kilovolt (kV) double circuit transmission line of approximately 280 kilometers
       (km) in length from Ras Gharib to Samallout.
    2. Construction of a 500kV/220kV substation and installation of a 500kV/220kV transformer in Ras
       Gharib.
    3. Extension of the 500kV/220kV conventional substation and installation of a 500kV/220kV
       transformer at Samallout.
    4. Construction of a 220kV transmission line of approximately 50 km in length between Ras Gharib and
       Gabel El-Zait.

B. Expansion of the Wind Generation Program. (Appraisal cost: US$2.9 million; actual cost:US$2.6
million)

Under this component, the project was to finance capacity building activities to support the expansion of the
wind power program:

    1. Provision of legal and financial advisory services in the implementation of the competitive bidding
       program for Build-Own-Operate (BOO) wind power farms.
    2. Management of wind power integration in the power system.
    3. Environmental and social assessment of the proposed site for a BOO wind power farm in the Gulf of
       Suez.
    4. Implementation of a knowledge management program including communications with stakeholders
       regarding project activities and dissemination of lessons learned.

C. Gulf of Suez BOO Wind Farm. (Appraisal cost: US$450 million; actual cost:US$380 million)

This component included the development and construction of a 250MW wind farm in the Gulf of Suez on a
BOO basis following a competitive bidding process to be financed by the developer.



Revised Components

At the first restructuring in June 2014, two new sub-components were added to the Transmission
Infrastructure component to utilize the US$106 million savings occurred because of the lower than
estimated cost of the 280km double circuit transmission line (A sharp decrease in aluminum and steel
prices was reported as the reason for the lower investment cost in the restructuring paper (p.v). But the cost
at appraisal was overestimated, which has been a recurring issue in similar energy projects in Egypt. The
cost was estimated based on “historical data available in the country sectors for similar projects” but global
market prices were not considered in the estimation (ICR, p.41).)




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



      1. Extension and reinforcement of the national 220kV network along the Suez Gulf Coastal area
         consisting of the construction of substations in north Hurghada and El-Qusair, and the connection of
         these substations to the national grid.
      2. Upgrading and rehabilitation of 232km of five existing 220kV transmission lines in the Nile Delta
         Governorates.

         The estimated cost of these additional investments was US$103.8 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$752.5 million excluding US$43.4 million
  for physical and price contingencies. In June 2019, the project closed with a total cost of US$659.6 million.
  The lower than estimated cost of the main transmission line (see Revised Components in the previous
  section) and the lower cost of the 250MW wind project, which was tendered on a BOO basis, were the main
  reasons for a lower actual project cost.

  Financing: At appraisal, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan was estimated at
  US$70.0 million. At project closing in June 2019, US$57.8 million of the IBRD loan was disbursed. At
  project closing all Bank funds were accounted for.

  The estimated funding from other donors at appraisal and their actual contributions at project closing were
  as follows: (i) the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) loan, US$149.75 million, actual US$124.08 million; (ii) the
  Clean Technology Fund grant, US$0.25 million, fully disbursed; (iii) the Public Private Infrastructure
  Advisory Facility (PPIAF), US$0.5 million, fully disbursed; (iv) European Investment Bank, French
  Development Agency (Agence Française de Dévéloppement-AfD), Neighborhood Investment Fund (NIF),
  and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) joint credit, US$70.0 million, fully disbursed; (v) KfW grant,
  US$0.7million, fully disbursed; and (vi) the private wind farm investor and operator, US$450.0 million, actual
  US$380.0 million.

  The IBRD and CTF loans were to finance the construction of the 500kV double circuit transmission line. The
  EIB, AfD, NIF, and KfW joint credit was to finance the construction and extension of the substations. The
  grants from CTF, PPAF and KfW were allocated to the technical assistance activities under the second
  component. A private investor was to develop and construct a 250MW wind farm in the Gulf of Suez region
  on the BOO model.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution of the Government of Egypt (GoE) was estimated at
  US$54.8 million. At project closing, the GoE’s actual contribution was US$46.3 million. The Borrower’s own
  funds were to finance the construction of the 220kV transmission line between Ras Gharib and Gabel El-
  Zait—the fourth sub-component of the first component—and contribute to the financing of the construction
  and extension of the substations.

  Restructurings: There were two project restructurings.

        First Restructuring (Level 1 – July 10, 2014): The project objective was revised to reflect the
         addition of new transmission investments to the project scope (see sections 2.a Objective and 2.d
         Components above). Target values of some indicators were revised based on progress, and new
         indicators were added to capture the achievement of the new project activities while irrelevant

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



          indicators were dropped: (i) The target for progress in implementing competitive bidding for the
          remaining wind energy program was decreased from 2,250MW to 750MW because of the revision of
          the procurement schedule by the Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy; (ii) Consequently,
          the target for associated greenhouse gas emission reductions decreased from 7 million tons to 2.6
          million tons; (iii) “Transmission capacity for rehabilitated transmission lines doubled” was added as a
          new outcome level indicator; (iv) “Households benefitting from wind energy” was replaced by “direct
          project beneficiaries” and the target was set at about 1.46 million people, 49 percent of whom would
          be female; (v) Three unmeasurable and irrelevant outcome level indicators were deleted, i.e., public
          and private investments leveraged for transmission and first BOO wind project, total job creation in
          the wind industry and wind power supply chain development; and (vi) four new intermediate
          indicators were added to capture the implementation of the new transmission investments. Lastly,
          the project closing date was extended by 24 months from December 31, 2015 to December 31,
          2017 to allow time for the completion of the additional transmission works and to achieve the
          commissioning of the wind power plant, the tendering process of which was delayed by about two
          years because of the increased risk perception of the investors following the political events of 2011
          (Restructuring Paper, Report No: RES13247 p.vi).
         Second Restructuring (Level 2 – December 20, 2017): The closing date was extended by 18
          months from December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2019 to allow the completion of the additional
          transmission investments. The procurement of the additional transmission line investments under
          the first component was delayed because of the weak procurement capacity of the project
          implementation entity, the Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC), and the
          indecisiveness of the EETC in identifying new investments in place of those added to the project
          scope at the first restructuring that were later financed by the utility using its own funds. The
          outcome level indicator “transmission infrastructure to evacuate 3,000MW of wind power” measured
          in percent of completion was replaced by “Increase in transmission infrastructure capacity to
          evacuate 3,000MW of wind power” measured in gigawatt (GW) to better capture the outcome
          achievement, and there were some minor revisions to intermediate outcome indicators, such as the
          change in the units from Yes/No to percentages.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 15, 2010. The Loan Agreement was signed on November 4,
   2010 but the loan became effective on August 14, 2011 because of delays in the parliamentary ratification
   process of the agreement. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in March 2016. The original closing date
   was December 31, 2015. In two restructurings, the closing date was extended by a total of 42 months. The
   project closed on June 30, 2019. The reasons for closing date extensions have been outlined in the first and
   second restructuring entries above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives are substantially relevant to the country context. In addition to proven natural gas
and oil reserves, Egypt is rich in wind and solar power potential, but the share of renewable energy in the
generation mix is low. According to the 2030 Egypt Vision (p.12) of the Government of Egypt, the energy
goal of the country is to have "an energy sector meeting national sustainable development requirements
and maximizing the efficient use of various traditional and renewable resources contributing to economic
growth, competitiveness, achieving social justice, and preserving environment." In order to achieve this

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



               development goal, the government set a target for increasing the share of renewable energy in generation
               to 42 percent in its Energy Sector Strategy—the Integrated Sustainable Energy Strategy to 2035. The
               country has the legal framework to scale up wind power and increase transmission capacity. The project
               objective is outcome-oriented and appropriately pitched for the development status of the country, but the
               project implementing entity lacks sufficient project implementation capacity. Those capacity weaknesses did
               become evident and led to a lowering of the project's ambition in terms of installed capacity, which in turn
               proved to be mismatched with the transmission line. These weaknesses also resulted in costly delays and
               low achievement of results related to the second objective.

               At project closing, project objectives were aligned with the Bank priorities as defined in the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) 2015-2019. Under the second focus area of "Improved opportunities for
               private sector job creation", Objective 2.2. is defined as "improved energy generation capacity and energy
               efficiency." The goal of the Bank strategy is "to support the Egyptian government’s effort to eliminate power
               outages by 2017 and to promote financial sustainability of the sector by 2019 through the increased
               participation of the private sector in new energy generation, including the construction of … 5,250MW of
               renewable energy by the private sector" (CPF, p.31). The project objectives overlap with the shift in the
               Bank’s focus “from conventional power generation to enhanced energy efficiency, improved transmission,
               and scaling up renewable energy from wind and solar power facilities, with efforts aimed at bringing in
               private sector capital and know-how” (CPF, p.iii).

               Since the approval of the El-Tebbin Power Project in February 2006, the Bank has been active in the power
               sector in Egypt: The Bank financed the first solar-thermal power project and the 1,200MW Ain Sokhna
               power plant. But a transmission project addressing the physical off-take barrier to electricity generated by
               privately built and operated wind power mills was a new challenge for the Bank as a first in Egypt. Overall,
               given the Bank’s prior involvement in energy projects in the country and global experience it gained in
               similar transmission and private-public-partnership projects, the project objectives were adequately
               challenging.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To develop business models and required transmission facilities for scaling-up wind power in Egypt.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             The project objective was to scale up wind power by building the transmission infrastructure to connect the
                             wind power capacity to be built at the Gulf of Suez region to the national grid, while providing technical

                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



assistance to facilitate the first 250MW private wind power plant investment on a build-operate-own (BOO)
model. The project’s inputs—loans and credits—were to directly lead to the achievement of the full
transmission system between Ras Gharib at the Gulf of Suez and Samallout in the west. The expected
outcome was the mitigation of the off-taker risk associated with power evacuation. Under the technical
assistance component, the project was to provide legal and financial advisory services to the Egyptian
Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) in the competitive bidding program for the first 250MW wind power
project through to financial close, support the system operator to integrate wind power to the system, and
conduct environmental and social assessment of the proposed site for the BOO wind farm. The mitigation of
the off-taker risk associated with power evacuation and technical support were to facilitate the implementation
of the first private wind farm investment and lead to similar wind farm investments up to 2,500MW by
demonstrating the feasibility of this model. The causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and
direct, but the outcomes achieved could not be fully attributed to the project’s interventions; the project did not
include measures to improve the private investors’ overall risk perception, such as the Bank’s credit
enhancement instruments. This was discussed during the first restructuring in July 2014 because of the delay
in the tendering process caused by the political events between 2011 and 2014. (Restructuring Paper, Report
No: RES13247 p.iv). Therefore, the construction of a full transmission system and technical support in the
competitive bidding process for the first private wind power project were necessary for the achievement of the
project objective, but they were not sufficient per se.

Outputs

As a result of the project activities, following outputs were achieved:

      A 500kV double circuit transmission line connecting Ras Gharib to Samallout was constructed.
      A 500kV/220kV substation was constructed and a transformer was installed at Ras Gharib.
      The 500kV/220kV substation was expanded, and a new transformer was installed.
      A 220kV transmission line between Ras Gharib and Gabel El-Zait was 90 percent constructed at
       project closing. The line was commissioned in November 2019.
      The project agreements for the first 250MW private wind farm to be developed on a BOO model were
       signed on October 31,2017, about four years later than originally planned.
      Procedures were developed for wind power integration by the system operator.

Outcomes

The project activities resulted in the following outcomes:

      The transmission system connecting the wind farm sites at the Gulf of Suez to the national grid has a
       capacity, as planned, to evacuate power from up to 3,000MW installed wind power generation
       capacity.
      The project team confirmed that the system operator has now the capacity to integrate the intermittent
       electricity generated by the wind farms at the Gulf of Suez to the national grid without disruption.
      The first private wind farm investment with an estimated installed capacity of 262.5MW, against the
       target of 250MW, became fully operational in November 2019, five months after the extended project
       closing date. The target date for operation was December 2016 (Restructuring Paper, Report
       No:RES13247, p.16).
      A 250MW wind power plant project achieved financial close in August 2019. The wind farm is currently
       under construction and is expected to be operational in 2021. Additionally, a 500MW wind power plant

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



       project being developed by the same consortium of companies that operate the first wind power plant
       is nearing financial close. The construction is expected to start in 2021. The revised target for
       “implementing remaining wind competitive bidding program” was 750MW. The project team
       commented that there is an additional 2,000MW of wind power project in the pipeline, but the current
       status of these projects is unknown.

The project successfully completed the main transmission system, which could evacuate electricity generated
by up to 3,000MW installed capacity, as originally planned at appraisal. But completing the tender process of
a total of 2,250MW wind power capacity, in addition to the commissioning of the first 250MW capacity, during
project implementation was an ambitious target. Following the political unrest between 2011 and 2014, this
target was revised to 750MW at the first restructuring. This created a mismatch between the installed
transmission capacity for 3,000MW and the targeted wind power generation capacity of 1,000MW—250MW
as the first capacity and 750MW as the remaining capacity. Currently, the transmission line is evacuating
electricity generated by the 262.5MW wind power plant developed under the project. The second wind power
plant with an installed capacity of 250MW is expected to start commercial operation in 2021. The third power
plant with a 500MW installed capacity is expected to be operational within less than three years once it
achieves financial close and construction starts. According to the ICR (p.13), the transmission line also
evacuates power generated by the state-owned wind power plants in the region.

Overall, the project was successful in achieving the project outputs by increasing the transmission capacity
and developing the first private wind power investment. But, despite the low target set at the first restructuring
and the technical assistance given to the EETC to develop the BOO model, the project was, by project
closure, partially successful in scaling up wind power by only addressing the electricity evacuation barrier.
Due to the high-risk perception, the investors require that the EETC’s power purchase commitment should be
backed by a government guarantee, i.e., off-take guarantee, which the Government of Egypt considers as a
“quasi-sovereign debt” burden on government finances (ICR, p.42). The government’s concerns about issuing
sovereign guarantee to back power purchase agreements create uncertainty about the medium- and long-
term sustainability of the BOO model developed under the project. Additionally, there is reasonable possibility
that the government would prefer electricity generated by combined-cycle-gas-turbine (CCGT) power plants
that have been recently built to utilize the large gas reserves discovered in the Mediterranean. Currently,
Egypt has around 20GW installed generation capacity surplus over peak demand of 30GW mostly because of
the rapid increase in the CCGT capacity in recent years. However, the slow, but steady, development of wind
power projects potentially reaching a total installed capacity of 1,012.5MW in the Gulf of Suez region confirms
that the construction of the transmission line and the development of the BOO model will mostly likely play an
important role in further scaling up wind power capacity in the country. Therefore, notwithstanding the risks
related to government guarantees and the rapid increase of CCGT power plants, the efficacy of the
achievement of the first objective to scale up wind power generation capacity in the region utilizing the BOO
model is assessed substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase transmission capacity in targeted areas.

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)




Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

This objective was closer to the output level rather than outcome level. It was added as a second objective at
the first restructuring to utilize the loan savings from the lower than estimated construction cost of the main
transmission line. Two new sub-components were added under the first component: (i) The expected outputs
under the first new sub-component were the construction of a substation in North Hurghada and another one
in the isolated system of El Qusair, and the connection of these substations to the national grid by a total of
92 km 220kV transmission line; and (ii) under the second sub-component, the conductors of 232 km of five
existing transmission lines in the Nile Delta Governorates were to be upgraded to high temperature thermal
conductors to double their peak capacity. The expected outcomes were improvement in the reliability of
power supply and the displacement of the expensive diesel generators in the El Qusair load center, and
reduction of bottlenecks and improvement of electricity supply reliability in the regions of Alexandria, Delta,
West Delta, and Canal—the Nile Delta Governorates. The causal links between project outputs and
outcomes were clear, but there was no indicator defined to capture the improvement in the reliability of
electricity supply in the Hurghada-El Qusair system or in the Alexandria-Canal system.

Outputs

      The transmission line from North Hurghada to El Qusair was 90 percent completed at project closing,
       and it was commissioned in November 2019.
      The EETC financed the purchase and installation of the conductors for four of the five transmission
       lines in the Nile directorates soon after the addition of these activities to the project scope at the first
       restructuring (Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) 12, p.4). The ICR (p.28) reports that
       materials for the reinforcement of about 330km of existing 220kV lines were supplied to EETC for the
       transmission lines of Aswan Connection/Salwan, Selwa/El Naqra, El Nawra/Aswan and Suez
       2/Badr—the last one was the fifth transmission line added to the project scope at the first
       restructuring. The work was to be completed by the EETC after project closing.

Outcomes

The indicator added to results framework at the first restructuring, i.e., “transmission capacity for rehabilitated
transmission lines doubled”, was deleted at the second restructuring. Neither the restructuring paper nor the
ICR explained why this indicator was deleted. As mentioned in the previous paragraph, four of the five
transmission investments added to the project at the first restructuring were financed by the EETC using their
own funds. Other existing transmission lines were identified for the installation of high thermal conductors.
These conductors were delivered before project closing, but they could not be installed. The project team
stated in their email dated February 1, 2021 that these conductors were installed after project closing, but
there is no data to show the impact of these conductors on increasing the transmission capacity in the
targeted area.

On the other hand, the commissioning of the transmission line between North Hurghada and El Qusair must
have resulted in an increase in the transmission capacity since these two locations were not connected to the
national grid before the project. Yet, the evidence is insufficient to conclude the achievement of this outcome.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



                            Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the objective to increase transmission capacity in targeted areas is
                            rated Modest because of the incomplete project outputs at project closing and insufficient evidence for the
                            achievement of the outcomes.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project facilitated the financial close of the first privately owned 262.5MW wind power plant, which
                            became commercially operational after project closure. A second wind farm with a 250MW installed capacity
                            is currently under-construction, and a third one with a 500MW installed capacity is expected to achieve
                            financial close in 2021. Despite the risks related to government guarantees and the rapid increase of
                            combined-cycle gas turbine power plants in the country that could potentially slow down the development of
                            wind power projects, the efficacy of the achievement of the first objective to scale up wind power projects is
                            rated Substantial, because of the impact of the project in facilitating the development of a total of 1,102.5MW
                            wind capacity in the Gulf of Suez region. On the other hand, the efficacy of the achievement of the second
                            objective is rated Modest. The project was successful in connecting two locations on the Gulf of Suez region
                            to the national grid, but there was no indicator in the results framework to measure the outcome related to the
                            project activities added at the first restructuring and to capture the achievement of the second objective.

                            Given the preponderance of activities that were implemented to achieve Objective 1, hence its larger number
                            of measurable outputs and outcomes, the overall Efficacy rating is Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, the economic benefits of the project were assumed to be the additional energy provided to
   consumers that was valued at the consumers’ willingness to pay and the value of avoided greenhouse gas
   emissions, which was taken as a range of values because of the difficulty in forecasting a single value (PAD,
   p.75). The capital cost of the project included the costs of the transmission investment and the technical
   assistance activities, excluding the cost of the 250MW wind farm to be built on a BOO model. Additionally, the
   operation and maintenance costs were included in the analysis. The cost of the electricity EETC was to
   purchase from the wind power plants—gradually increasing to a total installed generation capacity of
   3,070MW—was assumed to be US$0.08 per kWh for the first 20 years of the analysis, and US$0.05 per kWh

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



thereafter; it was assumed that the construction of more efficient wind farms at the end of the 20-year operating
lifetime of the original power plants would result in a decrease in the cost of electricity. The average system cost
of transmission and distribution to consumers was estimated to be US$0.015 per kWh based on the national
averages (PAD, p.74). The calculations resulted in a range of economic internal rates of return (EIRR) from 2.6
percent to 21.1 percent depending on the assumptions on the elasticities of willingness to pay for electricity and
the value of carbon benefits. With a carbon price at US$13 per metric ton and an elasticity of -0.30, the project
was barely viable with an EIRR of 11.2 percent. Without carbon benefits, the EIRR was calculated at 9.2 percent
with -0.30 elasticity.

At the first restructuring, a new economic analysis was conducted because of the addition of new transmission
investment activities to the project scope to utilize the savings from lower investment cost of the transmission
system than estimated at appraisal. But the benefits from these activities, although identified, could not be
quantified; hence, they were not included in the analysis. On the other hand, when the energy benefits—
excluding benefits from avoided greenhouse gases—were compared to the incremental capital and operating
costs, the EIRR was calculated at 10.5 percent with -0.30 elasticity, which was above the 10 percent opportunity
cost of capital generally applied to government investments in Egypt (Restructuring Paper, Report No: 13247,
p.x)

At project completion, the same methodology was used to conduct an economic analysis. The EIRR was
estimated at 35 percent, excluding the benefits from avoided greenhouse gases. The decrease in the cost of
electricity purchased—US$0.038 per kWh for the first 262.5MW wind power plant and US$0.031 per kWh for the
second 250MW wind powerplant under construction—was the main reason for this very high EIRR. Additionally,
the total project cost was lower than the estimated cost at appraisal—US$332.46 million at appraisal against
US$279.6 million at project closing—but this was because of the cancellation of about US$37.9 million of loans
as a result of the delays in the implementation of the additional transmission investments. The economic
analysis did not include the unquantifiable benefits from the additional transmission investments; hence, it was
conservative, but the assumption that the wind park will achieve a total installed capacity of 3,070MW in the
early years of the economic analysis—despite only targeting 2,500MW (250MW+2,250MW) originally that was
later revised to 1,000MW (250MW+750MW)—was overly optimistic. Currently there is only one 262.5MW
capacity wind farm in operation and another 250MW capacity wind farm under construction. A third wind project
with a 500MW installed capacity is expected to achieve financial close in early 2021 and be constructed in 29
months.

Therefore, it could be expected that the total installed wind capacity would reach at 1,012.5MW within three
years. Assuming that there would be no further increase in the installed wind capacity, the additional economic
analysis conducted by the project team resulted in an EIRR of 27 percent excluding benefits from CO2 emission
reductions and 33 percent including the CO2 emission reduction benefits. Despite the mismatch between the
lowered ambition of installed capacity and the transmission line, the EIRRs show that the project was
economically viable mostly because of the significantly lower tariff rates at project closure than those estimated
at appraisal.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, a financial analysis was conducted based on the assumptions of the economic analysis with
respect to the capital of the transmission line, the O&M cost, the purchase price of incremental power, and the
system average costs of transmission and distribution. Instead of the consumers’ willingness to pay for electricity
that was used in economic analysis, the financial analysis used the incremental revenue from retail sales of
power. Without the CTF financing, the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was calculated at 8 percent,


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



higher than 6.95 percent financial cost of the Government of Egypt financing, if the carbon price was assumed to
be US$50 per metric ton. With the CTF financing, the project would be financially viable with a carbon price
above US$13 per metric ton; the NPV would be US$169,000 with CTF-blended financing, whereas the NPV
would drop to negative US$1.8 million without CTF financing.

At the first restructuring, a new financial analysis was conducted with the same assumptions used at appraisal.
Additional financial benefits were expected from reduced operation and maintenance of costs of the diesel units
that were to be displaced after the connection of the isolated system of EL Qusair to the national grid. The
calculations resulted in an FIRR of 6.7 percent with a carbon price of US$30 per metric ton, and a positive NPV
of US$248,000 with a carbon price of US$5 per metric ton under CTF-blended financing. The proposed
restructuring had improved the financial viability of the project (Restructuring Paper, Report No:13247, p.xi)

At project closing, a financial analysis was not conducted. The project team commented that “financial viability
was not a criterion in the original project so was not used in the ICR” because the financial analysis at appraisal
showed that “it was unattractive without concessional financing and carbon credits, and even marginal with
them” (Project team’s email dated February 1, 2021). Project team also reported that assuming an installed
capacity at 1,000MW and an average tariff rising to US$0.11 per kWh over seven years, the FIRR was
calculated at 22 percent excluding any financial benefits from CO2 emissions reductions. Due to the low-cost of
power, the project has a high financial viability.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The overestimation of the project cost at appraisal resulted in a large sum of savings during project
implementation, which could not be utilized efficiently. The unused loans were allocated to new transmission
investments in targeted areas, but some of these activities were financed by the EETC using their own funds
soon after their addition to the project scope. The EETC could not identify new activities to utilize the unallocated
project funds. At one point, there were talks to allocate these funds as seed capital to establish the proposed
Egypt Clean Energy Fund, but this did not happen. Other transmission activities faced serious project
implementation issues because of the weak procurement and contract management capacity of the project
implementation unit, EETC. The contracts could only be awarded in 2018, four years after the addition of these
activities to project scope. Although the project closing date was extended by 18 months to allow time for the
completion of these activities, about US$37.9 million of loans (IBRD, US$12.2 million; CTF, 25.7million) had to
be cancelled without fully achieving the expected outputs from the additional transmission investment activities.
The cancelled loan amount was about 36.5 percent of the US$103.8 million estimated cost of these activities.
Lastly, the financial close and the commissioning of the private wind power investment was delayed by about
five years, because of the time needed for due diligence including yearly wind assessments. The assumption at
project appraisal that the wind power plant would be commissioned within three years after effectiveness was
very optimistic. The plant could not achieve financial close until October 2017 and was operational in November
2019, after project closing. The political instability in Egypt between 2011 and 2014 was another reason for the
delay in the financial close of the first wind power plant.



Overall, the efficiency of the project in utilizing the project’s resources and inputs to achieve results is rated
Modest. Despite a mismatch between the lowered ambition of wind power supplies and the transmission line,
the economic analysis for 1,000MW installed capacity resulted in high economic rates of return, i.e., 27 percent,
mostly because of much lower cost of power at project closing than the power cost estimated at appraisal. The
financial analysis provided by the project team also showed that the project is financially viable at a financial


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



internal rate of return of 22 percent because of the same reason. However, there were significant shortcomings
in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project, mostly related to the implementation of
transmission activities added to the project scope at the first restructuring.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 9.20
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              27.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objective is substantially relevant, when the project design's inadequate assessment of weak
institutional and implementing capacity is taken into account. The project’s success was substantial in achieving
the first objective to scale up wind power in the country against the revised lower target for installed generation
capacity. The achievement of the second objective to increase transmission capacity in targeted areas was
modest because of the incompletion of project activities at project closing and insufficient evidence for the
achievement of the outcomes. Overall, the efficacy of the achievement of the project objectives is rated
Substantial. The efficiency is rated Modest, because of significant shortcomings in the operational and
administrative efficiency of the project, mostly related to the transmission investments added to the project
scope at the first restructuring. Overall, the Outcome of the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Insufficient development of the wind power plants in the Gulf of Suez area may result in the
underutilization of the transmission line built under the project. At appraisal, there was sufficient
demand from private investors to develop wind power plants in the region, which necessitated the
construction of a transmission line with a capacity to evacuate power from 3,000MW installed capacity.
Following the political events of 2011 and 2014, there was a sharp decline in the interest of private investors
to develop wind power projects. In addition to the 262.5MW wind power plant developed under the project,

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



another 250MW private wind farm investment achieved financial close in August 2019 and it is expected to
begin commercial operation in 2021. Some other investors have been in talks with the Egyptian authorities,
but the current status of these talks is unknown. On the other, the transmission line should act as a
backbone of the national grid system in the West-East direction and it should be expected to contribute to the
stability of the system by allowing the evacuation of power from other existing government owned wind
power plants.

Insufficient maintenance of the transmission line in the long run may result in the deterioration of the
transmission service. The transmission line follows the El Sheikh Fadl-Ras Gharib Road but passes mostly
through the desert. The line is expected to have a lifetime of 40 years, but harsh desert conditions, such as
sandstorms, can adversely affect the transmission line. The EETC has been expanding the transmission
network in the country in parallel to the increase in the installed generation capacity thanks mostly to the
development of combined-cycle gas turbine power plants. A worsening in the financial viability of the EETC
may result in insufficient maintenance of the transmission network, including the one built under this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance of the project was high. By constructing a transmission line, the project was to
  address one of the critical barriers to the development of wind power plants, and by technical assistance;
  it was to facilitate the financial close of the first private wind power plant investment in the country. As
  presented in the ICR, the theory of change was well articulated but had the significant shortcoming that it
  did not address the off-take guarantee, which delayed the financial close of the first privately owned wind
  power plant project for five years in the wake of the political events between 2011 and 2014. The results
  framework did not fully capture the theory of change and the monitoring and evaluation arrangements
  included redundant indicators (See section 9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization below). The
  technical aspects of the project were adequate, but potential risks, such as delays in the processing of
  necessary approvals for the Nile crossing, were not identified at appraisal. Despite the experience gained
  in other energy projects in Egypt, the original cost of the transmission component was overestimated in
  this project, too. This resulted in a large amount of savings, which could not be efficiently utilized. Major
  risks were adequately identified, including the underutilization of the transmission line because of the
  slow development of the wind projects. This risk materialized, because it was overly optimistic to expect
  the achievement of the financial close of the first private wind power project in three years and the
  development of 2,250MW additional capacity in five years, regardless of the political events that took
  place between 2011 and 2014. The EETC’s limited experience with the Bank’s procurement methods
  was rated as a moderate risk for project implementation, but EETC’s weak project management capacity
  resulted in project implementation delays and insufficient monitoring of the environmental and social
  safeguards. Absence of a dedicated project team under the project implementation unit was a significant
  shortcoming, which resulted in delays in the procurement and monitoring of contracts of the transmission
  investments added to the project scope at the first restructuring.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions, which were held approximately every six months, produced 19 Implementation
 Status and Results Reports (ISRs). The ISRs were detailed and candid in reporting the issues related to
 project implementation and the achievement of the project objective (ISR 11, p.6 and ISR 13, p.6). The
 project team closely supervised project implementation and offered solutions to improve the performance
 of the project. For example, the project team initiated talks with the authorities for the use of the Bank’s
 credit enhancement instruments to improve the overall risk profile of the first private wind power
 investment, but the Government of Egypt decided to use its sovereign guarantee rather than the Bank’s
 credit enhancement instruments. There were shortcomings in the project’s team focus on the sustainability
 of the business model to scale up wind power in the country; the off-take guarantee has remained as a
 barrier to the development of additional wind power plants in the region. Following the Mid-Term Review in
 March 2016, the project performance improved because of the project team’s closer supervision and the
 firm stance against the extension of the project closing date unless there was tangible progress in project
 implementation (ISR 14, p.14). Milestones were agreed to ensure that all contracts were awarded before
 certain dates, and monthly meetings were introduced with the EETC management to review progress with
 regard to the agreed milestones. The project team closely monitored the safeguard aspects of the project,
 too. The shortcomings in the implementation of safeguards, such as insufficient monitoring of the
 implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan and the Environmental and Social Management Plan, were
 flagged to the EETC during missions (ISR 12, p.7). Starting from October 2015, the project implementation
 unit was required to submit monthly safeguards implementation reports. The project team’s supervision of
 the project activities to be financed with the loan savings was adequate; despite the project team’s efforts
 to improve the implementation of these activities, some transmission investments could not be completed
 by project closure and about US$38.0 million of project savings had to be cancelled because of the loan
 withdrawal validity expiration. The weak project implementation capacity of the EETC was the main reason
 for poor project implementation, but there is insufficient evidence to validate the project team’s enabling
 role in improving the EETC’s project implementation capacity.

 The Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of insufficient focus on the
 sustainability of the business model, shortcomings in the supervision of the project activities added to the
 project scope to utilize the loan savings, and insufficient evidence to validate the project team’s enabling
 role in improving the EETC’s capacity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



a. M&E Design
 The project objective was not clearly defined. The development of business models and required
 transmission facilities were a means to achieve the project objective to scale up wind power in Egypt. But
 because of the way the project development objective was formulated, they could be easily mistaken as the
 objectives of the project. Although the project had a simple design consisting of the construction of a full
 transmission system to evacuate wind power from the Gulf of Suez and technical assistance to support the
 first private investment in wind power on the BOO model, the results framework did not fully capture the
 theory of change; it was deficient in terms of not having addressed important issues related to the off-take
 guarantee that had direct implications for risk perception by private investors.. The achievement of some
 expected outcomes, such as total job creation in the wind industry, wind power supply chain development,
 and public and private investments leverages for transmission, were not supported by the project activities
 and not measurable. The two indicators, i.e., “transmission infrastructure to evacuate 3,000MW of wind
 power “and “financial close of first private sector investment in wind power,” were adequate to capture the
 contribution of the project’s activities and outputs toward achieving the expected outcomes of availability of
 transmission capacity and the implementation of the BOO model; the indicator of “percentage progress in
 implementing remaining wind competitive program” encompassed the achievement of the project objective
 to scale up wind power. These indicators were relevant and measurable. But the expectation that the
 competitive tendering of an additional 1,250MW wind power capacity would be completed within four years
 of project implementation was overly optimistic. The intermediate outcome indicators were adequate to
 monitor the progress in project implementation, but they were not included in the “Arrangements for results
 monitoring” table on page 40 of the PAD.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E design was simplified at the first restructuring; the original indicators to measure the outcomes
  that were not supported by the project activities were deleted. The target value of the indicator measuring
  progress in implementing remaining wind competitive bidding program was revised from 2,250MW to
  750MW considering the political situation in the country following the events between 2011 and 2014.
  New intermediate outcome indicators were introduced to capture the implementation progress of the
  transmission line investments that were added to the project scope at the same restructuring. Since the
  EETC financed some of these activities from its funds, the outcome level indicator of “transmission
  capacity for rehabilitated transmission lines doubled” was deleted at the second restructuring. As the
  project team stated the EETC’s decision on which new investment activities would be financed by the
  project was delayed because of poor project management; therefore, no new intermediate outcome
  indicator could be introduced to the results framework during project implementation to monitor those
  activities, the completion of which was delayed beyond project closure. The indicators related to the
  implementation progress of the main transmission line connecting the Gharib Suez wind park area to the
  national grid and the transmission lines along the Suez Canal were adequately measured, but there were
  delays in the submission of quarterly project progress reports (ISR 10, p.7).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to the authorities and the Bank’s project team, but sometimes with
  delay. Based on these findings, the project team proactively intervened to overcome the barriers to
  achieve the project objective; in the wake of the political unrest between 2011 and 2014, the project
  team offered World Bank guarantees to improve the overall risk profile of the first 250MW wind project.

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



  The project team also closely monitored the implementation of the additional transmission investments
  in the west of the country utilizing the M&E system. Nevertheless, these activities could not be
  completed before project closure because of the EETC’s poor project management. The M&E data were
  used to provide evidence for the achievement of the first project objective, but the data were insufficient
  to provide evidence for the achievement of the second objective.



  Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest. The original target for installed generation capacity was
  ambitious and the M&E system had significant shortcomings in assessing the achievement of the
  second objective.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was
   undertaken at appraisal. The project was expected to have construction related minimal environmental and
   health and safety impacts. The mitigation measures were adequately defined (PAD, pp.29-30). Additionally,
   the ESIA indicated that the transmission line could have an adverse impact on the migration routes of
   migratory birds if the project resulted in the destruction of vegetation near tower footings or substations. A
   potential collision of birds with the transmission line was not expected, but diverters/flappers were to be
   installed on the transmission line. The ESIA was disclosed on March 28, 2010 in country and April 23, 2010
   on the Bank’s InfoShop. After the addition of two new sub-components at the first restructuring, the ESIA
   was updated and disclosed in country and on InfoShop on June 11,2014.

   During project implementation, there were instances of non-compliance with occupational health and safety
   requirements of the environmental safeguard policy. The project implementation entity, the Egyptian
   Electricity Transmission Company (EETC), lacking sufficient capacity to monitor the construction sites, hired
   an independent environmental consultancy firm, but with delay, to monitor the contractors’ compliance with
   the safeguard policy (ICR, p.19). The Bank’s safeguards team supported EETC, too. These efforts resulted
   in gradual improvements at project sites in complying with the environmental safeguard policy, such as
   adequate and acceptable environmental, health and safety measures, insurance coverage for all workers,
   and workers’ code of conduct to minimize potential misconducts that could adversely impact the health and
   safety of the communities.

   The project did not comply with the requirement of installing bird diverters/flappers. At project closing, this
   equipment was at the procurement stage. The bird migration surveys, which had to be conducted at certain
   time of the year, was the main reason for delay in the procurement of the bird diverters/flappers (ICR, p.40).



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



  The environmental consultancy firm hired by the EETC will carry out post-construction monitoring for the
  following two migration seasons to confirm compliance with this safeguard policy.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Because of the installation of transmission towers, the project
  was expected to acquire land in the form of 20 x 20 m areas for 11 percent of the transmission route that
  passed through cultivated land; hence, the project triggered this safeguard (PAD, pp.108-109). A
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed on March 28, 2010 in country and April
  23, 2010 on the Bank’s InfoShop. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was to be prepared during project
  implementation when the exact extent of land acquisition would be known. After the addition of two new
  sub-components at the first restructuring, the RPF was updated and disclosed in country and on InfoShop
  on June 11,2014. A grievance mechanism was disclosed at appraisal, but the grievance committee was
  formed only in February 2015, i.e., near the time of the original project closing date of December 2015.

  At project closing, the project was in compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy. The
  payments for land acquisition and compensation for damaged crops were adequately processed. The
  Grievance Committee received 126 complaints, mostly in the form of inquiry about the payment amounts
  and how rates were determined (ISR 19, p.2). On the other hand, the absence of the implementation
  reports of the Resettlement Action Plan and the Environmental and Social Management Plan remained as a
  key challenge. The Bank’s project team flagged this shortcoming to the EETC during missions (ISR 12, p.7).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project implementation entity, the EETC, had no previous experience in implementing Bank-financed
  projects. Therefore, it was agreed to establish a financial management unit within the project
  implementation unit (PAD, p.28). The unit was to have the overall responsibility for recording, budgeting,
  bank reporting requirements, and handling the loan disbursement arrangements. Interim financial
  statements and annual project audits were submitted on time (ICR, p.21). The ICR did not report whether
  the project audits were qualified or not. There were no issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated
  with the project. At project closing, all project funds were accounted for.

  Procurement

  The project followed the Bank guidelines in procurement; the implementation of international competitive
  bidding contributed to a lower than estimated construction cost for the main transmission line. On the other
  hand, the low project management capacity of the EETC resulted in significant procurement delays. As a
  result, the transmission activities added to the project scope at the first restructuring could not be fully
  completed by project closing. Procurement activities could only be concluded on April 26, 2019, two
  months before the project closing date (ISR, No:19, p.2). The departments that were responsible for
  design, planning and supervision activities did not directly report to the PIU; this resulted in delays in the
  scope, identification, and preparation of the bidding documents, in addition to ineffective contract
  supervision (ICR, p.23).




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                         Reason for
Ratings                      ICR               IEG
                                                                         Disagreements/Comment
                                                                         The relevance of objectives is
                                                                         rated Substantial. The project’s
                                                                         success was rated Substantial in
                                                                         scaling up wind power
                                                                         generation capacity against the
                                                                         revised low target. The
                                                                         achievement of the second
                                                                         objective to increase the
                                                                         transmission capacity in targeted
                                                                         areas is rated Modest due to
                                                                         insufficient evidence. Overall
                                                                         efficacy of the project is rated
Outcome                      Satisfactory      Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                         Substantial. Efficiency is rated
                                                                         Modest because of significant
                                                                         shortcomings in the operational
                                                                         and administrative efficiency of
                                                                         the project, mostly related to the
                                                                         implementation of the
                                                                         transmission activities added to
                                                                         the project scope at the first
                                                                         restructuring. According to the
                                                                         Bank guidance (p.38), the
                                                                         Outcome is rated Moderately
                                                                         Satisfactory.
                                                                         The quality at entry is rated
                                                                         Moderately Satisfactory because
                                                                         there were moderate
                                                                         shortcomings, such as
Bank Performance             Satisfactory      Moderately Satisfactory   overestimation of the cost of the
                                                                         transmission line, overly
                                                                         optimistic development schedule
                                                                         of the wind power plants,
                                                                         absence of a dedicated project

                                                                                           Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



                                                                                 management unit, and
                                                                                 inadequate identification of risks.
                                                                                 The Quality of Supervision is
                                                                                 rated Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 because of insufficient focus on
                                                                                 the sustainability of the business
                                                                                 model, shortcomings in the
                                                                                 supervision of the project
                                                                                 activities added to the project
                                                                                 scope to utilize the loan savings,
                                                                                 and insufficient evidence to
                                                                                 validate the project team’s
                                                                                 enabling role in improving the
                                                                                 EETC’s capacity.
                                                                                 The original target for installed
                                                                                 generation capacity was
                                                                                 ambitious and the M&E system
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest
                                                                                 had significant shortcomings in
                                                                                 assessing the achievement of
                                                                                 the second objective.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons incorporating material from the lessons listed on page 21 of the
ICR.

Overestimated project costs can lead to large amount of savings that can adversely affect the
overall project implementation and project efficiency. Because of the lower actual cost of the
280 km double circuit transmission line than the cost estimated at appraisal, US$106 million was
saved. To utilize these savings, additional transmission activities were added to the project, but the
project implementation agency, i.e., EETC, financed parts of these additional activities through its
own funds. Later, the EETC could not identify new activities to be funded by these savings. The
project team suggested direct contracting method to utilize the funds before project closing and also
informed the EETC that early cancellation of funds would have been considered (ISR 17, p.4). At
project closure, US$37.9 million of the loans (IBRD, US$12.2 million; CTF, 25.7million) had to be
cancelled without fully achieving the expected outputs from the additional transmission investment
activities. The overestimation of project costs has been a recurring issue in similar energy projects in
Egypt.

Ambitious project development schedules that seek to involve the private sector on a new
model, such as build-operate-and-own (BOO), can put the achievement of the project
objective at risk. The project had a very ambitious schedule for the development of the first 250MW
wind power plant project by a private investor on the BOO model; it was expected that the first
power plant would start commercial operation within three years. The financial close of the
remaining 2,250MW capacity was expected within five years of project implementation. Such
investments require longer time for detailed technical, contractual and commercial assessments to

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



achieve bankability for project financing. The political events between 2011 and 2014 had an
adverse impact on the development of these wind power projects, but even without this force
majeure, the project schedule was very ambitious. The financial close of the first wind power
investment was achieved during project implementation, but the start of the commercial operation of
the power plant was delayed beyond project closing.

Absence of a dedicated project team can result in poor project management if the project
implementation entity does not have sufficient project implementation capacity. The project
implementation unit (PIU) within the EETC did not have adequate and experienced staff. The
turnover of the heads of the PIU was frequent. Some project activities were undertaken by
departments not reporting to the PIU. These led to poor project management that manifested itself in
delays in the preparation of bidding documents and ineffective contract supervision. The Bank’s
project team’s efforts to remedy the situation was partially successful. As a result, some project
activities to be financed by the savings could not be completed before project closing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  An assessment is recommended because of the following reasons: (i) Excessive cost-overestimation in recent
  energy projects in Egypt and large amount of savings on the grounds of using international competitive
  bidding; (ii) the additionality of the Bank in promoting build-operate-own model to scale up renewable energy
  and the sustainability of this business model; and (iii) overall development impact of recently Bank-financed
  energy projects in Egypt.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive overview of the project. The narrative was candid and internally consistent.
Economic analysis was comparable to the analysis conducted at appraisal, but a financial analysis was not
conducted at project closing. The evidence was mostly at the output level and it was insufficient to support the
reported achievement of the second objective. The analysis of the outcomes of the additional activities financed
by loan savings was inadequate. The ISRs and Aide Memoires included detailed information about these
activities, but these were not reported in the ICR. The discussion of Bank Performance did not follow the Bank
guidance; it was descriptive rather than evaluative. The discussion of safeguards was insufficient, too; the ISRs
included more information about the issues related to the implementation of safeguard policies. The information
about the financial management of the project was not adequate. The discussion in the Lessons and
Recommendations section was useful and based on the experience gained during project implementation, but it
was more in the form of findings, rather than lessons.




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EG-Wind Power Development (P113416)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Modest




                                                                     Page 22 of 22
