     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022274

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P107648                                        National Dairy Support Project

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                          Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50740                                      31-Dec-2017                                        218,542,088.07

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2012                                    29-Nov-2019

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              352,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               254,785,793.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           218,542,088.07                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                      ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                J. W. van Holst                  Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the National Dairy Support Project (NDSP) as articulated in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 17) was identical to the PDO as stated in the Financing
   Agreement (page 4) and aimed to:

   "increase the productivity of milch animals and improve market access of milk producers in project
   areas."


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



   The project aimed to cover about 40,000 villages across 14 major dairying states (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
   Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
   Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal). In 2014, four additional states were added to the NDSP: Uttarakhand,
   Telangana, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh, bringing the total states participating in the project to 18.

   As stated the PDO includes two elements that will be assessed independently:

   1. To increase the productivity of milch animals in project areas, and

   2. To improve market access of milk producers in project areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Productivity Enhancement (appraisal cost: US$258.3 million, actual cost: US$132.30 million). This
   component aimed to increase bovine productivity through improved animal breeding and nutrition services.
   It included the following sub-components:

   1.1. Animal Breed Improvement (appraisal cost: US$164.30 million, actual cost: US$89.37 million).:
   This sub-component would support: a) Production of high genetic merit bulls (HGM) through: (i) Progeny
   Testing (PT) program in selected breeds; (ii) Pedigree Selection (PS) program in selected indigenous
   breeds; and (iii) Import of exotic bulls/embryos/frozen semen. b) Semen Production: Strengthening of
   existing semen production stations and establishment of new semen stations. c) Delivery of Artificial
   Insemination (AI) Services through trained mobile AI technicians (MAIT) at farmers‟ doorstep.

   1.2. Animal Nutrition (appraisal cost: US$94.00 million, actual cost: US$42.93 million).. This sub-
   component would support: a) Ration Balancing Program (RBP): A comprehensive RBP whereby extension
   advice would be provided to dairy farmers through trained local resource persons (LRP) for advising on
   animal feed and nutrition. Research shows that feeding balanced rations has the potential to increase milk
   yield, reduce production costs, and contribute to reduced methane emissions. b) Fodder Development:
   Extension initiatives/interventions for fodder development, including support for improved fodder seed
   production, fodder contracting, demonstrations for silage making, and reducing wastage of dry fodder
   through processing and enrichment.

   2. Milk Collection and Bulking (appraisal cost: US$166.30 million, actual cost:
   US$151.33 million). This component would improve access to markets by developing village level milk
   collection and bulking facilities. This would include: a) community mobilization and institution building
   through: (i) expansion of selected existing dairy cooperative societies (DCS) registered under the
   Cooperative Societies Act, and (ii) promotion of new milk producer institutions which would be organized
   and registered as producer companies under the Companies Act; b) training and capacity building of milk

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



  producers and functionaries; and c) village level infrastructure for milk collection and bulking such as milk
  cans, bulk milk coolers for a cluster of villages, associated weighing and testing equipment, and related IT
  equipment.

  3. Project Management and Learning (appraisal cost: US$29.30 million, actual cost: US$10.95
  million). This component would ensure smooth implementation and coordination of project activities,
  regular and timely monitoring of implementation progress and outputs/outcomes
  achieved, and learning through feedback to management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The estimated total project cost was US$453.9 million. In 2014, this amount was revised
  down to US$328.56 million. The actual total cost of the project was US$298.54 million (ICR Data sheet,
  page ii). The difference was due to lower disbursed IDA amount and lower counterpart financing (see below
  for more details).

  Financing. The project was to be financed through an IDA Credit worth US$352 million to the Government
  of India (GoI). The IDA credit would flow as a grant from the GoI, through a line item in the Department of
  Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DADF) budget, to the National Dairy Development Board
  (NDDB). In 2014, this amount was revised downwards to US$254.79. According to the ICR (Data Sheet,
  page ii) the actual amount disbursed was US$218.54 million or 62% of the appraisal amount and 85.7% of
  the revised amount. These differences stemmed from the cancellation of US$97.00 million equivalent of the
  IDA Credit in 2014; lower than expected expenditures stemming from procurement-related cost savings;
  exchange rate effects over time (at approval, the exchange rate was INR 45/USD 1 and by 2014, INR
  60/USD 1, a depreciation of 33%); and, under-delivery of pilot artificial insemination (AI) services (ICR,
  paragraph 15).

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to contribute US$39.10 million of counterpart funds,
  also the project beneficiaries were expected to contribute US$62.80 million, which totaled US$101.90
  million. At restructuring, these amounts were revised down to US$28.31 million for the borrower and
  US$45.47 million for the beneficiaries, totaling US$73.78 million. The actual amounts were US$24.28
  million (62% of the appraisal amount and 86% of the revised amount) and US$51.76 million (82% of the
  appraisal amount and 114% of the revised amount) for the borrower and the beneficiaries, respectively (ICR
  Data Sheet, page ii). The total actual amount was US$76.04 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 15, 2012 and became effective three months later on June 22,
  2012. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 15, 2015, which was in-line with the expected
  date in the PAD (three years after effectiveness). The original closing date was on December 31, 2017. The
  project closed 23 months later on November 29, 2019. According to the ICR (paragraph 20) "a 23-month
  extension enabled completion/fulfillment of the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), achievement of the PDO,
  and planning for post-project consolidation."

  The project was restructured twice, both level 2 restructuring as follows:

  1. On April 7, 2014, when the amount disbursed was US$5.03 million, in order to authorize the cancellation
  of US$97.00 million equivalent of the IDA Credit. This cancellation reflected cost savings from exchange



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



   rate fluctuations. At approval, the exchange rate was INR 45/USD 1 and by 2014, INR 60/USD 1, a
   depreciation of 33% (ICR, paragraph 20).

   2. On September 3, 2015, when the amount disbursed was US$41.54 million, in order to authorize a 23-
   month extension of the closing date to November 29, 2019; and add four more states to the project. The
   States of Uttarakhand, Telangana, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh were added to the project bringing the total
   states participating to 18 (ICR, paragraph 19).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In India, more than half the country's population derived the bulk of their income
through the agricultural sector. The sector was identified by the Government and the Bank as one of the
areas of focus for making growth more inclusive. Within agriculture, dairying was an important economic
activity, accounting for about 18% of agriculture GDP. India is the world's largest producer of milk with
annual production of about 112 million tons, most of which is consumed domestically by India's 1.2 billion
largely vegetarian population. More than 70 million of the reported 147 million rural households depend on
dairy, in varying degrees, for their livelihood. However, the dairy sector was facing a number of challenges:
emerging demand-supply imbalances, rising milk prices, low productivity levels, weak service delivery,
limited farmer access to organized milk processing sector, and environmental challenges related to
methane emission, overgrazing and animal waste management. The project aimed to increase domestic
milk supply through investments designed to improve productivity of milk animals.



At appraisal, the project objective was in line with the GoI's priorities for the dairy sector as envisioned in
the a National Dairy Plan (NDP, 2008). The NDP envisaged a focused multi-state initiative to improve
animal productivity, strengthen/expand infrastructure for milk procurement at the village level, and enhance
milk processing capacity and marketing, backed with appropriate policy and regulatory
measures. The project supported and operationalized the first phase of NDP through investments to
enhance animal productivity and improve farmer access to organized milk marketing channels. The project
objective was also in line with the Bank's India Country Strategy (FY09-FY12) which sought to achieve
rapid and inclusive growth, ensure development was sustainable, and increase the effectiveness of service
delivery.

At completion, the project objective remained in line with the GoI's priorities for the dairy sector as
emphasized in the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying (DAHD) National Action Plan (Vision
2024). The plan called for increasing the number of productive animals and per animal productivity, thus
increasing milk production and marketable surpluses, all of which were in line of the project's objective.
Also, the Borrower Completion Report (BCR, 2020) stated that: “the long-term outcome of the NDSP
remains compatible with the country’s national priorities and development policies”. The project objective
was also in line with Bank's Country Partnership Framework for India (CPF, FY18-22) which emphasized
three themes for the Bank engagement: (a) sustainable, resource-efficient growth; (b) improving
competitiveness and enabling job creation; and, (c) investing in human capital. Improving competitiveness
was to achieved through: food safety, food processing, and food/commodity supply and distribution

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



               infrastructure, and improving land and water use efficiencies in agriculture. While improving the business
               environment was to achieved through innovation, quality standards and managerial skills, which were in line
               with the PDO’s “productivity” and “organized markets” themes. Also, enabling more quality jobs for women
               was in line with financial inclusion.

               The project’s objectives, in light of the measurable PDO indicators specified in the PAD, were clear and
               focused, but lacked an explicit connection to higher level objectives, namely, sustainable, inclusive
               economic growth and poverty reduction in the smallholder dairy sector. Nevertheless, on the basis that the
               project was directed at small-scale dairying operations in villages and was intended to generate broad-
               based longer term outcomes, the Relevance of Objectives is rated High.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the productivity of milch animals in project areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective (to increase the productivity of milch animals in
                             project areas), the project would support genetic improvement of the dairy herd (cows and buffalos) and
                             optimal use of feed and fodder. This would be achieved through support for long term investments in animal
                             breeding, extensive training of dairy farmers and doorstep delivery of ration balancing advisory services and
                             AI services, integrated with veterinary support, together with development of related information network and
                             databases. These activities were expected to result in more milk per animal and increased proportion of in-
                             milk female animals to adult female animals. Anticipated longer term outcomes included: sustainable,
                             inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction in the smallholder dairy sector National self-sufficiency in
                             milk production.

                             The achievement of this element of the PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: first, producers
                             need to accept project technologies, and second, trained manpower needs would be filled.

                             The ToC reflected clear connections between the intended activities and the expected outcomes. Also, the
                             stated assumptions were realistic.

                             Outputs



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



The following outputs are as reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

Animal Breed Improvement

      14 Progeny Testing projects were implemented (no target).
      249 Pedigree Selection projects male calves were distributed (target: 501, 50% achievement rate).
      2,456 bulls were available for distribution to the 54 Semen Stations nationwide, replacing up to 33% of
         the 7,406 existing breeding bulls in collection and rearing (ICR, paragraph 38).
      1,330 Mobile AI Technicians (MAITs) completed over 2.67 million AIs (about 0.8 million annually) and
         reached a 46% conception rate.
      28,830 dairy animals were included in Milk Recording: 28,830 (no target).
      44 Calf Rallies were organized to promote AI (no target).
      28 semen Stations were strengthened by the project (target: 28, achieved). These semen stations
         produced 88.18 million semen doses compared to an annual target of 122.74 million (72%
         achievement rate).
        171 pure-bred bulls imported (Holstein, Friesian and Jersey) (no target).
        824 imported embryos (Holstein/Jersey) were transferred (target: 835, exceeded).
        88 male (Holstein/Jersey) calves were made available for distribution (target: 108, 81% achievement).
        32,000 village-level meetings were held to create AI awareness (no target).
        12,322 villages were covered by a Mobile Artificial Insemination Technician (target: 23,800, 52%
         achievement) and 783,000 AIs were carried out under the AI pilot (just over 20% of the appraisal
         estimate, ICR, paragraph 41).

Animal Nutrition

      2.86 million milch animals (target: 2.7 million, 106% achievement) in 33,389 villages were covered by
         Ration Balancing Program (RBP) (86% of the target, ICR, paragraph 29).
        572,548 women farmers were covered by Ration Balancing Program (no target).
        300,312 Scheduled Tribe (ST) /Scheduled Cast (SC) farmers covered by Ration Balancing Program
         (no target).
        2.0 million dairy animals were covered by Ration Balancing Program (no target).
        32,787 Local Resource Persons were inducted to deliver through Ration Balancing Program doorstep
         Services (no target).
        603,720 ha land brought under fodder production (no target).
        7 fodder seed processing plants were established (target: 7, achieved).
        30,185 metric ton (MT) fodder seed sales were achieved (target: 20,330 MT, exceeded).
        2,033 farmers were covered under the Fodder Development program (no target).
        At closing, 4,333 dairy farmers adopted silage production based on NDSP demonstrations (ICR,
         paragraph 34).



Outcomes



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



By project completion, 172 End Implementing Agencies (EIAs) implemented 477 sub-projects across 18
states benefiting 3.7 million organized, mostly smallholder, milk producers, versus the 1.7 million estimated at
appraisal (ICR, paragraph 25). Also, 52,509 villages were newly organized and/or strengthened for dairy
activities, enrolling an additional 1.7 million milk producers in DCSs and DPCs compared to target of 1.2
million. According to the ICR (paragraph 26), improvements in milk productivity were expected from
"technologically advanced practices in dairy animal nutrition and, over a longer timeframe, genetic
improvement."

The outcome was assessed through two PDO level outcome indicators: #1. Percentage increase in milk
production per animal, and #2. Proportion of “in-milk” female animals to adult female animals. The in-milk to
adult female ratio is an indicator of scientific animal management practices focused on animal nutrition and
health care, and scientific breeding. The higher the ratio, the higher the number of animals “in-milk” (i.e.,
under lactation) at any point and higher the milk production. By project completion, milk production per animal
(PDO indicator #1) increased by 21% compared to a target of 10% (target exceeded by 210%), and the
proportion of in-milk female animals to adult female animals (PDO indicator #2) increased to 68%
(target: 66%, and baseline was 63%) (target was exceeded by 103%).

The increase in milk production per animal was a result of a seven-year program that integrated advanced
feeding and improved breeding practices (primarily through artificial insemination), which were not used
before in India for smallholder dairying (ICR, paragraph 27). The result was measured using the weighted
average of the daily milk yield per in-milk animal for indigenous cows, crossbreds and buffaloes. The End-line
Survey (DRS, 2019) showed that average milk yields per dairy animal across all 18 participating states
increased 21% from a baseline of 5.03 liters/day to 6.09 liters/day (vs. target of 5.53 liters/day, or 10%). Also,
a separate household-level study, revealed that the average milk production for milk-producing households in
project villages was 14.5 liters/day compared to 11.7 liters/day in control villages, and for buffalo, averaged
9.4 liters/day in project villages compared to 6.0 liters/day in control villages (ICR, paragraph 27). The
adoption of the Ration Balancing Program (RBP) resulted in better-nourished cows/buffaloes and more days
in milk (i.e., greater persistence of lactation). According to the ICR (paragraph 30) RBP increased the average
lactation period by an additional 26 days for cows and 50 days for buffaloes. In addition, RBP improved milk
quality as the average fat content increased from 4.70% to 4.78%, and Solids-non-Fat (SNF) rose from 7.86
to 8.54% in cows, and from 8.12 to 9.12% in buffaloes. This improvement in milk quality increased its market
value, which puts a premium on fat content. Other benefits of RBP included the reduction of feeding costs by
10.2% per liter of milk (146% of target) where the cost of production was reduced from INR 19.49/liter of milk
to INR 17.19/liter (ICR, paragraph 31). Also, according to the ICR (paragraph 36), RBP reduced average
methane emissions in lactating cows and buffaloes by 13.8% (138% compared to a target of 10%). Milk
productivity also benefited from the higher conception rates in herds where AI was piloted as this increased
the days in milk. i.e., increasing the conception rate from a baseline of 35% to 46% under AI, which resulted
in around one additional month of milk per animal (ICR, paragraph 28).

According to the ICR (paragraph 28), the improvement in the proportion of in-milk female animals to adult
female animals was also a result of the RBP intervention. Adoption of RBP resulted in better-nourished
cows/buffaloes and more days in milk (ICR, paragraph 28). Also, higher conception rates in herds where AI
was piloted increased the days in milk. Further improvements to the in-milk to adult female ratio was
envisaged coming mainly from the genetic improvement through animal breeding, which is a longer-term and
its impact on the so-called “wet ratio” of the herd was not envisaged within the project lifetime (ICR paragraph
28). Anticipated genetic improvements were expected to become significant by 2027.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in increasing productivity of milch
animals in project areas as the targets for both PDO level indicators were exceeded and arguably attributable
to the productivity enhancement programs. However, the project fell short on achieving its intermediate
outcome targets for the AI pilot program where village coverage reached 52% of the target and the number of
AIs completed annually reached about 20% of the target (0.78 million compared to a target of 3.8 million).
The ICR (paragraph 71) attributed the shortfall in the AI pilot program to limited manpower in the technical
labor market to perform AI, which was compounded by the scarcity of accredited AI training centers; failure
of the Shreeja and Baani DPCs to participate in the AI pilot due to resistance from their State Animal
Husbandry Departments; uneven policy support to create the enabling environment for AI; low awareness of
AI in states where buffalo dominated; and the effect of local grazing practices with free-roaming bulls and
resistance to ear-tagging negatively affected AI uptake.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved achieving is
rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve market access of milk producers in project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective (to improve market access of milk producers in
project areas), the project would raise farmers' awareness about the importance of good quality milk and
build their capacity for hygienic milk production, collection and sale. Specifically, the project would support
milk collection and bulking through supporting village-level collection and milk chilling infrastructure as well as
supporting community mobilization and institution-building (Dairy Cooperative Society, Dairy Producer
Company). These activities would result in additional producers joining Coops and Dairy Producer
Companies; women and Scheduled Tribe/Scheduled Cast would participate in Village-based Milk
Procurement System, which would expand transparent quantity- and quality-based milk procurement, End
Implementing Agency training would build long-term management capacity. In sum, this would allow dairy
small-holders to access an organized milk market in the project area with a higher proportion of milk produced
being sold to the organized sector. Collective sales would strengthen farmers' negotiating power and reduce
transaction costs for such a highly perishable commodity. Anticipated longer term outcomes include
sustainable, inclusive economic growth and poverty reduction in the smallholder dairy sector, and national
self-sufficiency in milk production.

The achievement of this PDO was underpinned by the assumption that decentralized dairy organizations
would be strengthened, and inclusive design would increase participation of women and Scheduled
Tribe/Scheduled Cast members of the community.

The ToC included activities that were directly linked to the PDO. The stated assumptions were logical and
realistic.


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



Outputs

The following outputs are as reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

Milk Collection and Bulking

        243 Village-based Milk Procurement System sub-projects were implemented (no target).
        52,471 Villages covered (target: 31,900, exceeded)
        21,361 New villages were covered (target: 21,188, exceeded).
        4,209 Bulk Milk Chillers installed: 4,209 (target: 4211, achieved)
        29,577 Automated Milk Collection Units/Data Processor and Milk Collection Unit (Village-based Milk
         Procurement System facilities) were installed (target: 29,582, 99.9% achievement rate).
        5.37 million kg/day additional milk were procured per day by project completion (no target).
        1.686 million additional producers were enrolled in Dairy Cooperative Society and Dairy Producer
         Company.
        1.135 million Scheduled Tribe/Scheduled Cast members of the community participated in the project
         activities (no target).
        Six Dairy Processing Companies were created/supported under NDSP account for 834,400 producers
         (ICR, paragraph 48) (139% of target).
        853,154 producers were organized in Dairy Cooperative Societies across 39,259 villages of which
         14,371 (121% of target) were new villages (ICR, paragraph 48).



Outcome

This outcome was assessed through two PDO level indicators, indicator #3 that measured "the increase in
the share of milk sold to the organized sector" , and indicator #4 "proportion of total milk sold to total
production." By project completion, the share of milk sold to the organized sector increased by 75% compared
to target of 56% (target exceeded by 134%), while the share sold to organized markets in the control areas
was 51% (ICR, paragraph 44). The proportion of total milk sold to total production reached 74.3% compared
to a target of 65%, baseline was also 65%. The ICR (Annex 1) explained that the original PAD baseline value
was 54% but was increased to 65% following the 2013 Baseline Study. Average production and sale by the
intervention group was 10.9 liters/8.1 liters respectively and for the control group 9.4 liters/6.8 liters
respectively (ICR, Annex 1).

This increase was a direct result of the project-supported technological innovation that included equipping
DCSs and DPCs with capital items such as Bulk Milk Chilling Units (BMCs), Automated Milk Collection Units,
and Data Processor Milk Collection Units, all of which contributed to increased milk procurement (ICR,
paragraph 44). By 2019-20 the project had installed aggregate BMC capacity of 12.5 million liters/day
compared to the targeted 1.36 million (918% of target), which allows for accommodating future
growth. According to the ICR (paragraph 47) "installation of BMCs also helped to sustain milk quality by filling
gaps in existing milk routes and creating new BMC milk tanker routes." Another important factor was the
automation of the milk procurement process which improved transparency of the milk procurement process.
This improved the producer confidence as it allowed the producer to "view the weight and fat content of their
milk and knew that the price received was merit-based (ICR, paragraph 44)." Over five years, the project
areas saw the milk price per liter received by milk producers from their DCSs increase by an average 8-11%

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



                            (ICR, paragraph 45). Also, according to the ICR (paragraph 45) the Borrower Completion Report stated
                            that 88% of the Village-based Milk Procurement System (VBMPS) beneficiaries reported increased milk
                            prices, 74% reported reduced milk wastage and 43% reported reduced milk marketing time. According to the
                            ICR (paragraph 48) additional milk procurement from newly organized producers reached 2,950 MT/day
                            (97% of target) with an annual turnover exceeding US$350 million equivalent. Also, the project supported
                            organizing 1.67 million producers into Dairy Cooperative Societies/Milk Unions and Dairy Processing
                            Companies (130% of target).

                            Milk quality assessed using methylene blue reduction (MBR) showed an average of 126 minutes which was
                            105% of the target (ICR, paragraph 46). The MBR test measures the bacteriological quality of milk at the Bulk
                            Milk Coolers level. Results varied as milk at the Dairy Cooperative Societies had a range of 60 to 280
                            minutes, and milk at the Dairy Processing Companies had a range of 58 minutes to 133 minutes. The ICR did
                            not provide an explanation for the variation in the MBR readings between the Dairy Cooperative Societies and
                            the Dairy Processing Companies. However, variation in general could partially be attributed to the season of
                            the year, where milk quality drops during hot summer months (ICR, paragraph 46). Water scarcity during hot
                            summer months negatively impacts the overall hygiene of the milking process (particularly washing cans and
                            animals) and results in an increased bacterial load (ICR, paragraph 46).

                            Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy with which Objective 2 has been achieved is rated
                            High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project succeeded in increasing the productivity of milch animals in project areas. By project completion,
                            milk production per animal (PDO indicator #1) increased by 21% compared to a target of 10% (target
                            exceeded by 210%), and the proportion of in-milk female animals to adult female animals (PDO indicator #2)
                            increased to 68% (target: 66%, and baseline was 63%) (target was exceeded by 103%). The project
                            also improved market access of milk producers in project areas. By project completion, the share of milk sold
                            to the organized sector increased by 75% compared to the target of 56% (target exceeded by 134%), while
                            the share of milk sold to organized markets in the control areas was 51% (ICR, paragraph 44). Finally, most
                            intermediate outcome indicators were met or exceeded, except for the number of artificial inseminations in a
                            pilot program, which fell short of the envisaged target.

                            This review concludes that the overall efficacy with which the project's objectives were achieved was high.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 22
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



  High



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

ex-ante

     The Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) in the PAD at appraisal estimated the overall economic Rate
         of Return (ERR) at 23.5% and the Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at 22.1 %. Project costs and benefits
         were estimated at 2011 prices over 20 years with 12% opportunity cost of capital.
        Benefits. (a) Animal nutrition was expected to lead to increased milk productivity due to nutrition, reduced
         cost of milk production, and reduced methane emission. (b) Animal breed improvement would produce
         high genetic merit bulls to supply about 3.85 million disease free semen doses annually for project AI
         services, leading to the benefit of increased milk productivity through better genetics. (c) Improved milk
         collection and bulking would result in increased producer price and reduced transaction costs.
        Methodology. The projects benefits were quantified separately for indigenous and cross bred cattle and
         buffaloes. Next, benefits were aggregated at project sub-component and component levels (in that
         order), and then finally aggregated for the project as a whole. Financial analysis was done at market
         prices. Economic analysis involved making appropriate adjustments to financial benefits and costs.
        Cost-benefit analysis was conducted separately for major investment activities: breed improvement and
         AI service delivery, animal nutrition management, and milk collection and bulking investments, which
         together account for 93.6% of project costs.
        Sensitivity and Risk Analyses. A number of sensitivity and risk analyses were conducted using various
         scenarios. Project costs were allowed to increase up to 30% above the base level, and the three sources
         of benefits were allowed to decrease up to 50% below their base levels. This risk analysis estimated the
         effects of uncertain returns to investments and generated confidence limits for realizing expected
         benefits. The variations caused the ERR to vary between 11.8% and 20.4% with a coefficient of variation
         of 8% . The expected ERR was estimated at 16.2% and was reasonably stable because the risk model
         predicted 0.84 probability of ERR exceeding 15%.



ex-post

     The ex-post EFA followed the same approach as the one at appraisal. The overall Internal Rate of
      Return (IRR) was estimated at 60% with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$475 million, and the FRR was
      estimated at 57% with a NPV of US$492 million. Costs and benefits were estimated at 2018 prices over
      20 years with a 10% discount rate.
     Benefits. The project benefits for the ex-post EFA were measured for: (a) Productivity Enhancement:
      increased milk productivity through improved animal breeding, nutrition, and delivery of AI services
      (48% of total project cost); and (b) Milk Collection and Bulking: improved access to markets by investing
      in Village-based Milk Procurement System facilities and the formation of Dairy Producer Companies and
      Dairy Cooperative Societies (50% of total project cost).
     Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA). The CBA was conducted separately for major project interventions: breed
      improvement and AI service delivery, animal nutrition management, and milk collection and bulking

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



       investments. Benefits were then aggregated and compared to overall project costs, including
       contingencies and costs associated with project management. Costs and benefits were estimated at
       2018 prices over a 20-year horizon with 10% discount rate.
      The ex-post analysis showed higher net benefit from the project compared to the ex-ante EFA. These ex-
       post results were due to several factors including: (a) Higher actual scale of benefits derived from key
       project activities compared to the ex-ante analysis. For example, the ex-ante analysis estimated a 5%
       reduction in feed and fodder cost (INR /liter milk produced) due to RBP. At project closing, impact
       assessment studies on actual RBP delivered show a higher average cost reduction of 12%. (b) Under
       the Village-based Milk Procurement System (VBMPS), the number of milk producers organized into
       Dairy Cooperative Societies (DCSs) and Dairy Producer Companies (DPCs) surpassed targets by 141%
       and 126%, respectively, resulting in more producers being organized at a lower unit cost (ICR, Annex 4).
      The total cost of the project was US$294.58 million, with an average cost of US$78 per beneficiary .At
       project completion, 2.85 million animals were included in the program, net benefit in the form of
       aggregate profit for these producers amounted to US$302 million (ICR, Annex 4).
      Sensitivity Analysis. For component 1, a reduction in project benefits could occur if the Local Resource
       Persons (LRPs) did not perform satisfactorily and/or if the AI delivery services, particularly the Mobile
       Artificial Insemination Technicians (MAITs) services, were unsatisfactory. For the MAITs, an assumption
       was made that 25% performed below par, while for LRPs, the project’s documented LRP attrition rate
       was used-about 25%. In both these scenarios, the IRR (financial) declined to 41% and 59%, while for
       IRR (economic), only declined to 40% and 58%, respectively. Also, changing the impact of the
       DCSs/DPCs on milk price from 21% to 15% and 10%; and changing the Bulk Milk Coolers (BMC)
       capacity utilized from 100% to 75% and 50% were analyzed. The analysis showed that decreasing the
       utilized BMC capacity from 100% to 75% and 50% resulted in a reduction in the IRR from 46% to 38%
       and 29% respectively; and a reduction in the NPV from US$102 million to US$74 million to US$46 million
       respectively. The sensitivity analysis also showed that decreasing the impact of the DCS/DPC on the
       milk price from 21% to 15% and 10% caused the IRR to decrease from 46% to 33% and 21%
       respectively; and caused the NPV to decrease from US$102 million to US$64 million and US$32 million,
       respectively.



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

While the project closed 23 months later than its original closing date, it did not experience any cost
overruns (ICR, Annex 4). According to the ICR (Annex 4, paragraph 19) "the project was efficiently managed
with a relatively low administrative cost of 4%, considering that it was a large-scale national program covering 18
States." The project disbursed 100% of the IDA Credit and implementation benefited from an efficient financial
management system. However, implementation experienced a slow start of activities. The 23 months extension
enabled the project to achieve or exceed its intended outcome targets and helped to derive additional benefits in
animal health and renewable energy.

Overall, efficiency is rated High. This rating reflects a significantly higher ex-ante IRR at 60% compared to 23%
at appraisal. The project also, had an overall efficient implementation performance relative to its size, despite
the initial delays.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    93.00
Appraisal                                                 23.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    98.00
ICR Estimate                                              60.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of Objectives in this project was rated High because the objectives were clear and aligned with
both Government and World Bank development strategies for India. Overall Efficacy was rated High. The
project succeeded in increasing the productivity of milch animals in project areas. By project completion, milk
production per animal (PDO indicator #1) increased by 21% compared to a target of 10% (target exceeded by
210%), and the proportion of in-milk female animals to adult female animals (PDO indicator #2) increased to
68% (target: 66%, and baseline was 63%) (target was exceeded by 103%). The project also improved market
access of milk producers in project areas. By project completion, the share of milk sold to the organized sector
increased by 75% compared to target of 56% (target exceeded by 134%), while the share sold to organized
markets in the control areas was 51% (ICR, paragraph 44). Efficiency was rated High based on a significantly
higher ex-ante IRR at 60% compared to 23% at appraisal.

Given that all of the three assessed criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency) were rated High
there were no shortcomings in the project's achievements, its overall outcome is therefore rated Highly
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 92) discussed the following risks that could potentially impact the project's development
outcome:

1. Policy risk. NDSP provided a roadmap for the second phase of the National Dairy Plan. According to the
ICR (paragraph 92) the policy and strategic environment continue to be favorable with the strong social and




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



economic rationale for consolidation and continued expansion of NDSP’s proven technologies beyond the
10% of dairy producers, mostly smallholders, supported under the first stage.

2. The risk related to the sustainability of NDSP’s decentralized institutions including the Dairy Cooperative
Societies (DCS), End Implementing Agencies (EIAs), Dairy Producer Companies (DPCs) and Local
Resource Persons (LRPs). Sustainability of the DCS, and of the EIAs (Milk Unions) is likely to continue.
NDSP built capacity to support EIAs as dairy businesses. However, more attention is needed to staffing
issues and the lack of human resource (HR) plans and strategies. DPCs established under NDSP
demonstrated promising financial sustainability. A World Bank study (2020) asserts that the liquidity,
solvency and efficiency of new DPCs is average with an overall upward trend. Recommendations are made
to boost financial strength and viability. Sustainability of LRPs is also likely to continue after addressing the
reasons of attrition through expanding LRP roles to include MAIT and milk recorder functions to provide a
livable income. Also, female LRPs may be more sustainable because they seek part-time income, and are
less likely to out-migrate for jobs.

3. The risk that youth will not seek dairying as an employment option. A 2017 study by IEG ( Research
Report: Understanding Existing Knowledge/Skill Level and Attitude/Motivation of Rural Youth towards
Dairying as an Employment Activity in NDP I Intervention Villages) showed that knowledgeable youth are
concerned by their prospects as dairy farmers. The local context and agro-climatic environment are the main
influencing factors. The ICR paragraph 92) predicts that the future engagement of youth in dairying as an
occupation may depend on women.

4. This risk related to the sustainability of the Ration Balancing Program (RBP). NDSP supported
RBP through financial provisions for two years. According to the ICR (paragraph 92) "milk unions ran the
RBP until end-of-project and were keen to continue." Producers are demanding that EIAs continue RBP and
many are doing so, e.g., the State of Maharashtra allocated funds to implement RBP in 3,000 villages, post-
project.

5. The risk related to the sustainability of the NDSP breeding program. Sustainability of AI depends on
farmers’ willingness to pay for doorstep delivery of AI services, the conception rates achieved, and continued
adherence to the Standard Operating Procedure.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well aligned with the country and sector strategies of achieving inclusive growth,
  promoting sustainable development, and improving effectiveness of service delivery. While the project
  had a technically and operationally complex design, activities were linked to the needs of the dairy sector
  (ICR, paragraph 68). The project design was informed by analytical activities, namely, a livestock sector
  review conducted by the Bank in 2009. Design also benefited from the experience of previous Bank-
  funded operations. Notable lessons reflected in the design included: the importance of a participatory
  approach with strong producer involvement in the milk procurement system; and securing alternative
  sources of funding for investments in dairy processing once a certain level of dairy production and

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



  infrastructure is in place. Design also took into account the Government's experience in the dairy sector,
  notably, the importance of the genetic quality of bulls, attention to animal identification and recording, and
  adoption of standard operating protocols in cattle and buffalo breeding programs (PAD, paragraph 35).

  The project components included well-defined complimentary activities that were aligned to the PDO. The
  enabling policy and regulatory environment supporting project investments was reflected in the
  requirement that states commit to time-bound policy changes to trigger certain project investments (AI
  delivery, RBP/fodder development, and VBMPS). Implementation readiness benefited from the pre-
  identification of nine out of the proposed fourteen states for participation along with a set of pre-approved
  investments at appraisal (ICR, paragraph 68). According to the ICR (paragraph 89) "close engagement of
  Bank safeguards, fiduciary and sector specialists in ensuring the analytical, technical and operational
  integrity of project design." Six main risks were identified in the PAD. The overall risk to achievement of
  the PDO was assessed to be medium (PAD, paragraph 49). Important risk areas identified in the PAD
  included: the extended geographic coverage, activities in multiple states and through multiple EIAs, along
  with financial management (FM) and procurement capacities/practices. According to the ICR (paragraph
  69) "the PAD risk assessment was generally accurate in practice." However, the PAD risk analysis did
  not anticipate the challenges that arose from the massive need for technical manpower recruitment and
  training needs to implement a decentralized project that was geographically dispersed across 18
  States (ICR, paragraph 69). Finally, M&E benefitted from a well-designed Results Framework (RF) with
  indicators that were aligned to PDOs, and with a comprehensive monitoring plan (see section 9a for more
  details).

  Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory. This rating reflects alignment with dairy sector priorities,
  sound project design, and robust M&E design. While the project had notable implementation readiness
  measures, it still suffered from early implementation delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation was challenging given that the project was implemented over an extended geographic area
 across 18 States. The Bank conducted 19 supervision missions and field visits to participating States. With
 only two Bank Task Team Leaders through the implementation period, the project benefited from stability
 and strong relations with the implementing agency. According to the ICR (paragraph 90) the Bank missions
 included an "appropriate mix of specialists." The Bank supervision worked with the borrower to address
 initial implementation delays, extend the Credit closing date, and alleviate implementation bottlenecks. The
 Bank also worked with the implementing agency to contract an M&E firm, an Indian research institute, and
 consulting bodies that helped ensure high quality analytical M&E products (ICR, paragraph 90). The
 Borrower Completion Report (BCR, 2020) acknowledged the Bank supervision and noted that the Bank
 demonstrated "timely, appropriate support stressing problem-solving; consistently timely release of project
 funds; clear/detailed project reporting; strong, multi-level procurement support including FA facilitation and
 rapid resolution of issues; “phenomenal” technical support including at the field level; and, a focus on
 innovative solutions and a long-term perspective (ICR, paragraph 90)."



                                                                                                       Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



 Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory. This rating reflects effective, responsive and results-focused
 supervision that guided this complex project to successfully achieve its PDO as reported in the ICR.

 Overall Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC), which was not required at the time of appraisal.
 Nonetheless, the ICR (paragraph 8) included a ToC that reflected the connections between the project
 activities, outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts. The ToC also reflected the assumptions that
 underpinned the achievement of the PDO. M&E design was comprehensive with an advanced MIS system
 and included participatory monitoring of physical and financial progress; surveys at baseline, mid-term and
 completion; and, special thematic studies as determined, as well as smaller, interim annual surveys (ICR,
 paragraph 79). The first objective (to increase the productivity of milch animals in project areas) was to be
 assessed through two PDO level indicators: #1. Percent Increase in Milk production/animal, and
 #2. Proportion of in-milk female animals to adult female animals. The second objective (to improve market
 access of milk producers in project areas) was to be assessed through two PDO level indicators:
 #3. Proportion of total milk sold to total production, and #4. Percent increase in share of milk sold to the
 organized sector (as a share of production). These four indicators were directly linked to the stated
 objectives, measurable and had realistic end of project targets. The RF also included 17 intermediate
 results indicators to assess the different activities supported by the project. The meaning/measurement of
 the intermediate indicators were generally well-described and appropriate for monitoring progress (ICR,
 paragraph 79). The project management unit (PMU) would coordinate various consultancy services,
 including an external M&E agency responsible for measuring performance of the project against targets
 outlined in the Results Framework (PAD, paragraph 30).

 Overall, M&E design was robust with a detailed RF that included relevant indicators to assess the PDO and
 the project activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 80) assessed M&E implementation through four main criteria:

  Data collection, analysis and reporting. M&E activities included participatory monitoring of physical
  and financial progress; surveys at baseline, mid-term and completion (ICR, paragraph 79). According to
  the ICR (paragraph 80) the project achieved high standards and multi-level institutional buy-in which was

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



  demonstrated through the collection and organization of data in sector-specific data systems by the
  National Dairy Development Board (NDDB); using trained field personnel to conduct decentralized,
  methodologically sound data collection/entry for the MIS; and developing and deploying a web-based,
  single-platform Integrated NDSP Portal.

  Studies and Reports. According to the ICR (paragraph 80) all envisioned studies/reports were delivered.
  The Baseline was completed in Year 1, the Mid-term and Final evaluation reports (End-line Survey) were
  delivered, as well as a Borrower Completion Report (BCR). In addition, 16 methodologically thematic
  studies were financed. These provided an analytical perspective for future dairy operations and public
  policymaking.

  Development and operationalization of ICT systems. Two ICT systems were developed under the
  project, first the Information Network for Animal Productivity and Health (INAPH). This was a
  Desktop/Netbook/Windows/Phone-based field IT application that enabled real-time capture of
  comprehensive data on individual dairy animals. Second, the Semen Station Management System
  (SSMS) which monitored supply, demand, production, pricing, revenue and biological parameters (such
  as bull fertility and dilution rates).

  Mainstreaming the NDSP approach to M&E into country systems. The NDDB mainstreamed the
  NDSP approach to M&E-where decision-making became based on data-analytics. Also, the INAPH was
  adopted formally as India’s National Dairy Information System and its deployment was required for
  Central Sector Schemes related to animal husbandry and health and it became the backbone of the
  National Animal Disease Control Program.

  Based on the above-mentioned evidence, it is evident form the ICR that the project benefited from
  an effective implementation of M&E activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR assessed M&E utilization through three main criteria:

  Utilizing M&E data, products and best practice cases. According to the ICR (paragraph 81) the
  NDDB utilized the project data to monitor and report on the project implementation progress to the Bank,
  to other central-level institutional stakeholders and to the IEAs/local stakeholders. Data were also used
  to support targets and activities for annual project planning; and, to promote knowledge dissemination at
  workshops and seminars. According to the ICR (paragraph 80) the project's M&E data "facilitated
  planning and decision-making based on data-driven progress reporting."

  Performance and results data had immediate, practical application. Two important examples
  emerged from the project experience: First, an accurate Progeny Testing/Pedigree Selection program
  was feasible through utilizing monitoring data from the Information Network for Animal Productivity and
  Health (INAPH) which proved fundamental to complete test inseminations under Progeny Testing, milk
  recording, and numbers of daughters/contemporaries evaluated. Second, through Semen Stations
  biosecurity, it became evident that initial coverage rates for Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) were
  substandard and monitoring these results guided vaccination campaigns (ICR, paragraph 81).




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



  External studies supported and complemented project implementation. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 81) external studies provided project-level indicators of progress; facilitated the evaluation of
  outcomes/impacts; and ensured validation of project progress and course corrections.

  The above-mentioned information point to strong utilization of project data, which was also confirmed by
  the use of the data in the ICR.

  Overall, M&E quality is rated High. The project benefited from a robust M&E design that included
  competent institutional leadership and relevant indicators to assess the project’s results. Implementation
  was effective and utilization was strong with the NDSP ICT systems formally mainstreamed/deployed to
  stakeholders as part of GoI’s planning and operational system for dairy industry modernization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified environmental category B. It triggered three safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP4.01), Pest Management (OP4.09) and Indigenous peoples (OP 4.10). The project was
   likely to provide opportunities for an overall positive impact on the environment through better manure and
   waste management, balanced feed and nutrition program, and improved cattle breeds. However, some
   activities had potentially adverse environmental impacts that would require mitigation measures. These
   activities included: construction related activities, handling and management of wastes from livestock
   sector, and effluent treatment from large dairy farms. The project did not finance any direct procurement of
   pesticides. However, limited pesticides use was possible while growing high quality fodder seeds.
   Therefore, a pest management plan was developed to address any likely adverse impacts of handling,
   management and disposal of pesticides. The project was not expected to adversely impact the tribal and
   other vulnerable groups but because of their marginalization they might have had differential access to
   project benefits. An Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) was disclosed in-country on June 14,
   2011 and at the Bank's Infoshop on July 4, 2011.

   Environmental Compliance. The ICR (paragraph 84) stated that the "overall environmental compliance
   was satisfactory" and environmental safeguards were "in full compliance." Mitigation measures
   were mainstreamed through the Ration Balancing Program and Fodder Development programs to
   manage livestock-based methane production and the potential for increased free-grazing to harm natural
   habitats. Capacity-building was provided to EIAs for managing animal waste and animal health care waste.
   EIAs also benefited from regular field visits and awareness programs to better understand environmental
   safeguards procedures/practices including safe use by fodder farmers of permissible pesticides under the
   Pest Management safeguard policy.

   Social Compliance. According to the ICR (paragraph 85), social compliance was overall "Satisfactory" and
   "the project applied due diligence and no adverse social impacts were reported." Social safeguards were an
   integral part of sub-projects at the village level, i.e., base-level accountability. While the Indigenous Peoples
   (IP) policy was triggered, it included no set target. In 2017, an Equity Action Plan (EAP) focused on the


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



  vulnerable (SC/ST), and set a combined target of 17%. At closing, 302,309 producers had benefited from
  awareness programs on dairy livelihood options, and the SC/ST target of 17% was achieved (ICR,
  paragraph 85). The project successfully established a Grievance Response Mechanism (GRM) which
  according to the ICR (paragraph 86) was "widely publicized at the national, state and village levels and was
  accessible to all project-affected people." The ICR provided no information on the number or nature of
  grievance cases.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). FMS technology enabled effective management of complex accounts for
  477 projects covering 172 End Implementing Agencies (EIAs). Also, the decentralized, multi-layered audit
  structure was well-suited for micro-management of a large-scale project with multiple EIAs and project
  accounts. In addition, training and capacity building on project FM guidelines/processes ensured smooth
  and relatively problem free FM (ICR, paragraph 88). According to the ICR (paragraph 88) "FM reviews
  determined that an adequate FM system was in place to provide accurate and timely information verifying
  that WB credit proceeds were being used as intended." Annual audited financial reports had unqualified
  opinions and were timely submitted to the Bank.



  Procurement. Procurement activities benefited from frequent procurement training for EIAs to build
  capacity. A global accounting firm conducted 12 semi-annual procurement post reviews, and "none of
  which identified serious procurement issues/discrepancies (ICR, paragraph 87)."




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  "Gender: The project explicitly targeted and measured women’s participation. This focus resulted in the
  formation of 4,400 women-only DCSs, and Shreeja Mahila, an all-women DPC. By the time the project
  closed, the EIAs had trained 2.4 million milk producers, DCSs/Milk Unions/DPC management, LRPs,
  MAITS and field technicians, covering vulnerable groups including 784,000 women (45 percent) and
  271,000 SC/ST farmers (10 percent). Greater focus is needed in such projects on women as cooperative
  members and service providers (e.g., LRPs), and in the case of DPCs, to involve female
  shareholders.21As evidenced by the Equity and Inclusion Study,22 women’s involvement in NDSP showed
  significant evolution with potential to be leveraged in new operations. NDSP women were more likely to
  access one/more of the three project extension services: AI, animal health and nutrition, devote additional
  time to improving milk quality and participate in milk selling decisions. Women as service providers
  significantly affected their standing in the village which contributed to their empowerment and income.
  However, the frequency of extension services use by women needs improvement, and women would
  benefit from more training on RBP and VBMPS. Women-only DCSs and DPCs are a striking example of a
  community institution working towards women’s economic independence (ICR, paragraph 57)."

  Also, the project supported clean energy pilots: "(i) Pilot rooftop solar panels: Installation of 61 rooftop solar
  Photovoltaic (PV ) systems supported the adoption of clean alternative sources at affordable cost and
  reduced dependence on the unreliable, grid-connected power supply; and, (ii) Pilot Flexi Biogas Plants:

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



   1,000 biogas plants generated additional income for producers using biogas as a clean cooking fuel, and
   bio-digested slurry both as a fertilizer and for sale. Indicative results show GHG emissions declined by 817
   metric tons (CO2 equivalent), by replacing LPG use (ICR, paragraph 64)."



d. Other
   "Milk Fortification: A grant from the South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative successfully explored
   the potential for micro-nutrient fortification in the liquid milk supply chain, reaching Milk Federations, DPCs
   and Milk Unions in 20 States. Fortifying just 13,000 liters/day in 2017, the pilot reached 5.5 million liters of
   milk per day by 2019, and access for six million consumers. Early adopters included the large, integrated
   dairy firms Mother Dairy India, Verka and Saras (ICR, paragraph 65)."



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                   High

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR included seven lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Data collection and analytics are critical elements needed to successfully drive project
implementation, anchor needed course correction and allow transparent and objective
assessment of impact. The Information Network for Animal Productivity and Health (INAPH), with
its multi-million data records, is now at national scale and officially mainstreamed. This system
permitted the calculation of Estimated Breeding Values (EBVs) and estimation of genetic progress.
Milk recording and production costs captured in INAPH on 2.85 million milch animals supported the
business case for optimal nutrition management as a least-cost, productivity-enhancing approach.
The National Dairy Development Board's (NDDB) use of INAPH data in scheduled regional review
meetings with End Implementing Agencies (EIAs) allowed objective assessment of implementation
progress and the formulation of action plans to prevent and recoup delays.

2. Improved animal nutrition plays a critical role in the efforts to modernize smallholder
dairying. The benefits of ration balancing program (RBP) and Fodder Development transferred to a
receptive clientele cannot be overstated and they are confirmed by the results in milk productivity
and quality. Tangible, measurable gains emerged rapidly when the RBP regime was correctly
delivered, adopted and practiced. The resulting boost in producer incomes motivated further growth

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



in DCS/DPC membership and producers’ commitment to the wellbeing of their animals and to milk
quality. A major co-benefit of RBP was reduced GHG emissions and water footprint, a message
which needs constant reiteration. The instruments for delivering such services/messages must be
both financially and technically sustainable.

3. Ensuring access to organized markets is a critical initial requirement to sustain
increases in productivity. Unless a producer sees increased direct remuneration from selling more
and higher quality milk, there is little incentive to invest in productivity-enhancing technologies. The
Village-based Milk Procurement System (VBMPS) unequivocally provided this incentive. That said,
the enabling conditions for the VBMPS as designed may not be easily replicated outside India, as
they depend on a well-established system of cooperatives, village and matrix organizations, a
technically and operationally advanced and well-connected lead institution, IT connectivity and
economies of scale. Careful consideration is needed to determine whether such system can be
used/adapted to other conditions and contexts.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. M&E benefited from a robust design, satisfactory implementation and strong utilization.
Overall, the M&E system, the Government's BCR and the external studies provided important inputs to the ICR
and efficiency analysis. However, there were minor discrepancies between the outputs reported in Annex 1 and
those reported under the discussion of outcomes.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and skillfully used the
evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the two objectives. It provided a well
balanced discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to the indicators and what
the project actually achieved on the ground.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify the assigned ratings.
Discussion of outcomes was comprehensive, and the efficiency analysis was robust.

Conciseness. The ICR was well written and provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation
experience and candidly reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s
messaging. The outputs in Annex 1 included targets, and the ICR discussed clearly the risks and mitigation



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Dairy Support Project (P107648)



measures. Also, the sections on M&E design, implementation and utilization were all well structured and
informative.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
