     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0021982

1. Program Information



 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Liberia                           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                 Approved Operations
 4                                  6

 Operation ID                       Operation Name
 P127317                            LR-PRSC-I (FY13)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                  Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-52770                         30-Jun-2014                                        10,349,892.00

 Bank Approval Date                Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2013                       30-Jun-2014
                                   IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                    10,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                     10,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                 10,349,892.00                                            0.00




P146619_TBL
 Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
 Liberia                           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                      Operation Name
 P146619                           LR PRSC II ( P146619 )




                                                                                        Page 1 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)




L/C/TF Number(s)                  Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
IDA-52770,IDA-55500,IDA-H9990     30-Jun-2015                                          28691851.00

Bank Approval Date                Closing Date (Actual)
12-Nov-2014                       30-Jun-2016

                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

Original Commitment                  30,000,000.00                                              0.00

Revised Commitment                   30,000,000.00                                              0.00

Actual                               28,691,851.00                                              0.00



P151502_TBL
Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
Liberia                           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

Operation ID                      Operation Name
P151502                           LR-PRSC III (FY16) ( P151502 )


L/C/TF Number(s)                  Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
IDA-55500,IDA-D1420,IDA-H9990     30-Jun-2017                                          39061561.00

Bank Approval Date                Closing Date (Actual)
17-Nov-2016                       31-Dec-2017

                                  IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

Original Commitment                  40,000,000.00                                              0.00

Revised Commitment                   40,000,000.00                                              0.00

Actual                               39,061,561.00                                              0.00



P162111_TBL
Country                           Practice Area (Lead)
Liberia                           Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

Operation ID                      Operation Name
P162111                           MFMPRSDPO-IV ( P162111 )



                                                                                       Page 2 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D1420,IDA-D2710,TF-A6378              31-Dec-2018                                             25367493.88

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  24-Jan-2018                               31-Dec-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           20,000,000.00                                       4,670,000.00

  Revised Commitment                            20,000,000.00                                       4,670,000.00

  Actual                                        20,697,493.88                                       4,670,000.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Konstantin Atanesyan        Paul Holden                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

Liberia Poverty Reduction Support Development Policy Operation (PRSDPO) series consisted of four operations
and two supplemental financings. The original project development objective (PDO) as described in the Program
Document (PD) for PRSDPO-I (P127317) and replicated in PRSDPO-II (P146619) was to “sustain and deepen
government-owned efforts to reform governance and civil service, and to support the broadening of reforms to
include economic transformation and human development in the context of the implementation of the
Government’s second Poverty Reduction Strategy—the Agenda for Transformation” (PD pp. vi and 19). The PDO
was revised in PRSDPO-III. The revised PDOs were: (i) strengthening governance with particular emphasis on
transparency and accountability as well as budget execution and oversight; (ii) addressing key constraints to
growth, including electricity and land; and (iii) improving human capital development particularly through improved
access to education and health (PRSDPO-III PD, pp. viii and 11). The PDO for PRSDPO-IV remained the same
with two notable differences/inconsistencies: while p. vii of the document reproduces the PDO from PRSDPO-III
verbatim, the main text of the document (p. 14) adds “land” to objective (ii) and excludes “education” from
objective (iii), leaving “health”.

For the purposes of this evaluation, the consolidated objectives of this program were as follows:

PDO 1. Strengthening governance

PDO 2. Addressing key constraints to growth



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



PDO 3. Improving human capital development


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PD for PRSDPO-I outlined the main reform areas, which were mostly governance-related: They were (i)
transparency and accountability; (ii) improving budget execution and oversight; (iii) civil service reform; and (iv)
improving land administration to reduce conflicts and enhance the investment climate. The PD describes three
project “components” (instead of pillars/policy areas): (i) governance and civil service reform, including
transparency and accountability, customs administration, public financial management, and procurement; (ii)
economic transformation, including infrastructure, and agriculture and land reform; and (iii) human capital
development, including education.

In the next three operations, these “components” become pillars/policy areas; with some small variations within
these pillars across the series. For example, PRSDPO-II Pillar 1 does not have an area on “customs
administration”, which appears again in PRSDPO-III; while PRSDPO-IV changes it to “tax and customs
administration”. Similar to PRSDPO-I, Pillar 2 in PRSDPO-II includes areas of infrastructure (energy, power, and
transport), and agriculture and land reform. PRSDPO-III drops transport and agriculture, and PRSDPO-IV brings
back agriculture and drops power (Table 1). The ICR does not describe these changes and lists only a few
changes made after PRSDPO-II.

For the purpose of this evaluation, the consolidated pillars/policy areas for the program are as follows:

1. Governance:

       1.1. Transparency and accountability

       1.2. Civil service reform

       1.3. Tax and customs administration

       1.4. Public financial management

       1.5. Procurement

2. Economic transformation:

       2.1. Energy

       2.2. Agriculture and land reform

3. Human capital development:

       3.1. Education

       3.2. Health

The program included a total of 34 prior actions (PAs), listed in the table below.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



Table 1. Prior Actions for the Program (by policy areas)

Policy areas                       Prior actions
                                   PA1.1.1. The Recipient has adopted an anti-money laundering and anti-
                                   terrorism financing regulation to enhance transparency and
                                   accountability

                                   PA1.1.2. The Recipient has completed the preparation of a three-year
                                   strategy, whose substance is acceptable to the Association, for the
                                   Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission

                                   PA1.1.3. The Recipient has established a financial intelligence unit
                                   whose vocation is to help increase transparency in the Recipient’s
                                   financial transactions.

                                   PA1.1.4. The Recipient has facilitated the effective operation of its
                                   Financial Intelligence Unit through issuing: (a) Regulation on Currency
                                   Transaction Reporting for Financial Institutions (FIU/CBL/SR1A-
                                   CTR/02/2016); (b) Regulation on Suspicious Transaction Reporting for
                 1.1.
                                   Financial Institutions (FIU/CBL/SR2A-STR/02/2016); (c) Regulation for
                 Transparency
                                   Further Distribution and Action on the UN List of Terrorists and Terrorist
                 and
                                   Groups (FIU/OR1A-ER/02/2016); and (d) Regulation Dealing with Cross-
                 Accountability
                                   Border Transportation of Currency and Bearer Negotiable Instruments
                                   (LRA/FIU/OR1-CN/02/2016).
1. Governance                      PA1.1.5. The Asset Disclosure Unit within the Recipient’s Liberia Anti-
                                   Corruption Commission (LACC) has become operational as evidenced
                                   by the employment of an asset verification officer pursuant to an
                                   employment contract dated November 2, 2015

                                   PA1.1.6.The Recipient has through the Central Bank of Liberia, issued a
                                   regulation to improve the capacity of CBL to compel financial institutions
                                   to comply with their obligations on anti-money laundering and combat
                                   the financing of terrorism to promote a more efficient sanctions regime.

                                    PA PA1.1.7. The Recipient has through the Liberia Anti-Corruption
                                    Commission, issued a regulation to facilitate civil servants’ declaration of
                                    their assets to promote integrity in the civil service
                 1.2. Civil Service PA1.2.1. The Recipient has prepared and adopted a revised pay reform
                 Reform             strategy merging allowances and base pay for civil service cadres, with
                                    a view to enhancing transparency and accountability of the Recipient’s
                                    public service.

                                   PA1.2.2. The Recipient has completed merging of discretionary
                                   allowances and base pay for civil servants at levels 1-4 as evidenced by
                                   a Personnel Action Notice from the Recipient’s Civil Service Agency to
                                   the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, dated April 12, 2016


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



                             setting out the consolidated pay scale for each of the grades covered
                             under levels 1-4.

                             PA1.2.3. The Recipient has through its Civil Service Agency: (a)
                             completed the merger of discretionary allowances and base pay for civil
                             servants; and (b) set out the consolidated pay scale for grades 1-10 to
                             remove distortions in civil servants’ salaries and enhance transparency
                             and accountability in the public service
                             PA1.3.1. The Recipient has rolled out a new custom administration
                             system (ASYCUDA) to two additional ports of Bo-Waterside and Ganta
                             to improve customs administration and enhance service delivery.
           1.3. Tax and
           Customs
           Administration
                             PA1.3.2. The Recipient has submitted to its parliament for enactment, a
                             draft “Modernized Customs Code of Liberia (2017)” to strengthen
                             customs and tax administration.
           1.4. Public       PA1.4.1. The Recipient, through its MOF, has adopted integrated
           Financial         financial management information systems (IFMIS) in its payroll
           Management        processing, to strengthen its fiscal discipline and budget transparency.

                             PA1.4.2. The Recipient, through its MOF, has submitted its IPSAS-
                             based financial statements for FY 2010/2011 and FY 2011/2012 to
                             GAC, to improve its internal budget controls

                             PA1.4.3. The Recipient has completed the installation of the civil service
                             management module of the integrated financial management
                             information systems (IFMIS), with a view to strengthening fiscal
                             discipline and budget transparency.

                             PA1.4.4. The Recipient has completed the roll-out of the IFMIS to
                             eleven (11) additional ministries and agencies, for a total of nineteen
                             (19) and brought five (5) donor-financed projects onto pilot tested mode
                             in IFMIS, with a view to facilitating management of public systems.

                             PA1.4.5. The Recipient has submitted its IPSAS-based financial
                             statements for FY 2012/2013 to its General Auditing Commission for
                             audit, with a view to improving internal budget controls.

                             PA1.4.6. The Recipient has, through its Civil Service Agency, improved
                             civil service payroll management by: (a) completing the validation of all
                             employees through biometric authentication; and (b) linking the human
                             resource management information system (HRMIS) to the payroll
                             system as evidenced by a letter and interim reports from the Civil
                             Service Agency to the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning
                             dated May 2, 2016.




                                                                                             Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



                                    PA1.4.7. The Recipient has prepared and published quarterly
                                    comprehensive government finance statistics as set forth in the Annual
                                    Fiscal Outturn Report for FY 2013/2014 and the Annual Fiscal Outturn
                                    Report for FY 2014/2015

                                    PA1.4.8. The Recipient has submitted to the General Auditing
                                    Commission its report on the Annual Consolidated Fund for FY
                                    2014/2015 for audit, with a view to improving internal budget controls.

                                    PA1.4.9. The Recipient has through its Ministry of Finance and
                                    Development Planning: (a) published on its website quarterly
                                    comprehensive GFS-compliant fiscal operations reports for Liberia for
                                    FY2015/16 and FY2016/17 to promote budget transparency; and (b)
                                    submitted the IPSAS compliant financial statements for FY2015/16 and
                                    FY2016/17 to the GAC to improve internal budget controls.
                                    PA1.5.1. The Recipient has structured, within its civil service, a career
                                    track for procurement specialists, with a view to improving budget
                                    execution.

                                    PA1.5.2. The Recipient has completed the technical review of draft
                                    implementing regulations, adopted by the Board of Commissioners of
                                    the Recipient’s Public Procurement and Concession Commission, with a
                                    view to strengthening the Recipient’s procurement systems.

                                    PA1.5.3. The Recipient’s PPCC has approved and published minimum
                 1.5. Procurement
                                    standards and a procurement accreditation system entitled Design of a
                                    Procurement Professionalization System for Liberia dated May 25, 2016
                                    to certify procurement practitioners with a view to professionalizing
                                    public procurement.

                                    PA1.5.4. The Recipient through the Minister of Finance and
                                    Development Planning, has approved the transfer of the Financial
                                    Management Training School to the University of Liberia to enhance the
                                    professionalization of financial management and procurement
                                    specialists, and started the transfer process
2. Economic      2.1. Energy        PA2.1.1. The Recipient has: (a) issued a Petroleum Import License
Transformation                      dated August 23, 2016 to LEC to import HFO to generate electricity for
                                    public service with its own generating plants; and (b) introduced an open
                                    and competitive procurement process for the importation of HFO for
                                    LEC’s own generating plants, through LEC’s Board Policy Resolution
                                    dated July 4, 2016, mandating all procurement of fuels for LEC’s
                                    generation of electricity to be done through an international competitive
                                    bidding process.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



                                       PA2.1.2. The Recipient has through the Liberia Electricity Corporation,
                                       signed the contract between LEC and ESBI, a competitively selected
                                       firm, to enable ESBI to take over and improve the management of LEC.
                                       PA2.2.1. The Recipient has adopted a policy framework for land tenure
                                       reform which clarifies land ownership rights related to public land and
                                       government-owned land.

                                       PA2.2.2. The Recipient has established a collateral registry with a view
                                       to improving credit and expanding the rural economy
                    2.2. Agriculture
                    and Land Reform
                                       PA2.2.3. The Recipient has pursuant to the Liberia Land Authority Act,
                                       made the Liberia Land Authority operational to improve land governance
                                       including land administration and management, as evidenced by the; (a)
                                       Ministry of Finance and Development Planning allocation of budgetary
                                       resources for the LLA in its National Budget FY 2017/2018; and (b)
                                       President’s appointment of at least 4 out of the 5 Commissioners.
                                       PA3.1.1. The Recipient has adopted a comprehensive, fully costed
                                       implementation plan for teacher recruitment, training and deployment
                                       across all levels of the education system with a view to improving
                                       incentives for school attendance.

                    3.1. Education     PA3.1.2. The Recipient’s Ministry of Education has adopted a
                                       framework for equitable resource allocation by region and pupil’s poverty
                                       status, particularly with respect to the school grant scheme as evidenced
                                       in its briefing paper to cabinet entitled Revision of the Framework for
                                       Equitable Allocation by Region and Pupil’s Poverty Status with Respect
 3. Human capital                      to School Grant Scheme dated May 6, 2016.
development                            PA3.2.1. The Recipient’s Ministry of Health has conducted a half-year
                                       budget execution review for FY2016 as evidenced in its report on
                                       Absorptive Capacity of Funds at Ministry of Health dated May 5, 2016
                                       with a view to improving budget execution.

                    3.2. Health        PA3.2.2. The Recipient, through its Ministry of Health, has approved the
                                       Joint Financial Management Assessment Costed Plan 2017 to improve
                                       efficiency in the use of domestic and external resources for the health
                                       sector.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The overall context of the program was severely affected by escalation of the Ebola crisis in July 2014 (at the
time of PRSDPO-II, appraised in October 2014). Following the PRSDPO-I ($10 million), the original amount of
PRSDPO-II was increased from $10 million to $35 million to help mitigate the effects of the Ebola epidemic.
Similarly, PRSDPO-III ($40 million) received supplemental financing ($16.6 million) to help deal with
consequences of the economic crisis in the aftermath of Ebola (total $56.6 million). PRSDPO-IV ($20 million)
also received supplemental TF financing of 4.7 million, totaling $24.7 million. The grand total for the series
(2014-18) was $126.3 million (see ICR, Table 4). Overall, the program was extended by one year (from 2017 to


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



2018) due to a delay in disbursement of PRSDPO-I caused by a delay in the ratification of IDA credit by the
legislature.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives were relevant for the country needs throughout the series and consistent with the government
 strategy (Agenda for Transformation, AfT) - particularly given the severe challenges that the country faced in
 terms of poor governance, poor infrastructure and weak HD indicators. The objectives were also aligned with
 the Bank Group strategy in Liberia.

 The original PDO (PRSDPO I-II) lacked focus (“sustain and deepen government-owned efforts to reform
 governance and civil service, and to support the broadening of reforms to include economic transformation
 and human development in the context of the implementation of the Government’s second Poverty Reduction
 Strategy—the Agenda for Transformation”). For example, the PDO lists one very broad concept (“reform
 governance”) alongside a specific aspect of public sector governance (“civil service”). It was not clear
 whether the aim was to focus on civil service reform or emphasize it within the efforts to reform governance
 overall.

 The caveat of “government-owned efforts” also seems to be an unnecessary way to frame the objective. In
 this respect, the revised PDO 1 was a significant improvement as it clearly stated the focus (“transparency
 and accountability as well as budget execution and oversight”) of the overall governance reform effort, and
 hence lent itself to better accountability, measurement and evaluation.

 The same can be said about the revised PDOs 2 and 3. While the original PDO lumped together already
 excessively broad concepts of “governance”, “economic transformation”, and “human development” into one
 objective, under the overall unclear rubric of “broadening reforms”, the revised PDOs unpacked the objective
 into clearer and more concrete concepts and added sectoral specificity – electricity and land for PDO 2 and
 health and education for PDO 3. However, even these were excessively broad and unfocused.

 The PD for PRSDPO-IV contained inconsistent articulations of the PDO, as noted earlier. Health is included
 and education is excluded from PDO 3, but RIs only relate to education. The ICR does not explain the reason
 for these changes and uses the PRSDPO-IV executive summary definition of the PDO (excluding land and
 including education).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 PDO 1: Strengthening governance. PDO 1 was linked to the Pillar (I) on Governance. Most of areas stayed
 the same through the series. Prior actions for this PDO broadly followed clear logic and were relevant for
 achieving the intended outcomes. Overall, prior actions related to this PDO and Pillar were relatively
 consistent (albeit with variations within specific areas, as explained below).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



          1.1. Transparency and Accountability: There were 7 prior actions (PAs) for this area.
These included establishing, operationalizing, and strengthening relevant institutions such as the financial
intelligence unit (FIU) and the Liberia anti-corruption commission (LACC). PAs included such measures as
establishing the FIU and facilitating its effective operation through issuing regulations on anti-money
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT), including on Currency Transaction Reports
(CTRs) and Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs), preparing a strategy for LACC, operationalizing the
Asset Disclosure unit within the LACC, issuing a LACC regulation to facilitate civil servants’ declaration of
their assets, and also issuing a regulation to improve the capacity of Central Bank of Liberia (CBL) to compel
financial institutions to comply with their obligations on AML/CFT. The PAs generally adequately reflected the
triggers included in preceding credits within the series, with 2 exceptions: (i) while the trigger in PRSDPO-II
stipulated that “Asset Disclosure unit within the LACC is operational with adequate staffing”, the respective
PA in PRSDPO-III describes operationalization in terms of hiring of one staff member, which is unlikely to
make the whole system work; and (ii) the trigger in PRSDPO-III stipulated that the CBL adopts policies and
procedures to conduct AML/CFT compliance inspections, whereas the PA in PRSDPO-IV mentions only a
CBL regulation to improve its own capacity to compel financial institutions to comply with their obligations on
AML/CFT. In both cases relevance (and efficacy) of the PAs is unclear. Considering that 5 out of 7 PAs in this
area follow clear logic and are relevant to the achievement of the PDO, the relevance of this group of PAs is
rated Moderately Satisfactory.

          1.2. Civil Service reform. 3 PAs (PRSDPO II-IV) in this area included such measures as preparing
and adopting a revised pay reform strategy, merging allowances and base pay for civil service cadres;
completing merging of discretionary allowances and base pay for civil servants, and setting out the
consolidated pay scale, initially for grades 1-4, followed by grades 5-10. These PAs appear to be clear and
follow a logical pathway, relevant for reforming the civil service. Relevance of this set of PAs to the
achievement of the PDO is rated Satisfactory.

         1.3. Tax and Customs Administration. This area included 2 PAs on rolling out a new customs
administration system (ASYCUDA) to two additional ports (PRSDPO-I) and submitting to parliament a draft
“Modernized Customs Code of Liberia” (PRSDPO-IV). The latter was introduced to replace triggers in
PRSDPO-II and III to expand ASYCUDA to remaining ports. Both measures appear to be relevant for the
overall goal of strengthening customs and tax administration and enhancing service delivery, particularly the
introduction of ASYCUDA. Overall, relevance of PAs for this area is rated Satisfactory.

          1.4. Public Financial Management (PFM). There were total 9 PAs in this area. 4 PAs were aimed at
strengthening fiscal discipline and budget transparency by adopting integrated financial management
information systems (IFMIS) in payroll processing (including completing the installation of the civil service
management module of the IFMIS, roll-out of the IFMIS to 19 ministries and agencies, and 5 donor-financed
projects); completing the validation of all employees through biometric authentication; and linking the human
resource management information system (HRMIS) to the payroll system. 5 PAs aimed at improving internal
budget controls through submitting IPSAS-compliant financial statements to General Auditing Commission
(GAC); and preparing and publishing quarterly comprehensive GFS-compliant fiscal operations reports. The
PAs were broadly relevant to the goals of strengthening fiscal discipline and budget transparency, as well as
linked to other areas (civil service reform, transparency and accountability, etc.). At the same time, it was not
clear to what extent technically complex systems such as IFMIS are sustainable in the low capacity context of
Liberia. Relevance of this set of PAs is rated Satisfactory.

        1.5. Procurement. This area included 4 PAs that aimed at improving budget execution and
strengthening the procurement systems by implementing such measures as structuring a career track for

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



procurement specialists within civil service; and completing the technical review of draft implementing
regulations of the Public Procurement and Concession Commission (PPCC). Specific measures included
approving and publishing minimum standards and a procurement accreditation system to certify procurement
practitioners and transferring Financial Management Training School to the University of Liberia to enhance
the professionalization of financial management and procurement specialists. These measures were broadly
relevant (but only as first steps) for the objective of strengthening procurement systems that were almost
completely eroded during the civil war. At the same time, the PAs barely went beyond the more narrowly
defined objective of establishing career track for public procurement professionals, and the only PA related to
procurement regulations is very vague and non-specific. From this perspective, this area could have been
better placed within the Civil Service Reform area. PA relevance in this area is rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

Overall, the relevance of PAs for PDO 1 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PDO 2: Address key constraints to growth. This PDO was linked to Pillar 2 on economic transformation and
covered energy, agriculture and land reform.

           2.1. Energy. This area covered electricity sector which is a critical constraint to economic growth in
Liberia. There were 2 PAs, one of which was initially defined as a trigger in PRSDPO-I but later deferred to
PRSDPO-III. The program focused on improving the operational efficiency of Liberia Electricity Corporation
(LEC), reducing costs of operations and passing efficiency improvements to the consumers through lower
tariffs. The PA in PRSDPO-III included issuing a Petroleum Import License to LEC to import heavy fuel oil
(HFO) to generate electricity for public service with its own generating plants; and introducing an open and
competitive procurement process for the importation of HFO, mandating all procurement of fuels for LEC’s
generation of electricity to be done through an international competitive bidding process. The PA in
PRSDPO-IV aimed at ensuring efficient delivery of electricity services to users and included signing a
contract between LEC and a competitively selected firm to take over and improve the management of LEC.
The PAs were relevant, with a rating of Satisfactory.

          2.2. Agriculture and land reform. 3 PAs in this area included measures such as adopting a policy
framework for land tenure reform which clarifies land ownership rights related to public land and government-
owned land; establishing a collateral registry with a view to improving credit and expanding the rural
economy; operationalizing the Liberia Land Authority to improve land governance including land
administration and management. The PAs were marginally relevant to the topics of land reform and
improving agricultural credit and could have been defined in much stronger terms to help achieve the PDO. It
is not clear for example, how establishment of another government agency in an extremely weak capacity
environment would directly promote land reform. Policy reform measures were limited to adopting a
framework for reform only and it is not clear whether any concrete measures were taken in this regard
through the life of the series. The relevance rating for this area is Moderately Satisfactory.

Overall, relevance of PAs for achievement of the PDO on addressing key constraints to growth is rated
Satisfactory.

PDO 3: Improving human capital development. The initial focus of this PDO was on the education sector;
health was added at PRSDPO-III stage with the onslaught of the Ebola epidemic. Each sector included 2
PAs.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



        3.1. Education. 2 PAs in this area included measures for adopting a comprehensive, fully costed
implementation plan for teacher recruitment, training and deployment; and a framework for equitable
resource allocation by region and pupil’s poverty status. The PAs were only partially relevant for achieving
the much broader PDO on improving access to education. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.

          3.2. Health. 2 PAs in this area included measures to improve budget execution in the health sector:
conducting a half-year budget execution review; and approving a plan to improve efficiency in the use of
domestic and external resources for the health sector. How the PAs link to the PDO on improving access to
health is not clear, as increased spending does not necessarily translate into better outcomes by itself, and in
the environment of low capacity can be wasteful. The projects documents do not specify how this is linked
and rationale provided is weak. The PAs in this area would be a much better fit in the area on PFM, as they
have little, if any, connection to health outcomes. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The overall relevance rating for PAs intended to achieve the PDO 3 is Moderately Satisfactory.

The overall rating for relevance of PAs for the program is Moderately Satisfactory, derived from the below
ratings for each PDO PAs relevance.

Table 2. Rating of Relevance of Prior Actions



PDOs                               Areas                              PA relevance rating
                                   1.1. Transparency and
                                                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Accountability
                                   1.2. Civil Service Reform          Satisfactory
                                   1.3. Tax and Customs
                                                                      Satisfactory
                                   Administration
1. Strengthening governance
                                   1.4. Public Financial
                                                                      Satisfactory
                                   Management
                                   1.5. Procurement                   Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                   Overall PDO PA Rating              Moderately Satisfactory

                                   2.1. Energy                        Satisfactory
2. Addressing key constraints to
                                 2.2. Agriculture and Land            Moderately Satisfactory
growth
                                   Overall PDO PA Rating              Satisfactory

                                   3.1. Education                     Moderately Satisfactory
3. Improving human capital
                                   3.2. Health                        Moderately Unsatisfactory
development
                                   Overall PDO PA Rating              Moderately Satisfactory
Overall PRSDPO series:                                                     Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

This PRSDPO series contained a high number of indicators, reflecting the broad sectoral coverage of the
program.

PDO 1: Strengthening governance

1.1. Transparency and Accountability (Relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory). Key RIs in this area included:

    o Number of Currency Transaction Reports (CTR) and Suspicious Transaction Reports (STR) issued by
      the FIU. This RI was relevant for measuring PAs 1.1.3., 1.1.4., and 1.1.6. (see Table 1) and was
      monitored throughout the series (PRSDPO I-IV). However, its initial targets were underestimated and
      later revised upwards, in case of CTRs quite significantly (from 50 to 100,000), less so for STRs (from 10
      to 100). This indicates a design weakness in terms of poor quality of initial targeting.
    o Percentage of senior civil servants (directors and above) providing complete asset statement to LACC.
      This indicator was relevant was measuring PAs 1.1.5. and 1.1.7. and monitored in PRSDPO II-IV. The
      targets were unchanged, albeit somewhat conservative (from baseline of 56% to target 75%) and could
      have been designed with higher target in mind, given the fact that only senior level civil servants were
      targeted.

1.2. Civil Service Reform (Relevance rating Satisfactory). There was only one designated RI in this area –
percentage of civil servants in grades 1-10 paid according to new pay structure that was to measure PAs 1.2.1-
3. The indicator was relevant, consistent (monitored in PRSDPO II-IV), and properly targeted (from baseline of 0
to 100%). At the same time, only one indicator (related to pay structure only) in all PRSDPO series was
insufficient to properly measure success in reforming the civil service and reflect progress (or lack thereof) in
PAs.

1.3. Tax and Customs Administration (Relevance rating Satisfactory). There were two RIs in this area, tracked in
PRSDPO I, III and IV.

    o Percentage of ports where ASYCUDA is operational. This indicator was relevant to PA 1.3.1., but the
      target was revised significantly downwards, from 100% in PRSDPO-I to 80% in PRSDPO-III and
      eventually to 55% in PRSDPO-IV. The ICR explains revisions by lack of necessary funds for
      infrastructure investment, possibly an indicator of design weakness.
    o Share of total Customs revenue captured by ports where ASYCUDA is operational. This indicator was
      highly relevant to PA 1.3.1. and properly captured the intended objectives. At the same time, the baseline
      was already quite high (90%) and target revision from 100% to 95% somewhat diminished its eventual
      efficacy.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



1.4. Public Financial Management (Relevance rating Satisfactory). This area included three RIs, relevant to PAs
1.4.1-9, all of which were tracked throughout the series. 2 indicators were revised, one downwards, one
upwards, reflecting the achievement dynamics (according to the ICR):

     o Share of civil servants paid through the IFMIS solution – a relevant and properly targeted indicator, from
       baseline of 0 to full coverage (100%).
     o Number of Ministries and Agencies in which IFMIS is installed and operational. This indicator was
       relevant and well targeted. It was revised upwards reflecting progress on the ground, from 20+ to 50+,
       from baseline of 7.
     o Timing of submission of Annual Financial Statements to GAC (months after end of fiscal year). This
       indicator was also relevant and well-targeted. It was revised slightly downwards, reflecting new
       legislation requirements, from 3 to 4 months, with baseline of 12 months.

1.5. Procurement (Relevance rating Moderately Unsatisfactory). Two indicators in this area were tracked in
PRSDPO II-IV, one was revised upwards due to faster than expected progress (eventually also exceeded):

     o Number of trained and certified procurement analysts appointed in the civil service. This indicator
       measured PA 1.5.1., and was revised upwards from 100 to 120, with baseline of 0. Relevance of this
       indicator was weak, as number of trained and certified specialists – while an overall welcome
       development - does not generally reflect the improvement of procurement systems, particularly for an
       extended series. A better indicator would have been the share/volume of public procurement conducted
       through better (more transparent and competitive) practices.
     o Publication of annual Compliance Monitoring Report (CMR) by the PPCC. Similarly, this indicator,
       reflecting the fact of a publication, is not able to show any qualitative improvement in procurement
       practices. It was supposed to measure PA 1.5.3.

PDO 2: Addressing key constraints to growth (electricity and land)

2.1. Energy (Relevance rating Satisfactory). Three RIs in this area were consistent, tracked in PRSDPO II-IV,
with only one slight revision upwards, reflecting progress. Except for the indicator on cost of electricity, which
does not mention the issue of subsidy (or absence thereof), a others were relevant and well-targeted, reflecting
progress in important areas such as improved access to and reduced cost of electricity through use of more
efficient fuel. At the same time, the links of these RIs to the PAs (2.1.1.-2) are not obvious.

     o Cost of electricity to end users/KWH(US$) 0.55 - 0.40.
     o Urban access to electricity (number) 12,742 - 50,000 (revised upwards to 60,000)
     o Share of energy produced from high cost diesel, baseline of 100%, target 20%.

2.2. Agriculture and Land (Relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory). This area was covered by three RIs.
Indicators were somewhat relevant, but rather weak in measuring the achievement of the related PDO.

     o Share of commercial bank credit to the agriculture sector (%). This RI was supposed to measure
       improvement in access to finance in agriculture, reflecting the effectiveness of PA on establishing a
       collateral registry, but the target was very modest (from baseline of 3.7% to 5.5%) and modestly relevant
       in that sense, although it was tracked in three PRSDPOs (II-IV).
     o Land parcels with use and ownership rights recorded under new policy. This RI was introduced (but not
       defined in terms of target) at PRSDPO-I, and then reappears at PRSDPO-III, with target of 100 (from the
       baseline of 0). The RI was revised and reformulated at PRSDPO-IV (as below).


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



    o Legacy and new deeds digitized. This indicator replaced the earlier one on land parcels (according to
       ICR to better match the PA) and was introduced at the very end of the series in PRSDPO-IV. It was more
       ambitiously targeted (50,000 for legacy deeds and 10,000 for new deeds, from baseline of 0 for both),
       but represented a measurement of a much more modest action aimed at agriculture and land reform,
       perhaps reflecting a “low-hanging fruit” at the end of the series.

PDO 3: Improving human capital development (access to education and health)

3.1. Education (Relevance rating Moderately Satisfactory). Achievements in this area were measured by a set of
related indicators on school (primary, and junior and senior secondary) net enrollment rate, tracked in PRSDPO
II-IV. The indicators were well defined, targeted, and linked to the PDO on access to education. At the same
time, they were poorly associated with the PA on teacher recruitment, training and implementation. A better or
additional RI could have been one associated with teacher absenteeism, etc.

3.2. Health (Relevance rating Moderately Unsatisfactory). Two indicators related to health appeared only in
PRSDPO-III, and measured health budget execution rates (recurrent and capital). Their relevance to the PDO
on access to health services is weak, as increased spending in an extremely weak institutional capacity
environment easily could easily translate into more waste of resources and inefficiencies and can potentially
trigger more corrupt behavior in the absence of mitigating measures. The PDs and ICR do not explain how these
basically PFM-related indicators are linked to the overall PFM reform agenda supported by the series. Targets
are only partially defined (for example, recurrent budget execution rate aims at anything more than current rate
of 96% - which is already high.

Table 3. Rating of Relevance of Results Indicators

PDOs                              Areas                            Results Indicators relevance
                                  1.1. Transparency and
                                                                   Moderately satisfactory
                                  Accountability
                                  1.2. Civil Service Reform        Satisfactory
                                  1.3. Tax and Customs
                                                                   Satisfactory
                                  Administration
1. Strengthening governance
                                  1.4. Public Financial
                                                                   Satisfactory
                                  Management
                                  1.5. Procurement                 Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                  Overall PDO RI Rating            Moderately Satisfactory

                                  2.1. Energy                      Satisfactory
2. Addressing key constraints to
                                 2.2. Agriculture and Land         Moderately Satisfactory
growth
                                  Overall PDO RI Rating            Satisfactory

                                  3.1. Education                   Moderately Satisfactory
3. Improving human capital
development
                                  3.2. Health                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



                                               Overall PDO RI Rating              Moderately Satisfactory
    Overall PRSDPO series RIs relevance:                                        Moderately Satisfactory


  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthening governance.

               Rationale
               Efficacy rating: Moderately Satisfactory. This PDO was spread across many diverse (often interconnected)
               technical areas. In some areas relevance of PAs and RIs was uneven, thus making it difficult to connect inputs
               and outputs to achievement of results. The ICR aggregates the number of RIs by level of achievement,
               concluding with a rating of MS on that basis (11 RIs, 5 achieved, 5 partially achieved, 2 not achieved), which
               does not necessarily provide a fully nuanced picture. In addition, the ICR breaks the results in this area in two
               blocks: procurement and everything else, which is not representative of the relative effort spent in each area.
               This validation revisits each specific area and accords overall rating based on relative importance of each of
               them within the series as a whole (areas such as PFM and Tax and Customs in particular), reflected in
               supporting PAs and other efforts (ASA), as detailed in the PD.

               1.1. Transparency and accountability: despite the broad title, the focus of PAs was on AML/CFT-related
               regulations and disclosure of civil servants’ assets through the LACC. Progress was tracked with the help of
               two relevant and measurable indicators (one was drastically revised upwards based on actuals). In both cases
               targets were achieved. Overall, it is not clear however, how these new regulations and asset disclosure
               affected overall transparency and accountability situation in the country, and the ICR has no information on
               that. Efficacy rating: Substantial.

               1.2. Civil Service Reform: similar to the previous area, its focus was narrow, and the PAs covered reforming
               the civil service pay structure only, with one RI. Despite being included in all PRSDPOs as a trigger and also
               as a PA, the target of 100% coverage was not achieved, with actual result of 4.2%. Efficacy rating: Negligible.

               1.3. Tax and Customs Administration: this area PAs focused on rollout and operationalization of ASYCUDA in
               all ports of the country, plus updating customs regulations. Two RIs in this area were revised downwards in the
               aftermath of Ebola crisis, one of them quite significantly. Both were only partially achieved. Since the more
               important RI of total volume of customs revenue passing through ASYCUDA operated ports was rather high
               93% (albeit from already high baseline of 90%), the final efficacy can be considered positive. Efficacy rating:
               Substantial.




                                                                                                                Page 16 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



1.4. Public Financial Management (PFM): interventions in this area focused on introduction and
operationalization of IFMIS and timeliness of financial reporting. These actions were relevant for achieving
progress in PFM overall, and results in some areas were impressive for weak capacity environment such as
Liberia. All 3 RIs were well defined and consistently tracked, with one of results not achieved (share of civil
servants paid through IFMIS, target 100%, actual 60%), and two others achieved (timely reporting and
introduction of IFMIS in ministries). Efficacy rating: Substantial.
1.5. Procurement: interventions focused on introducing a career track for procurement officers within the civil
service, and adoption of reform-oriented regulations. Out of 2 RIs targets in this area, one (publication of a
compliance report) was not achieved, the other - number of trainees - exceeded the target. The PAs and RIs
were only partially relevant, as the number of trained specialists does not necessarily indicate progress in the
area of procurement. Efficacy rating: Modest.

Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Addressing constraints to growth.



Rationale
Efficacy Rating: Moderately Satisfactory. This PDO focused on infrastructure (energy and transport – the
latter dropped early on) and land reform. Both areas were critical for addressing constraints to growth, with
situation in energy (electricity) particularly abysmal. Overall, results were better defined and achieved in
electricity sector.

2.1. Energy: PRSDPO series interventions in energy identified relevant areas for interventions and came up
with generally realistic targets. It is understood that results in this area were achieved through a much broader
set of actions and interventions, beyond the scope of the areas supported by the series, but nevertheless it is
possible to see the contribution of the PRSDPO-supported PAs in this regard. RIs were well-defined and
tracked consistently. All three RIs were achieved (one partially, after it was revised upwards – initial target
was exceeded). Efficacy rating: Substantial.

2.2. Land and agriculture: PAs in this area pursued land reform through regulatory and institutional reform,
including establishment of Liberia Land Authority and collateral registry. The two RIs were only marginally
relevant to the PDO. According to the ICR, one RI was revised, but in reality it was dropped and replaced by
another RI (from “land parcels used and recorded under new policy” to “number of deeds digitized”) – more
modest in its ambition and relevance to the PDO, perhaps reflecting the difficulties in progressing the land
reform. The second RI (on share of commercial bank lending to agriculture sector, baseline 3.7, target 5.5
and actual 4.8%) was very modest as well and its link to PAs was not obvious. Efficacy rating: Modest.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 24
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)




                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory



                  OBJECTIVE 3
                  Objective
                  Improving human capital development

                  Rationale
                  Efficacy rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory. This PDO was revised halfway through the series by adding health
                  sector (to education), with the onslaught of Ebola epidemic. Overall, education PAs and RIs appear better
                  defined, more relevant and eventually more efficacious than in health sector.

                  3.1. Education: PAs focused on teacher recruitment and resource allocation in the education sector, while the
                  RIs measured school attendance at various levels. The RIs were well-defined and measurable, yet the link
                  between the RIs, PAs, and the PDO was not clear, as teacher recruitment is just one of possible measures to
                  improve school attendance and overall access. Nevertheless, based on relevance of RIs to the PDO, and
                  achievement of 3 out of 4 targets that were consistently tracked throughout the series, the efficacy rating is
                  Substantial.

                  3.2. Health: this area was included at PRSDPO-III stage to mitigate the negative impact of the Ebola
                  epidemic. However, neither the PAs (focused on improving health budget execution) not the RIs (2 RIs,
                  measuring health budget execution rate) were directly related to the PDO. One of RIs was not achieved, and
                  the other has no information provided in ICR. No information on access to health and its dynamic is provided
                  in ICR. Efficacy rating: Negligible.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Overall achievement of objectives for this DPL series is rated Moderately Satisfactory, a sum of ratings of
efficacy of all three PDOs. The objective on human capital development (health and education) was not well
defined and many results were either incomplete of impossible to assess with the information provided.
However, taking into account negative factors such as severe capacity constraints and exogenous shocks
(Ebola outbreak and commodity price collapse), this rating does not diminish many positive achievements,


                                                                                                                  Page 18 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



which, together with some of the measures taken towards achievement of results in the future, can be assessed
as steps in the right direction.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

These series aimed at helping the country to achieve important development objectives in several diverse and
complex technical areas through an extended period of time that also coincided with the Ebola epidemic halfway
through the program. The series were more successful in some specific subareas related to public sector
governance (for example, transparency and accountability – introducing measures to promote AML/CFT
activities; PFM – introducing IFMIS in key ministries and expediting financial reporting; and energy – reducing
cost and expanding coverage of electricity services). The series were less successful in designing and
monitoring a set of relevant actions and achieving results in such areas as agriculture financing and land reform,
procurement reform, civil service reform (introduction of revised pay structure), and access to health services. In
some cases, despite some positive results, their attribution to the measures supported by the series was not
clear (for example, education – school attendance). The table below summarizes the ratings for overall outcome
by aggregating ratings for PA Relevance and Achievement of Objectives/Efficacy, described in detail in earlier
sections. The overall outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory reflects many positives, as the program was
able to promote positive results in several critical areas in an environment of low institutional capacity and an
ongoing outbreak of an Ebola epidemic.

Table 4: Summary Outcome rating

PDOs                  Areas                              Efficacy             PA Relevance Outcome
                      1.1. Transparency and
                                                         Substantial          MS
                      Accountability
                      1.2. Civil Service Reform          Negligible           S
                      1.3. Tax and Customs
                                                         Substantial          S
1. Strengthening      Administration
governance
                      1.4. Public Financial ManagementSubstantial             S

                      1.5. Procurement                   Modest               MU
                                                         Moderately           Moderately       Moderately
                      Overall PDO 1
                                                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory     Satisfactory
2. Addressing key
                      2.1. Energy                        Substantial          S
constraints to growth

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)




                      2.2. Agriculture and Land         Modest               MS
                                                        Moderately                            Moderately
                      Overall PDO 2                                          Satisfactory
                                                        Satisfactory                          Satisfactory
                      3.1. Education                    Substantial          MS
3. Improving human
                    3.2. Health                         Negligible           MU
capital development
                                                        Moderately           Moderately       Moderately
                      Overall PDO 3
                                                        Unsatisfactory       Satisfactory     Unsatisfactory
Overall PRSDPO series                                   MS                   MS               MS
a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR is quite candid in its assessment of elevated risks to sustainability of development outcomes, which are
many in the case of Liberia: exogenous shocks, such as the Ebola outbreak; the sharp drop in global commodity
prices; political risks associated with elections; lack of political will to implement wage bill reforms; ongoing
governance challenges (delayed submission of financial reports to GAC); increasing revenue losses in the
electricity sector, etc. The ICR mentions among mitigating measures the Government’s agreement to a new
IMF program, and several WB investment projects on governance and agriculture. In the light of the above risks
and ongoing negative trends, this review suggests elevating the ICR assessment of the risks from Substantial to
High.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The project was clearly overburdened with multiple components and sectors, and its technical sophistication
(e.g. introduction of IFMIS, ASYCUDA, pay reform, etc.) was too ambitious for the already overstretched and
low capacity within the public sector in Liberia, which was later exacerbated by the Ebola outbreak. The Bank
should have anticipated this in the design of the series. A shorter and more focused series would have been
more appropriate given well known constraints. The program included three supplements, which possibly
created an unwarranted expectation that more supplemental budget support would be forthcoming without
additional progress on reform. The ICR claims that design of the series integrated lessons from the
implementation of previous operations (Reengagement and Reform Support Program I-IV), as well as other
WBG interventions such as the Economic Governance and Institutional Reform Project (EGIRP), the Integrated
Public Financial Management Reform Project (IPFMRP), the Land Sector Reform Project; and the new three-


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



year arrangement with the IMF under the ECF (2012) – and that these lessons were reflected in the choice of
prior actions. The project documents identified these lessons in considerable detail, including the importance of
such factors as ownership and political economy of reforms; focus, selectivity, and sequencing of reforms;
capacity, etc.

The design of the program was underpinned by the considerable analytical work on a range of important policy
issues (PEFA, PEMFAR, Growth Diagnostics, PER in HD sectors, Poverty Note), and benefited from sector
dialogue covering reforms in the agricultural sector and the financial system. The results chain described in the
project documents was uneven: some areas lacked clear and obvious links between PDOs, prior actions and
RIs.

The initial assessment of risks to achievement of PDOs (moderate) was excessively optimistic. Although it is
well understood that the Bank could not predict the Ebola outbreak and downward swing in global commodity
prices, the overall FCV context and low institutional capacity warranted more elevated risks and more extensive
efforts at mitigation, in addition to the IMF program and WBG investment projects. The operation grew in
complexity despite the severe stress to the government systems introduced by Ebola outbreak half-way through
the series. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank played an important and positive role in helping the Government to sustain reforms during the Ebola
outbreak, including several rounds of supplemental and additional financing. Many important reforms, such as
better financial reporting, energy sector measures, and the introduction of IFMIS were continued throughout the
series. Program implementation was boosted by several concurrent activities, including investment projects,
technical assistance and capacity building (EGIRP, IPFMRP, the Land Sector Reforms Project) and cooperation
with the IMF during the five-year arrangement under the ECF. PRSDPO-I faced significant delays between
approval and disbursement due to misunderstanding that could have been dealt with a better grasp of political
economy peculiarities in the country. Triggers contained in the series were incorporated into PAs as planned,
with very few minor deviations. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)




Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with Moderately Satisfactory rating for design,
reflecting somewhat complex design of the series given the extremely low capacity environment; and Moderately
Satisfactory for implementation, as despite overly complex design of the series, the Bank played an important
role in helping the Government to sustain some of the reforms despite the severe external shocks of commodity
prices and Ebola outbreak.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The program contained measures with possible direct impact on poverty and welfare (access to cheaper
electricity, improved access to education). Nevertheless, the poverty level in the country has been estimated to
have increased during the program implementation, largely due to exogenous shocks of Ebola outbreak and
commodity price fluctuation.



b. Environmental

The program did not contain any measures that could have had direct negative impacts on the environment.
Some of the intended land reforms (tenure) could potentially have led to more sustainable land use. Similarly,
improved efficiency as a result of energy sector reforms could eventually lead to reduced use of coal. These
results remain to be seen.



c. Gender

The program did not refer to any gender-related goals or components neither in PDs nor in the ICR. References
were made to Liberia being one of the last in the world on gender parity indices, and that the AfT referred to
improving situation as one of its strategic goals. HD-related PDO includes RIs on equal access to education.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



The ICR is generally thorough and candid in its assessment of the program. It provides detailed description of
the country context, including exogenous shocks which the country went through, and which affected the design
and implementation of the program. The report provides detailed sector context overview, describing the main
challenges which the program was supposed to help mitigate. Description of program pillars and areas provides
generally enough details, although the last pillar on human development describes (very briefly) only the
education area, without mentioning health.

The ICR does reflect on the changes made in PDOs, pillars, and RIs, but could have done so in more detail, as
some of these changes and inconsistencies are not mentioned. In a few cases, there was difference in triggers
and PAs, which the ICR did not track. The section on relevance of PAs contains enough details, is well-argued,
and notes a few weaknesses (agriculture) - although in some cases it omits them as well (e.g. procurement, land
reform, health). Similarly, the efficacy section notes a few but not all shortcomings on relevance, measurability,
and appropriateness of RIs. Table 5 provides a detailed account of the evolution and achievement of RIs, with a
few shortcomings: for example, there is no information on health budget execution rate, and in a couple of cases
the assessment of being “partially achieved” appears too generous (civil service, agriculture credit). The analysis
of efficacy is overall acceptable, with some exceptions, such as health, land reform, and procurement. The ICR
provides sufficient information on other outcomes and impacts (poverty, environment), with the exception of
gender – which could have been mentioned particularly in the context of the HD pillar. ICR assessment of risks
to development outcomes includes a criticism of overly optimistic initial assessment, although this review finds
that it could have been even more conservative in this regard. The ICR includes 4 broadly relevant and valuable
lessons, although some of them could have better nuanced. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

This review broadly concurs with the 4 lessons from ICR, and offers additional suggestions:

Lesson 1: Importance of sustained measures for good fiduciary practices to be ingrained in government
operations, which also underscores the need for a thorough and systematic ex ante risk assessment of risks to
achieving development objectives and articulation of mitigation measures. Excessively overburdening the fragile
and low capacity system with complex technical reforms (IPSAS-based reporting, introduction of ASYCUDA and

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-PRSC-I (FY13) (P127317)



IFMIS, payroll reform, etc.) is fraught with major risks to sustainability and the credibility of reforms in the long
term, once there is no direct donor support and hand-holding.

Lesson 2: Need for good communication with all stakeholders from the start to avoid preparation and
implementation delays. At the beginning of the series Parliament was not fully informed that the budget support
was in the form of an IDA credit and not an IDA grant and needed additional assistance on how to ratify such
agreements, which took additional 11 months between the Board approval and disbursement. In addition, an
extended and sizable program such as this series would have benefited from a better upfront understanding of
the political economy risks and scenarios.

Lesson 3: Need to keep the range of policy areas flexible, to better respond to exogenous shocks such as the
Ebola crisis, which occurred after the start of the series and highlighted the weaknesses in Liberia’s health
care delivery system.

Lesson 4: Capacity for reform in countries like Liberia, requires heavy TA to support a successful reform
program. The TA also encouraged stronger government commitment and willingness to reform. The key TA
support was particularly helpful in the areas of PFM, land reform and in electricity sector reforms. At the same
time, ongoing TA support for implementation (absolutely critical in an environment like Liberia) also needs to be
accompanied by strong and clearly targeted capacity building measures and indicators to ensure sustainability
of achievements.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
Given the complexity and length of this programmatic series, including through the provision of supplemental
financing, a more thorough assessment through a project performance assessment report (PPAR) is
recommended. This is particularly relevant today since this series was implemented during an outbreak of
highly infectious disease, and lessons learned could be useful for designing operations during and after the
COVID-19 pandemic. A PPAR could also answer some sector-specific questions on relevance and efficacy that
are difficult or impossible to address at the ICRR stage (energy, education, health, etc.). Another important
aspect that a PPAR could address, would be the appropriateness of highly complex multi-sector series as an
instrument to deal with critical developmental challenges in a low capacity environment. At the same time, the
decision whether to undertake a PPAR should take into account the ongoing pressures on the country team
related to COVID-19, and capacity constraints within the Government.




                                                                                                         Page 24 of 24
