     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022200

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P126856                                    Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82340                                 31-Dec-2018                                      150,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2013                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       150,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11)
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve key public services in participating small towns of
   Jiangxi Province through improvements to prioritized infrastructure."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Transport Infrastructure Improvement (US$100.39 million at appraisal, US$106.01 million, actual).
   This component would finance (i) the construction and upgrading of 76 km urban and country roads in
   seven selected counties and the construction of greenbelt and bus stops; and (ii) the construction of a new
   urban central bus station, including the main terminal building, maintenance facilities, and administration
   building in Gongqingcheng City.

   In the 2016 restructuring, four sub-projects in two counties were replaced by five new sub-projects (see
   Dates below). At the same restructuring, the bus station construction in Gongqingcheng City was dropped.

   2. Water Resources Management Infrastructure Improvement (US$45.02 million at appraisal,
   US$37.61 million, actual). This component would finance (i) flood protection and drainage systems in five
   selected counties; (ii) construction of a 10,000 m3 per day water treatment plant and associated water
   supply facilities in Luxi County; (iii) an integrated water management and flood control sub-project in
   Jinggangshan City that would construct about 7.8 km of wastewater and storm water collection pipes; (iv)
   construction and restoration of 160 hectares of wetlands along the Mianjiang River in Ruijin City.

   In the 2016 restructuring, the construction of the water treatment plant in Luxi County and two flood control
   sub-projects were replaced by a new Mianjiang River Improvement flood control sub-project in Ruijin City.
   This same sub-project, however, was later dropped in the 2018 restructuring.

   Component 3. Project Management and Capacity Building (cost at appraisal US$4.21 actual Cost
   US$6.00 million). This component would support: Institutional strengthening and capacity building by
   providing technical and management training, technical assistance to develop transport sector plan for three
   counties and flood management plans for two counties; and developing a smart transport management
   system in Gongqingcheng City. Office equipment would also be financed. In addition, this component would
   finance project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), including a modern, computer-based
   management information system (MIS) for adoption by all provincial and county project management offices
   (PMOs). This component would also finance consultants to undertake detailed designs and engineering
   works supervision.

   In the 2016 restructuring, several overseas study tours and procurement of some office equipment were
   cancelled; and replaced by additional equipment for the smart transport system in Gongqingcheng City.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was US$325.89 million including a loan of US$150 million. The loan
   was fully disbursed.

   Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financed this project with a
   loan of US$150 million.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



   Borrower Contribution: The government committed to contribute US$175.89 million at appraisal. This was
   reduced to US$151.3 million during the 2016 restructuring and further reduced to US$141.77 million during
   the 2018 restructuring (see in Dates below). At closing, the government disbursed US$109.84 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 20, 2013 and made effective on July 19, 2013. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was conducted on September 25, 2015. The loan was originally scheduled to close on
   December 31, 2018 but was extended by12 months, to close on December 31, 2019. There were three
   level 2 restructurings:

         On January 22, 2016 to reallocate resources among disbursement categories.
         On December 21, 2016, to (i) drop one and reduce targets for outcome and intermediate outcomes;
          (ii) revise components and associated costs due to realized cost savings from competitively bid
          contracts and change in urban master plans; (iii) reduce government contributions from the original
          US$175.89 million to US$151.3 million; (iv) amend the financing plan; and (v) extend the loan
          closing date by 12 months, from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019.
                 o The following targets were reduced: (1) direct beneficiaries of newly built or rehabilitated
                    roads, reduced from 491,000 to 478,000 persons; (2) direct beneficiaries of flood protection
                    reduced from 141,000 to 134,000; (3) length of newly built/rehabilitated roads from 76 to 65
                    km; (4) travel time saved from 157 to 152 minutes; (5) length of strengthened dikes from 36
                    to 35 km; and (6) increase in the area protected from floods from 22,400 to 20,200 km2. The
                    following target was dropped - 10,000 cubic meter a day from Luxi County water treatment
                    plant because the county updated its master plan (2015-2000) and self-financed a larger
                    capacity water treatment plant.
                 o The following components were revised: (1) under the transport sector, 4 roads in
                    Gongqingcheng City and Nanfeng were replaced with 5 new roads in Dexing, Luxi,
                    Gongqingcheng, and Yifeng, and a central bus station dropped after Gongqingcheng City
                    updated its master plan in 2014 to follow the central government's development strategy
                    toward greener growth. (2) Under the water sector, the Yuanhe River Flood Protection, Luxi
                    Urban Water, and the Mianjiang River East Dike flood protection sub-projects were replaced
                    by the Mianjiang River Improvement flood control sub-project.
         On June 23, 2018 to (i) further reduce the already reduced targets in the Results Framework; (ii)
          revise costs and components; and (iii) reallocate resources. No changes were made to the
          indicators.
                 o The following targets were reduced a second time: (1) direct beneficiaries of flood protection.
                    further reduced from 134,000 to 100,000 persons; (2) length of strengthened dikes further
                    reduced from 35 to 29.53 km; and (3) increase in the area protected from floods further
                    reduced from 20,200 to 17,052 km2.
                 o The following component was dropped - the Mianjiang River Improvement flood control sub-
                    project added during the second restructuring - because detailed design revealed
                    unwelcome impact on a high cultural value bridge and non-compliance with Bank safeguards
                    if pursued.




3. Relevance of Objectives




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



Rationale
China has been rapidly urbanizing and expected to reach 70 percent urbanization by 2020 from a level of
48 percent at appraisal. Between 2000 and 2030, 300 million people would be migrating from rural to urban
areas and at least 200 million off-farm jobs would be created. Smaller towns would absorb about 40 percent
of the country's rural-urban migrants. However, these small towns had a few development problems in that
there was a lack of regional development plans and there was also weak coordination with social and
economic development plans and land use plans. These small towns needed infrastructure investments in
flood protection roads, water supply, wastewater treatment and they lacked financing channels for these
infrastructure needs. China selected the poorer Jiangxi Province to demonstrate a new development
approach outlined in its 12th Five Year Plan (FYP) for small town development. In 2009, the State Council
approved a national level development plan for the Poyang Lake Region - the Poyang Lake Ecological
Economic Plan. A Regional level Master Plan for the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Development Zone
was prepared for 2010-2015 to cover 18 special sector specific master plans. This project supported the
small town development for the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone.

The PDO was relevant to the country's national priorities noted in the 13th FYP (2016–2020) and China’s
National Plan on New Urbanization (2014–2020). The 13th FYP set new urbanization as a national priority,
promoting small town development, and enhancing urban infrastructure. In addition, the 13th FYP also
highlighted the importance of integrated water resources management in the Poyang Lake Basin,
consistent with the water resources management interventions in this project. The National Plan on New
Urbanization (2014–2020) included building more people-friendly and sustainable cities and providing basic
urban services to all residents. The plan emphasized the need to enhance public services in small towns,
including water supply, wastewater treatment, transport, solid waste management, and power supply.

The PDO was also relevant to the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for China for
FY2020–2025. This project provided support to the CPF's two engagement areas. The first, under the
engagement area of Promoting Greener Development, the project would contribute to reducing water
pollution and strengthening sustainable natural resource management. The second, under the engagement
area of Sharing the Benefit of Growth, the project would promote shared development by geographically
focusing on less developed regions and small towns.

The Bank had previously worked with small towns in China like the Sichuan Small Towns Development
(P110632, closed in December 2016) and the China Integrated Economic Development of Small Towns
(P118597, closed in December 2018). Other Bank supported urban-rural projects include the Chongqing
Small Cities Infrastructure Improvement Project, Sichuan Small Towns Development Project, the
Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project, Ningbo Countryside Development Project, Agricultural
Technology Project, and Jilin Agricultural Product Safety and Quality Project. These previous projects in
China were testing grounds for new ideas and reforms. Lessons from these projects were shared with other
municipalities in China, especially in lagging regions (PAD, paragraph 8).

However, while there was a clear alignment between the project's development objectives and the
country and Bank strategies, the relevance of the objectives was pitched at a level that does not adequately
reflect a potential solution to a development problem. A shortcoming here was that the objectives were not
defined such that its achievements would be plausibly traceable to improvements envisioned to arise from
"improved key public services." Focusing on "improved key public services" alone was not outcome focused
and did not help in understanding what development results were expected as a consequence of the
project, whether those results were economic growth or increased income (through smoother transport


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



               systems), improved health, or other. These may be longer term targets but tracking them and identifying
               them was an important aspect of a successful development operation. The PDO formulation was kept
               purposely vague, did not specify what kind of public services were to be improved, even though the sectors
               were identifiable from the proposed outcome indicators at appraisal, nor was it changed, clarified, or
               strengthened at restructuring.

               In summary, the relevance of objective is rated substantial based on the continuing relevance of the
               objectives to the country's small cities development objectives and relevance to the World Bank's current
               partnership goals.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve key public services in participating small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to
                             prioritized infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The overall Theory of Change (TOC) for this project outlined that activities in transport,
                             water resources management, and capacity building would lead to outputs that would improve these services,
                             which in turn would lead to sustainable and resilient small town development. The TOCs for each sector are
                             outlined below:

                             Transport

                             Infrastructure construction and rehabilitation (of roads, bus station) was expected to lead to the output of
                             constructed or rehabilitated roads and this would, in turn, lead to the outcome of reduced travel time. In the
                             first restructuring, the bus station was dropped and four roads in two counties were replaced by five roads.
                             Targets were reduced for both outputs and outcome.

                             Water resources management

                             Activities such as strengthening dikes, constructing urban pumping stations, constructing access roads in
                             dikes, constructing cross-dike structures, and landscaping along rivers in 5 counties were expected to lead to
                             outputs such as a sufficient length of dikes that would lead to the outcome of improved flood protection. The
                             construction of wastewater and storm water collection pipes, together with the flood control sub-project
                             in Jinggangshan was expected to lead to an integrated water management. Construction and restoring
                             wetlands integrated to two wastewater treatment facilities and sewer pipes would lead to improved drainage
                             system and wastewater management. In the first restructuring, the only water treatment plant was dropped

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



and two flood protection sub-projects in two counties was replaced by one flood control sub-project. Targets
were dropped and reduced for both outputs and outcome.

Capacity building

Training, overseas study tours, technical assistance, and equipment would serve as inputs to transportation
and flood management plans and to pilot a smart transportation management in one city. The underlying
assumption here was that training would automatically lead to uptake of new knowledge and a change in
behavior by those who received training and thus also to improved performance. There were no related
outcome indicators for capacity building.

OUTPUTS under the TRANSPORT services:

The following targets were exceeded or achieved:

      Hengfeng County, Dexing City, and Gongqingcheng City prepared integrated transport plans, which
       identified priorities and recommended sector policy and regulations (original target 3)
      2,617 project officials and staff at the provincial and county levels participated in 41 domestic and
       overseas training, workshops, and study tours (original target 2,000)
      All local government provided budgets for operation and maintenance (O&M) of completed
       infrastructure projects.

The following targets were not achieved:

      Central bus station in Gongqingcheng City was not completed and later dropped (original target 1
       central bus station) because of changes to the master plan.
      Constructed 10 roads equivalent to 47.2 km (original target 14 road projects equivalent to 76 km)

OUTCOMES under TRANSPORT services:

The following targets were exceeded or achieved :

      565,850 residents benefited from access to new built or rehabilitated roads (original target 491,000).
       The Task Team confirmed in its December 30, 2020 email to IEG that the implementing entity
       conducted a census to count the number of beneficiaries. The increase was due to the influx of new
       residents to the area attracted by the new schools, hospitals constructed outside the project to
       accompany the project-funded roads (ICR, paragraph 30(a)).
      Travel time saved 160.9 minutes (original target 157 minutes). According to the ICR travel time saved
       was measured for each road sub-project following the methodology established at appraisal. Travel
       time for minibuses and cars were measured from starting to destination points at designated speeds.
       Results were compared to corresponding time before the project.
      The Dexing and Gongqingcheng integrated transport plans were incorporated into their respective
       13th FYPs. Gongqingcheng City self-financed the construction and rehabilitation of some of the
       priority roads from its plans.
      The project resolved bottleneck issues and improved connections to national networks.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



            o In Yifeng County, where the new Yuanming Bridge for motorized vehicles (previously only a
               small pedestrian bridge) over the Yexi River improved access between the old town and
               the new urban Development Zone in the south.
            o The ‘Nanmen Area Trunk Avenue’ sub-project in Dexing County established the link between
               the new urban area in Nanmen Area and the old downtown.
            o The ‘Yiyuan New District Road Network’ in Ganxian County linked the Yiyuan new
               development area with the old county and surrounding villages.
            o The ‘Chengfu Road’ sub-project in Hengfeng County linked the new industrial park and the
               urban areas and improved the daily commute of the workers in the industrial park. the
               new/rehabilitated roads improved access to other essential services, such as schools and
               hospitals.
            o The road subproject in Yifeng County improved public access to the emergency services of the
               Yifeng County Hospital and to the Chongwen Middle School.
            o The project facilitated around 230,000 passengers in Dexing to enjoy high-speed rail service in
               2017 and the number increased to 300,000 in 2018
            o The project connected Yifeng County to the No. 320 National Road and the Menghua Railway
               and enhanced the link between Luxi County and the No. 320 National Road.
            o The new/rehabilitated roads improved access to other essential services, such as schools and
               hospitals.
                     The road subproject in Yifeng County improved public access to the emergency
                       services of the Yifeng County Hospital and to the Chongwen Middle School.
                     the road subproject in Jiujiang County created new access to the Third Middle School,
                       the First Elementary School, and the Jiujiang County Hospital to solve the traffic
                       congestion issues.
                     It also established the fire lane in the project area to ensure the access of fire protection
                       services in the event of an emergency.
      As part of the planned technical assistance, the Gongqingcheng pilot smart transport management
       and early warning system helped detect responsible parties for traffic accidents, assisted in the search
       for missing persons, and provided evidence for criminal cases since 2017. The city government
       used its own funds to expand the smart accident investigation subsystem from 25 percent of the city to
       cover the entire city.
      The Jiangxi Provincial Project Management Office conducted a beneficiary satisfaction survey in April
       2019 across all 11 participating counties with 609 households, including 167 low-income households
       and 335 women. Respondents indicated 83.4 percent were highly satisfied and 16.6 percent satisfied
       with the improved public transport services supported by the project. The Task Team indicated in their
       December 30, 2020 email to IEG that "the task team vetted the questionnaire, the survey methods
       and procedures, The team interviewed some beneficiaries in different project counties during
       supervision missions and noted that their feedback was consistent with the reported survey results."
       The 100 percent satisfaction of the beneficiaries was an unusual metric.

OUTPUTS under the FLOOD CONTROL services

The following targets were achieved:

      Jiujiang County and Jinggangshan City completed its integrated urban flood control and management
       plans, identifying infrastructure and institutional gaps in flood management and recommended actions
       to enhance natural disaster management capacity (original target 2)

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)




      Completed the Jinggangshan Longjiang River Flash Flood Early Warning System design and
       development study.
      Local governments provided budgets for agencies designated to provide O&M of project-funded flood
       control sub-projects.

The following targets were not achieved:

      Strengthened 29.35 km of dikes (original target 36 km)
            o In Jinxian County, located next to the Qinglan Lake, the project completed eight dikes to form a
              closed dike look around the lake to increase the flood protection level in Jinxian.
            o In Jiujiang County, the project constructed and rehabilitated dikes and cleaned the Shahe
                River channel.
              o In Jinggangshan County, along the Longjiang River, the project constructed new dikes and
                rubber dams, along with a flash flood warning system to manage the floods.
      An area of 17,680 km2 was protected from floods (original target 22,400 km2)
      Construction of a 10,000 m3 per day water treatment plant sub-project and associated water supply
       facilities in Luxi County were dropped.

OUTCOMES under the FLOOD CONTROL services

The following targets were achieved:

      Juijiang County Integrated Urban Flood Management Plan and Jinggangshan City and Longjiang
       River Flash Flood Early Warning System and development study established a flash flood early
       warning system with Longjiang River basin hydrologic model to simulate the dynamics of flash floods,
       optimize the dam/reservoir operation, and provide flood early warning services.
      The Jinggangshan Flood Management Office operated the flash flood early warning system and
       ensured timely evacuation of local residents and reduced some RMB 2 million of losses in the 2019
       floods in Longjiang River basin.
      A significant flood estimated to be close to 1 in 10 year flood occurred in Longjiang River Basin with
       very little related loss in Longshi Town from the flood. The flood protection level (design flood) for the
       beneficiary areas of both the Shahe River in Jiujiang Countyand the Qinglan Lake areas in Jinxian
       County was raised from 1-in-5 years to 1-in-20 year floods while that for the Longshi Town with a
       population of 50,000 in Jingangshan City was raised from 1-in-5 year to 1-in-10 year floods.
      According to a beneficiary survey, 82.2 percent indicated high satisfaction and 17.8 percent indicated
       satisfaction with project investments in flood control.

OUTPUTS under the WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT services

The following target was almost achieved:

      Reduced annual wastewater flow into Poyang Lake from the Mianjiang River Tributary to 18,666,000
       m3 (original target 18,800,000 m3)

The following target was not achieved:



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)




      Increased area of improved wetlands to 128.63 hectares (original target 160 hectares)

OUTCOMES under the WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT services

      The Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD, a measure of the amount of oxidizable pollutants in effluent)
       entering the Poyang Lake was reduced by 110.25 tons (original target 40 tons). This outcome was
       due to the influx of new residents moving to the project areas as part of new town development (ICR,
       paragraph 39(e)).
      The beneficiary satisfaction survey showed that 84.9 percent of respondents were highly satisfied, and
       15.1 percent were satisfied with the improved wastewater management services.

In summary, the efficacy of the project to achieve the original objective is rated modest because most of the
original targets in outputs and outcomes were not achieved. Planned outputs such as the central bus station,
several roads, flood control sub-projects, and water treatment plant were dropped.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised.

Revised Rationale
The Theory of Change was not revised. The 2016 restructuring introduced changes to the indicators under
the transport services and water resources management sectors. Gongqingcheng City revised its urban
master plan in 2014 to follow the shift in the country's development strategy toward green and sustainable
growth. As a result, four road sub-projects in two counties were replaced by five new road sub-projects in four
counties and the construction of the bus station in Gongqingcheng City was dropped. The PDO level target
outcome indicator of direct beneficiaries of roads was reduced from 491,000 to 478,000 residents or a 2.6
percent reduction. The target values of the following intermediate indicator targets were also reduced (i)
length of newly/built upgraded roads (in kilometers) from 76 to 65 km. (ii) travel time saved (in minutes per
trip) from 157 to 152 minutes.

Under the water resources management sector, Luxi County developed a new urban plan (2015-2030), which
included a larger capacity urban water treatment plant. As a result, the construction of the only water
treatment plant sub-project in Luxi County was dropped. Two flood control sub-projects in two counties were
replaced by the Mianjiang River Improvement flood control sub-project in Ruijin City. The PDO target
outcome indicator was reduced: (i) the number of population protected from flooding from the original target of
141,000 to 134,000. The intermediate outcome indicator for daily water supply capacity (in m3) was
cancelled. The following intermediate outcome indicators were reduced: (i) length of dike strengthened (km)
from 36 to 35 km; and (ii) increase in flood protected area from 22,400 km2 to 20,200 km2.

The risk in the original TOC that the priorities established by the existing plans could change materialized
during implementation with the updating of urban master plans resulting in changes in outcome indicators.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



REVISED OUTPUTS under the TRANSPORT services

The following target was achieved:

      66.1 km of newly built roads (revised target 65 km)

REVISED OUTCOMES under TRANSPORT services

The following targets were exceeded:

      160.9 minutes of travel time per trip was saved (revised target 152 minutes)
      An increase of 565,850 residents with access to newly built or rehabilitated roads (revised target
       491,000)

REVISED OUTPUTS under FLOOD CONTROL services

The following targets were not achieved:

      Strengthened 29.35 km length of dike (revised target 35 km). The achievement was equivalent to
       completing three flood control sub-projects.
      Two flood control sub-projects in two counties were dropped and replaced by a new Mianjiang River
       Improvement for flood control sub-project.
      Increase in the area protected from floods reached 17,680 km2 (revised target 20,200 km2)
      Construction of a 10,000 m3 per day water treatment plant sub-project and associated water supply
       facilities in Luxi County was not completed and was dropped.

REVISED OUTCOMES under the FLOOD CONTROL services

The following targets were not achieved:

      99,880 residents benefited from flood control sub-projects (revised target 134,000). The number of
       beneficiaries was identified from detailed local census.
      The replacement sub-project was not completed and was canceled in the third restructuring because
       detailed design revealed severe impacts on a bridge with high cultural value and would affect
       safeguards compliance (see Section 10, Other Issues below).

In summary, after the first restructuring, the efficacy of the project to achieve the objective is rated substantial.
The reduced values of the outcome indicators were exceeded in transport although not achieved under flood
control services. Nevertheless, the project improved public flood control service using the flood protection
dikes and other affiliated basic structures to protect the beneficiary communities against floods. The early
warning system added to the city's resilience to flood-related disasters. Flood management plans offered
directions for future flood control investments and service delivery.



Revised Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised.

Revised Rationale
There was no change in the Theory of Change except that the activities were now limited to flood control only
activities. Water related activities were no longer part of the causal chain. As a result of the reduced scope of
this objective, target outcome indicators were reduced by a third and intermediate outcome indicators were
also reduced.

REVISED OUTPUTS under FLOOD CONTROL services

The following reduced targets were exceeded or achieved:

      Area protected from floods increased to 17,680 km2 (revised target 17,052 km2)
      Strengthened 29.35 km length of dikes (revised target 29.35 km). The added Mianjiang River
       improvement flood control sub-project was not completed and was canceled in the third restructuring
       because detailed design revealed severe impacts on a bridge with high cultural value (ICR, paragraph
       23(e)) and would affect safeguards compliance (see Section 10 Other Issues below).

REVISED OUTCOMES under FLOOD CONTROL services

The following reduced target was achieved:

      99,880 residents benefited from flood control sub-projects (revised target 100,000). The number of
       beneficiaries was identified from detailed local census. In the third restructuring (2018) the baseline
       value of the PDO outcome indicator was revised from 0 to 21,320 to include the population originally
       protected by the degraded flood control systems before the project. However, the PAD defined the
       indicator as additional population protected by improved flood control services and the baseline value
       should not have changed (ICR, footnote 20).
      The ICR stated that project eliminated schistosomiasis in Jiujiang County and improved local public
       health, which is plausible but the ICR did not offer supporting health statistics as evidence.
       Schistosomiasis is an acute and chronic disease caused by larval forms of parasitic worms released
       by freshwater snails. Freshwater snails were found in over 274,000 m2 of Jiujiang County and infected
       around 2.62 percent of the local population in 2005 alone. Molluscicide (niclosamide) was applied
       twice in the snail spreading areas before and after construction; to excavated surface silt, and buried
       in landfills. Some riverbanks were concreted to avoid freshwater snail habitats. Public awareness on
       schistosomiasis prevention and control were implemented. The Jiujiang Schistosomiasis Control
       Station investigated the area after the project was completed. Results showed that all freshwater
       snails were eliminated in the infected area.

In summary, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated substantial because all the revised
intermediate outcome indicators were exceeded, and the outcome indicator substantially achieved.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)




                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the outcomes is rated substantial. After the first restructuring, the
                            reduced outcome indicators were substantially achieved. After the second restructuring, the efficacy of the
                            project to achieve the outcome is rated substantial. The outputs that were dropped were replaced by similar
                            activities to retain the project's original level of ambition while responding to updates in master plans of the
                            target areas.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: A cost-benefit analysis was used at appraisal and at closing for the
   transport, flood control, and wastewater sub-projects, covering approximately 95 percent of total project
   costs. For road sub-projects, benefits included (i) cost savings in passenger traveling time, (ii) reduced vehicle
   operation cost due to improved road condition in project areas, and (iii) avoided losses from traffic accidents due
   to improved transportation conditions. For flood control subprojects, reduced expected future losses caused by
   floods were the economic benefits. The flood loss data were used to estimate losses under the ‘without project’
   and ‘with project’ situations and the differences provided the expected economic benefit (saved costs) of
   reduced flooding. All subproject costs included both the investments and regular O&M costs. Local government
   budgets regularly allocate O&M funding for the transport and water resources management facilities. At
   appraisal, the economic rates of returns (ERRs) for all road sub-projects and flood control projects was above
   10% (PAD, paragraph 33). The ERR for each sub-project ranged from 10 to 17 percent. A cost effectiveness
   approach (CEA) was applied to both water supply investment and environmental improvements (wetlands, river
   restoration). The water supply investment yielded a financial rate of return of 8.2%.

   The same cost-benefit approach was used at closing covering the roads and flood control components, while a
   cost effectiveness approach (CEA) was applied to the wastewater and wetland restoration sub-projects to
   ensure the least-cost option was implemented. The sub-projects generated ERRs from 11 to 18 percent,
   reflecting their individual economic viability. The analysis excluded the multiplier effects for adjacent land value
   appreciation, improved public health, accelerated tourism, agricultural development, and impact on growth.

   Administrative and operational efficiency: The project spanned 11 counties and involved sector
   administrations such as the Development and Reform Commission, Housing and Urban Rural Development,
   Transportation, Water Resources, Ecology and Environment, Urban Administrative and Law Enforcement, and
   Civil Affairs. Project implementation was administered at the provincial and the county levels. Several factors
   resulted in implementation delays. Counties lacked experience in managing World Bank-funded projects. Some

                                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



had slow internal approvals of sub-projects, some were delayed in obtaining counterpart funds that
were addressed through budget reallocations and the use of cost savings from lower sub-project contract costs.
Some counties and provinces experienced high staff turnover. Customized training workshops addressed these
capacity issues. (ICR, paragraph 62). The project was extended once, for twelve months, to complete the
additional works from the two restructurings. During implementation, updated master plans and revised local
development priorities (ICR, footnote 10) revised components and reduced targets at the PDO and intermediate
outcome levels. Land acquisition issues, design impact on safeguards compliance, and changes in government
requirements slowed implementation.

In summary, the shortcomings presented by the delays in implementation highlighted operational inefficiencies,
which were addressed with targeted capacity building technical assistance and the restructurings. The
operational delay caused a 12 month extension to the project but did not eliminate the economic and financial
efficiencies calculated by the cost benefit analyses and cost effective analyses of the completed sub-projects.
ERRs ranged from 11 to 18 percent while the financial rate of return yielded 8.2 percent. No comparison figures
at appraisal and closing were provided below for the completed sub projects. Project efficiency is rated
substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?                Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project outcome is rated satisfactory using a split rating. There were no changes to the original PDO but
there were substantial changes made to two of three outcome indicators, without altering the Theory of Change.
The relevance of objective remained rated substantial under both original design and after the restructurings.
Efficiency of the project also remained substantial throughout the project implementation. The efficacy of the
project to achieve the original objective is rated modest but substantial after achieving or exceeding
reduced targets. The overall efficacy of the project is rated substantial. Efficiency is also rated substantial. The
overall outcome is rated satisfactory. Following is the calculations used to arrive at the split rating of the
outcome:

                                                   Original                        After Restructuring


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



Relevance of Objective                                             Substantial
Efficacy                            Modest                              Substantial
Efficiency                                                         Substantial
Outcome Rating                      Moderately Satisfactory             Satisfactory
Value of Rating                     4                                   5
Disbursement (in millions)          US$63.13                            US$86.87
Share of Disbursement               0.42                                0.58
Weighted Value of Outcome           4 x 0.42 = 1.68                     5 x 0.58 = 2.9
Final Outcome Rating                           1.68 + 2.9 = 4.56, rounded off to 5 or Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The development outcomes related to the improved delivery of transport, flood control, and wastewater
services were: more access by lagging communities to more urbanized areas of the Poyang Lake Economic
Zone and to the national network; reduced flooding in the areas where the dikes were strengthened, and
health impacts from reduced pollution in lake Poyang. Since the project is aligned with updated master plans
and central government urbanization strategy of green growth and sustainability in less developed counties
like those covered by this project, risks to development outcome appear low.

According to the ICR, there was very low risk to development outcome for the following reasons: First, sector
experts at the county and provincial levels were heavily involved in ensuring the quality of the sub-projects
implemented, and reviewed feasibility studies and designs, construction quality control and oversight, and
planning for O&M of project facilities. Road and water management works designs considered the impact
from climate change. Second, dedicated entities and teams were appointed to implement the approved O&M
plans of completed sub-project facilities. Third, each county committed to allocate adequate O&M budgets.
Fourth, at closing, there were no outstanding obligations against social and environmental issues or
grievances, compensation, or livelihood arrangements. All disturbed sites were restored. Construction
wastes were properly disposed.

      Technical Risks: The project introduced several technological innovations and software systems that
       require maintenance and periodic updating. Risks remained that such periodic updating may not have
       the required financial backing. According to the Task Team in its December 30, 2020 email to IEG,
       the authorities have budgeted O&M needs to ensure that technological innovations were periodically
       updated as needed.
      Government Ownership Risk: The M&E system was customized for this project. To maintain its
       usefulness, the Task Team confirmed in its December 30, 2020 email to IEG that local governments
       budgeted O&M resources to update and maintain the system. Another example was the pilot smart
       transport management and early warning system introduced in Gongqingcheng City, which
       demonstrated disruptive technologies in modern transport management practices. Gongqingcheng
       City expanded the smart accident system to cover the entire city but according to the Task Team in
       its December 30, 2020 email to IEG "this smart transport management system was listed as a
       demonstration project in Jiangxi province but no information available on its replication." With regard
       to another pilot system using an endowment insurance mechanism to ensure the farmer’s basic

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



      income after land acquisition, the Task Team in its December 30, 2020 email to IEG noted "this
      endowment insurance mechanism was replicated in some other counties of Jiangxi Province.
     Financial Risks. There is also a risk that competing priorities arising from the updating of master
      plans may displace commitment to the O&M needs of the project investments. Entities were indeed
      identified to undertake the O&M needs, allocated funds in local budgets, but competing priorities
      arose during project implementation, which redirected resources. Budgetary commitments could still
      be reallocated based on emerging government priorities or changes in policy or master plan
      changes.
     Environmental Risks and Natural Disasters: According to the ICR, impact from climate change
      were considered in the design of the sub-projects such as roads. The risk from natural hazards and
      unusual environmental events remain.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant and supported the government's efforts to pilot Jiangxi province for
  small town development using the small cities in the Poyang Lake Ecological and Economic Zone
  because of its ecological and economic significance. This economic zone formed a third of the total area
  of the province, half of the provincial population, and contributed over 60 percent to the provincial Gross
  Domestic Product (GDP). Design was informed by lessons from experience with similar projects in China
  and in the East Asia region including: (i) establishing strong links between sub-projects and local master
  plans; (ii) ensuring that investment sub-projects were consistent with planned networks; and ensuring that
  design standards adapted to established local standards. The project was ambitious, across
  transport and water sectors, and across 11 counties, not all of whom were familiar with Bank funded
  processes. The overall implementation risk was rated moderate at appraisal. Training was expected to
  strengthen governance and address implementation capacity gaps. The project designed both hard
  investments and soft activities such as piloting innovations in public services to guide sector development
  planning. The project was closely aligned with the local development priorities but did not foresee the risk
  from a change in the country's development strategy toward green growth, which affected priorities
  contained in local master plans. At appraisal, the project prepared technical, financial, and economic
  feasibility of investment sub-projects. A customized M&E system would be designed.

  In summary, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory with minor shortcomings borne out by unforeseen
  risks that materialized during implementation, including the timely availability of local funding that were
  addressed at implementation through restructurings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



 The World Bank team conducted 15 supervision missions over the 6-year implementation period.
 Restructurings were utilized thrice to respond to changing priorities in local master plans. Fiduciary and
 safeguard aspects were adequately supervised, using third party consultants to monitor compliance
 with environmental and social safeguards. Fiduciary and procurement compliance were embedded in the
 MIS structure of the M&E system. The World Bank team delivered customized and targeted training
 workshops to address capacity gaps and enhance local institutional capacity. The performance reporting
 was candid in identifying shortcomings of mismatched indicators - output vs. outcome although these
 remained unaddressed even after restructurings. Transition arrangements, including the outcome of piloted
 interventions were not provided but confirmed by the Task Team in its December 30, 2020 email to IEG, as
 part of the local governments' commitment to O&M.

 In summary, the performance of the World Bank Team in its supervision of the project is rated satisfactory.
 There were only minor shortcomings in implementation. This included the misplaced outcome indicator
 that remained unaddressed in the restructurings. There were also challenges posed by missed risks
 (changes in local priorities in master plans) and availability of counterpart financing.

 With both the quality at entry and supervision rated satisfactory, the overall bank performance is rated
 satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the PAD, the project management offices at the provincial and county levels would implement
 a customized results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. This M&E system would consist of (i)
 a computer-based Management Information System (MIS) to monitor physical and financial progress to
 generate periodic reports; and (ii) a computer-based evaluation system (PAD, paragraph 27). Annex 1
 provided indicators at the outcome and intermediate outcome levels and broken further by project
 components to be monitored under the results framework (PAD< Annex 1). Baselines and target values for
 overall and intermediate outcome indicators were included in this evaluation system. The key activities and
 outputs in the results framework were reflected in the outcomes in the Theory of Change presented at
 closing (ICR, Figure 1).

 The objective was vague in that it did not specify the key public services to be addressed. The indicators
 did not cover all possible outcomes of the PDO. At closing, beneficiary assessments only measured
 satisfaction with the project interventions. Intermediate results indicators measured contributions to
 achieving PDO outcome level indicators. However, the choice of targets for indicators were not adequately
 explained, e.g., reducing travel time by 150 minutes and not by some other number and how then this
 saving of travel time contributed to productivity or economic activity. There were no indicators to show the

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



 impact of the project interventions on the quality of economic life and health of beneficiaries (e.g., new
 businesses generated, impact on local revenues from the influx of new residents, increase in fees and
 charges from additional economic activities, improved health of residents from improved access to facilities,
 benefits from increased access to educational facilities). One outcome from the project's impact in
 concreting riverbanks, applying molluscicides as part of the project eliminated the incidence of
 schistosomiasis but this indicator was not part of the results framework nor of the theory of change (see
 Section 4, Efficacy above). The ICR did present some of these outcomes (see ICR, Section E, Other
 Outcomes and Impact) but did not form part of the M&E design. The indicators that were used were
 specific, timebound, and measurable. The targets were made achievable after restructurings. There were
 no baselines reported except for that related to those benefiting from flood control clarified during the 2018
 restructuring. The Task Team confirmed in its December 30, 2020 email to IEG that customized computer-
 based M&E of the customized MIS established baselines.



b. M&E Implementation
  An external monitoring agency supported by dedicated M&E staff at the provincial and county level
  project management offices (PMOs) implemented the customized MIS system of the M&E. In addition,
  third party monitoring entities were contracted to monitor resettlement and indicators associated with
  wastewater management sub-projects. Two restructurings reduced some of the Intermediate and PDO
  outcome level targets (see Section 4 Efficacy above). The customized MIS allowed for collecting and
  reporting consistent, comparable data across all counties, using indicators of the results framework. Data
  complied with sector requirements in meeting progress and works quality overseen by local government
  authorities, such as the bureaus of Transport, Water Resources, Ecology and Environment, and City
  Administration and Law Enforcement. In some cases, local authorities confirmed data, e.g., travel time
  saved, water quality, and number of beneficiaries at the subproject level. Residents were not noted to
  have been involved in defining targets but the sub-projects were taken from master plans that were
  generated in a consultative manner.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data informed stakeholders of physical and financial project progress. M&E data informed the
  Mid Term Review and provided justification to extend the project closing. Reports from the use of M&E,
  including third party monitoring reports provided the evidence for the reported outcomes of the project.
  For example, the elimination of schistosomiasis incidents in Jiujiang County. Of the indicators that were
  included in the M&E design to be monitored, these were used to justify the reduction of targets and
  reasons behind revisions in components reflected in the three restructurings. M&E captured the
  innovations introduced by the piloted interventions and was used to enjoin its expansion (in the case of
  the smart transportation management system introduced in Gongqingcheng City.

  In summary, the M&E quality is rated substantial. Moderate shortcomings were identified in the M&E
  system design with missing or inadequately defined indicators. The customized M&E system was
  designed and implemented to assess achievement of objectives, the links in the results chain.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" and triggered five safeguards. (i)
   Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01; (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Safety of Dams
   (OP/BP4.37); (iv) Involuntary Resettlement OP4.12; and (v) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) The
   project was implemented using environment-friendly practices that promoted the use of green infrastructure
   and cost-effective nonstructural interventions. At closing, all compensations were fully paid; all necessary
   livelihood arrangements in place; all disturbed sites restored; and all construction wastes properly disposed.
   According to the ICR, the project complied satisfactorily with safeguards policies (ICR para 69).

   Construction activities involving two sub-projects could have some limited negative impacts on soil, air,
   water, acoustic environments, and on surrounding communities and triggered OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats.
   The first was the dike strengthening sub-project in Jinxian County that could have potential adverse impacts
   on Qinglan Lake, a provincial natural reserve. The second was the Mianjiang River (Lucao Lake) Protection
   and Utilization sub-project in Ruijin city. The Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) and the
   Environmental Management Plan (EMP) included appropriate mitigation measures (PAD paragraphs 53
   and 54) and according to the ICR were adequately implemented but not specified (ICR, paragraph
   69). Few sub-projects were anticipated to affect some rural households' graves, triggering OP/BP 4.11
   Physical Cultural Resources. The Resettlement Action Plan provided compensation and relocation
   measures for the affected graves (PAD para 47). Two other sub-projects triggered OP/BP 4.37 Safety of
   Dams. The first was the Luxi Water Supply System Improvement sub-project, which would withdraw water
   from a dam under construction. The second was the Longjiang River Integrated Management sub-project,
   which relied on an existing dam.

   All 22 sub-projects required land acquisition and population relocation (PAD paras 46 and 47) and thus
   triggered OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. At appraisal, an estimated 4,300 mu (285 ha) of land from
   collective villages would be acquired and impact about 7,200 people in over 1,600 households. In addition,
   anticipated house demolition would relocate 900 people from 230 households. Each sub-project prepared
   a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and consolidated to an overall project RAP. Project restructuring
   introduced a change in scope and location of sub-projects resulting in a revised Resettlement Plans.
   According to the ICR (paragraph 70), resettlement impact at closing was higher than at appraisal due to
   the added new transport sub-projects. At closing, the project affected 10,873 people (8,100 estimated at
   appraisal). All compensation was paid. House compensation standards applied in Luxi, Hengfeng, and
   Dexing Counties were higher than those in the resettlement plan because assistance was added to restore
   the livelihood of those who lost 20 percent of farmlands. A transparent and effective Grievance Redress
   Mechanism was established. According to the ICR, an implementation evaluation on resettlement was
   conducted and showed that affected households were generally satisfied with the results (ICR paragraph
   71).




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: According to the ICR, financial management was satisfactory at closing (ICR,
   paragraph 72). Targeted training and the customized MIS used in M&E enhanced the financial
   management capacity of the implementing agency (see Section 9 M&E above). Unaudited
   interim financial reports were submitted on time. The annual audits were submitted on time. External
   auditors issued unqualified audit opinions. External auditors reported some project management
   weaknesses that were remedied by relevant authorities (e.g., delays in counterpart funding, contract
   payments).

   Procurement: According to the ICR, procurement management was satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 73) and
   complied with Bank procurement procedures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   Gender. The Social Assessment included a gender analysis, based on consultations held separately with
   men and women. Women's views on priorities in transport, water supply network, and flood protection were
   solicited to promote a more gender sensitive and socially sound design. Gender disaggregated information
   was also collected and used in the Resettlement Action Plans to ensure that women's interests
   were safeguarded during resettlement.

   At closing, the ICR reported that project design did not specify specific gender-based outcomes and the
   project did not address any gender related issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                      High


12. Lessons

The operation offered five lessons that may benefit task teams in designing future similar operations.
These have been taken from the ICR with slightly modified language:



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



        Integrating hard and soft interventions may be a cost effective means to improve
           delivery of public services in small towns. In this project 'hard’ infrastructure investments
           such as transport and water infrastructure were accompanied by low-cost ‘soft’ interventions
           to achieve least cost and sustainable public services. These ‘soft’ activities included: (i)
           technical assistance to develop strategic sector development plans, (ii) a smart transport
           management system that demonstrates innovation and efficiency in delivering services to
           maximize benefits from that service, and (iii) green infrastructure, e.g., constructed wetlands,
           as nature-based solutions to wastewater management and an early warning system for
           floods to enhance the resilience of towns.
          Strengthening capacity of small towns may be used as incentives to coordinate the
           implementation of multi-sector sub-projects scattered in many locations. In this project,
           the project management office was in a government department that had already
           demonstrated its coordination capacity. However, these offices may not necessarily have
           technical experts in sub-projects that local authorities decide to implement. A corrective
           measure was to convene a panel of experts from relevant sector authorities to strengthen the
           local Project Management Office's technical capacity. This approach enhanced project
           ownership among the sector agencies.
          Technical and management innovations may be demonstrated in pilot activities. in
           Gongqingcheng City a pilot sub-project demonstrated a smart transport management
           system. The pilot used drones, big data, and cloud technologies to improve road
           safety. Another innovation was piloted in flood protection to address public health concerns
           such as the incidence of schistosomiasis. Still another innovation was piloting an endowment
           insurance mechanism to assure farmers of basic income after their lands were acquired.
          Projects may find restructuring a useful mechanism when implementing projects in
           centrally planned environments. In this project, centrally directed strategies adjusted
           priorities. Changes in components were anticipated because prior similar small-town
           development projects in China also encountered changes in priorities and replacement sub-
           projects readily identified. Restructurings were effectively used to achieve new targets that
           adjusted to the changes in priorities and strategies, both at the central and local government
           levels, but did not clarify the PDO.
          Using customized M&E tools may be exploited to support implementation. In this
           project, a Management Information System (MIS) was customized to monitor project
           progress and results. Indicators were linked to physical and financial progress, counterpart
           funding, loan disbursements, procurement and contracts payments. In addition, third party
           entities were contracted to monitoring safeguards compliance. Their monitoring of
           safeguards assisted in rapidly identifying possible choke points and informed the adoption of
           corrective measures. Bank teams may find using customized MIS and third party safeguards
           monitors helpful in implementing projects with moveable targets and changeable
           components.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                       Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Jiangxi Poyang Lake Small Town Project (P126856)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, succinct and candid. It is clear and tidy and provides relevant information and useful
analysis. The report is evidence-based and results-oriented. Project outcomes included numerous contributions
to various sectors of the provincial economy beyond those financed by the project. These outcomes were not
identified in the results framework but they nevertheless strengthened the argument supporting the effective
use of resources to achieve outcomes. The ICR is internally consistent. The annexes provided helpful
additional information to highlight the importance, for example, of identified entities to ensure ownership of O&M
functions of completed investment sub-projects. The quality of analysis justified the ratings. Lessons were
based on evidence provided by the operation, particularly the innovations piloted to improve the delivery of
services and the experience in land acquisition.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
