     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022401

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P107343                                     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel.

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Burundi                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1510,IDA-H5620                         30-Apr-2016                                         65,118,983.54

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Apr-2010                                 31-Jan-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             43,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              65,664,308.48                                              0.00

 Actual                                          65,118,983.54                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson               J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Grant Agreement (GA, 2010), for this project was
   “to increase small producers’ productivity and market access for targeted commodities in the Project Area”.

   For purposes of assessing the extent which the PDO was achieved in Section 4, this review will parse the
   PDO into two objectives, namely:



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



   Objective 1: to increase small producers’ productivity for targeted commodities in the project area; and

   Objective 2: to increase small producers’ market access for targeted commodities in the project area.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Support to agricultural productivity and access to markets (Original allocation:
   US$39.27 million; Actual: $39.2 million). This component aimed to promote the adoption of improved
   technology packages by beneficiaries through the implementation of productive and post-harvest as well as
   watershed management investments. It included two subcomponents: (1.1) financed matching grants for
   productive sub-projects to be implemented at various stages of the value chains: production; post-harvest
   activities; Component 1 also provided advisory support and training for professional associations and
   cooperatives in the value chains as well as capacity building for partner public institutions; (1.2) financed the
   following activities: (a) building the capacity of producer organizations (POs) benefiting from sub-projects;
   (b) building the capacity of public institutions supporting sub-project beneficiaries;

   Component 2: Irrigation development and feeder road rehabilitation (Original allocation: US$19.19
   million; Actual: $17.27 million). This component aimed to improve basic collective infrastructure so that
   producers could increase the volume of agricultural production and improve their connection to the market.
   There were two subcomponents: (2.1): development of marshland irrigation; (2.2): rehabilitation of feeder
   roads, as well as establishment of the systems needed to manage this infrastructure. Eligible infrastructure
   was to include: basic infrastructure for developing marshland irrigation; development of the watersheds
   adjacent to the marshlands; tracks within marshlands; and the feeder roads linking marshlands to the
   communal road network. Activities included establishing water user associations (WUAs), building their
   capacity, and preparing management and maintenance programs for irrigation facilities and equipment.

   Component 3: Management and coordination of project activities (Original allocation: US$7.20 million;
   Actual: US$8.65 million). This component aimed to finance project coordination and management activities,
   including the project communications activities and dissemination of information related to project
   implementation. It covered the costs related to the equipment, staff salaries, and recurrent expenditures of
   the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and Interprovincial Project Implementation Units (IPIUs). This
   component included funding the costs of the project’s financial management (FM) system and associated
   costs; M&E activities, as well as a Management Information System to collect baseline data and information
   on progress in project implementation, monitoring environmental and social impacts and develop the
   required tools and procedures to provide capacity building for the actors involved in these activities.

   Revised Allocations Across Disbursement Categories and Additional Financing: While the
   components were not revised, following the mid-term review (early 2014) there was a level 2 restructuring
   (mid-2015), followed by additional financing (end of 2016). First, the restructuring involved reallocating
   funds across disbursement categories to offset cost overrun under Category II (Goods, works and
   consultant services) to fund activities related to: Subcomponent 1.2 (capacity building, institutional support,

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



   and facilitation of access to markets); Component 2 (Irrigation development and feeder road rehabilitation);
   and Component 3 (Management and coordination of project activities). The primary reasons for the
   reallocation were the significant strengthening of the US dollar versus the SDR and the underestimation of
   construction costs of rural infrastructure. This restructuring also reallocated the remaining funds (about
   US$400,000, under the Project Preparation Facility Refinancing Category) to Category II (ICR, para. 13).

   Second, the Additional Financing (AF), approved in December, 2016, did not change the PDO, project
   description or safeguard category, but included changes in: (a) scaling up support for improved agricultural
   technology packages, as well as on consolidation and further rehabilitation/development of rural
   infrastructure; and (b) the results framework, which underwent four main changes: (i) increase in the targets
   for the three existing PDO indicators; (ii) introduction of two new PDO indicators; (iii) increase in the targets
   of eight intermediate results (IR) indicators; and (iv) introduction of four new IR indicators (ICR, para 15).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   (i) Project Costs: The original total project cost was US$70.0 million. The revised project cost was
   US$65.66, including the approved AF (US$ 22.664 million, end-December, 2016). The actual cost at project
   closing was US$65.12, or 93% of the original cost, and 99.2% of the revised project cost (with the slight
   difference due to exchange rate fluctuation).

   (ii) Project Financing: The World Bank (IDA) financing was US$68.0 million. By the end of the project, total
   Bank disbursement was US$65.12 million (or 98.5%)

   Borrower Contributions: At approval, the Borrower counterpart contribution was expected to be US$2.0
   million, but the eventual Government contribution of 0 was due to the country’s political and fiscal crisis.

   Also, the ICR reported an unexpected contribution from the beneficiaries, estimated to be US$2.2 million
   (mostly in-kind labor contributions for project-funded subprojects).

   Dates: The project was approved on April 29, 2010, becoming effective on December 17, 2010. A mid-term
   review was carried out in February, 2014. The original closing date was April 30, 2016; the actual closing
   date was January 31, 2020.

   Restructuring: As stated above at the end of Section 2d, a level 2 restructuring was carried out in mid-
   2015 and an Additional Financing (AF) of US$25.00 million to scale up project activities and enhance
   market access was approved in late 2016. There was no change in the project's level of ambition because
   of either the restructuring, the AF or the addition of two PDO indicators, and therefore, this review does not
   undertake a split assessment of the project's outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of the design of this project (Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets Development or
PRODEMA) the main livelihoods for 85 percent of Burundi's population depended on agriculture, with the

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 22
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



sector contributing to about 50 percent of the country's GDP. In 2010, over 70 percent the population was
affected by food insecurity. Despite the official priority assigned to agriculture, it had not been restructured
or modernized, The sector was dominated by smallholders using traditional and low productivity
technologies (ICR, para. 3). While PRODEMA was being appraised, another project, the "Agriculture
Rehabilitation and Support, and Sustainable Land Management Project of Burundi" (PRASAB), which
had moderately successfully focused on improving the productive capacity of mainly subsistence
farming through investments in production and sustainable land management and through capacity
building of producer organizations and local communities, was coming to an end. PRASAB had, apart from
its to support to subsistence farmers, provided matching grants for small productive investments at the
community level. PRODEMA's community drive development (CDD) design was a successor to PRASAB,
with the objectives “to increase small producers’ productivity and market access for targeted commodities in
the Project Area”. The PAD stated that this "project will use the approach introduced by PRASAB to help
households move modestly beyond the recovery of subsistence production and toward production for
markets - largely but not exclusively local markets - by making those markets more accessible (PAD, para
10).

The project's two objectives were complementary, and their three supporting components were all
relevant to addressing the main sectoral constraints and aspirations of the farmers, agro-processors,
traders, and consumers by addressing strategic aspects of the Government’s national and sectoral/thematic
policies, strategies and targets, including: Vision 2025; Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (2012 – 2025);
and Burundi’s National Development Plan (2018 – 27); National Agricultural Strategy: 2008-
2015 (2008); and three core programs of the National Agricultural Investment Plan (2018 – 2022). The
project addressed core elements of these framework documents, including: food insecurity; tapping the
comparative advantage of the agriculture sector to meet domestic needs and profitable export markets;
promoting value-addition and value chain development; competitiveness of the agricultural sector,
consistent with the Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) objectives and
strategies; and strengthening institutional and organizational capacities of the agricultural sector (ICR, para.
5).

The clear two-pronged project objectives, for both the initial project and the Additional Financing, were also
strongly aligned with key pillars of the World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) over two periods:
the CAS, FY09 – FY12 and the CAS FY13 – FY16. The project contributed to key pillars of these CASs,
including supporting directly: the strategic objective of ‘increasing the productivity of food and high-value
export crop production, improving the business environment, and improving infrastructural services’ which
contributed to the country’s transition to an increasingly stable, competitive, and diversified economy, with
enhanced opportunities for productive employment and improved standards of living. These elements were
at the core of the implementation of the Bank’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper for Burundi (2012 –
2025), which “placed agriculture at the heart of Burundi’s economic development as the main factor for
poverty and food insecurity reduction and promotion of shared prosperity” (ICR, para. 4).


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase small producers’ productivity for targeted commodities in the project area.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC): While the project's design included a results framework (RF), the PAD did not
               develop a ToC because it was not required at the time the PAD was prepared. The ICR reconstructed a
               generally sound ToC (ICR, paras. 9 - 11, and illustrated in Figure 1); while the figure illustrates how the two
               broad and inter-related objectives of improved productivity and increased market access for targeted
               commodities would be achieved, there was limited accompanying narrative, or implied from the subsequent
               description of the project components. The ToC for Objective 1 (increased yields for targeted crops) involved:
               capacity building and associated training of producer organizations and participating service agencies
               (providing improved technology and extension services) and partnerships, rehabilitation of marshlands and
               irrigation infrastructure; and protection of watersheds would provide technical support to the participating
               farmers to increase yields of important local crops. Although the basis for selecting the crops is not explicit in
               the PAD or the ICR, the selection was implied as part of Government's overall agricultural strategies cited
               above, consistent with an assumed competitiveness of the selected crops and their potential for marketing
               and processing. Also, the targeted commodities were the basic staple products most important in Burundi's
               household farm economy for food security, cash generation and livelihoods, while also considering crop and
               livestock production systems (as communicated to IEG by the Bank's project team) .

               The ICR presented supporting evidence on key outputs and outcomes which contributed to the achievement
               of Objective 1, reflecting also the results arising from the Additional Financing (AF) (ICR, paras. 22-27, Annex
               1; Project Impact Evaluation Study, 2020). Attribution of these results to the project's direct interventions is
               reflected in the ToC and supported by available evidence generated by the project's M&E system, the
               project's independent Impact Evaluation Study (2020, see below for details) and a supplemental independent
               Economic and Financial Analysis of PRODEMA (2020).

               Outputs: The project's main outputs are summarized in Table 1 (ICR, Annex 1):

               Table 1: Summary of Key Output Targets and Achievements

                   Output (or “Intermediate Result           Original      Revised        Actual   % of
                              Indicators”)                   Target         Target       Achieved Target
                a) Number of production subprojects
               financed/completed (involved multiple           2,630         2,786         2,762       99
               activities)
                b) Number of nurseries established for
                                                                    0          15            13        87
               bananas and fruit trees
                c) Hectares of marshlands rehabilitated        2,000         2,300          2,401     104
                d) Hectares of hillside areas protected       10,000        15,000         13,931      93




                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



The income-generating subprojects financed by the project included different types of activities which
contributed to the outcomes and achievement of objective 1 (e.g., establishment of nurseries, access to
improved seeds and breeds, production advice for several commodities, ICR, paras. 25 & 26). In addition, the
subprojects included technical support and funding to enhance the capacities of key public institutions
(including extension advisory and veterinary services) and Producer Organizations (POs). These public and
producer entities provided direct services to the beneficiary farmers to enable them to contribute toward the
achievement of the project's targets (both outputs and outcomes, see below) through provision of training
workshops and funds to enable field visits and provision of technical services to the beneficiary farmers (ICR,
Annex 2, paras. 6-10). It is noted that the ICR did not specify the number of training workshops and
participants.

Outcomes: The project's strategic outcomes are summarized in Table 2 (ICR, paras. 22-28, and Annex 1):

The key outcomes cited in Table 2 were generated by the subprojects, which supported relevant activities
and outputs (consistent with the ToC; ICR, paras. 25 & 26). At the same time, the ICR recognized that the
increases in productivity were not estimated based on a survey of randomly selected sample of value chain
participants in the project zones, as should have been the case, to better inform the achievement of the PDO
regarding the evolution of productivity of project-supported value chains. Hence, the M&E results based on
subprojects were not a completely reliable assessment of the full project's impact on all value chain
participants.

Table 2: Summary of Key Outcome Targets and Achievements

                                               Original Revised  Actual   % of
Outcome                            Baseline
                                               Target    Target Achieved Target
a) Number of Direct Project
                                      0        92,000     156,000   173,356       90
beneficiaries
b) Percentage of Female
                                      0         44.6        50        48.1        96
Beneficiaries
b) Productivity increases in
selected commodities (MT per
ha.)
  - Rice                              2.5         4.0         4.5        5.7      127
  - Bananas                           9.0        16.0        22.9       22.9      100
  - Coffee                            0.4         0.8         1.2        1.2      100
  - Milk (liters/cow/year)            360        950        1,350      1,439      107
c) Percent of farmers adopting
new/improved technology               NA             70      75         85        113
packages
d) Percent of producers adopting
improved animal                       NA             70      70        75.5       108
breeds/practices for milk
e) Percent of beneficiaries
adopting climate-resilient            NA             0      25.0       47.3       189
technologies


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)




The ICR noted that the "achievements of the project in terms of increased value chain productivity as
reflected by the project M&E data may have been skewed upward" (ICR, para. 27). Also, the Bank project
team provided the following clarifications regarding the attribution of project-induced productivity increases to
the project's interventions: "(a) the increases in productivity were assessed based on PRODEMA-supported
production subprojects (more than 2,300); and (b) there is no question of attribution since the data is from
PRODEMA-supported farmers. Since these farmers were not supported directly by other projects, the results
reported by the PRODEMA M&E system are definitely attributed to PRODEMA". In addition, the results of the
project's independent impact evaluation study (summarized in Tables 2 and 3 and section 2.3.4.2, dated
2020) and the Report on the Economic and Financial Analysis for the ICR (EFA, 2020), together, provide
analyses of the value chains directly supported by the project. Together, this analysis and supporting
evidence, help support, albeit partially, the overall attribution of project activities/outputs/outcomes, including
productivity increases, to the project's interventions. Also, during discussions between IEG and the Bank's
project team, it was stated by the team that there were no other investments by development partners with
similar objectives to increase productivity in the project area, helping to substantiate inferred attribution to
PRODEMA's interventions to increase productivity. Accordingly, given the low baseline figures overall
evidence on the patterns and level of the increases and progress toward the objectives/targets of objective 1
(which had been revised upwards following the AF), the further evidence and clarifications provided by the
project's Impact Evaluation Study and by the supplemental EFA analyses, and and further clarifications
provided by the Bank's project team, the efficacy with which Objective 1 has been achieved is rated
Substantial by this review.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase small producers’ market access for targeted commodities in the project area.

Rationale
Theory of Change: Figure 1 in the ICR illustrates that to achieve an increase in market access for targeted
commodities for small producers in the project area it would be necessary to: foster marketing arrangements
and business development capacities by beneficiary producer groups/cooperatives and farmer group leaders
through the establishment of market information systems and the rehabilitation of prioritized rural roads to
enable lower cost access to competitive markets; as well as to enable post-harvest processing subprojects to
generate value added and promote value chain development to markets where there is a demand for
the processed commodities.

Outputs The project's main outputs are summarized in Table 3 (source: ICR, Annex 1):

Table 3: Summary of Key Output Targets and Achievements for Objective 2

    Output (or “Intermediate Result           Original       Revised      Actual   % of
             Indicators”)                     Target          Target     Achieved Target

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)




a) Percent of participating producer
groups/associations/coops having                 20            30          18.3       61
contractual marketing arrangements
b) Number of post-harvest subprojects
                                                     0         NA           72        NA
financed
c) Number of farmer group leaders
trained in mgt. & business
                                                     0        120          162       135
development

d) Number of kilometers of rural roads
                                                 58           123         129.6      105
rehabilitated
e) Number of post-harvest/processing
                                                     0         20           20       100
subprojects financed/installed




As shown above, most of the output targets, other than a shortfall in the percent of producers with contractual
marketing, were achieved arrangements. These outputs contributed to the market-based outcomes shown
below.

Outcomes: The project's main outcomes with respect to Objective 2 are summarized in Table 4:

Table 4: Summary of Key Outcomes Targets and Achievements

                                              Revised       Revised      Actual   % of
                Outcome
                                               Target        Target     Achieved Target
a) Percentage of production of
commodities in targeted value chains            47.5           63          72.5      115
marketed by participating producers
b) Percentage of increased volume of
                                                     0         15            0         0
processed produce marketed




With respect to the progress toward objective 2, given the nature of the activities and the time required to
achieve their results, by the end of the project closure, there was a mixed picture, especially due to the delay
in procurement of the processing equipment prior to project closure, which are now delivered and
installed. Nonetheless, an important target for Objective 2 was exceeded, with respect to the proportion of

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



                            produce marketed, which involved a large proportion of the total beneficiaries. The ICR (para. 28), the
                            project's impact evaluation study (dated 2020, various sections, including Tables 2 and 3, Annex 16) and the
                            project's independent EFA study (dated 2020, regarding positive financial and economic returns for the major
                            value chains, supported by the project) also presented positive evidence regarding: (a) the role of the project
                            in promoting aggregation of production; (b) enhanced production, coupled with marketing alliances, and
                            product post-harvest treatment, enabling subsequent processing; (c) and expanded storage and price
                            stabilization. While the commodity processing activities during the AF period did not yield the intended
                            results, it is recognized that the number of sub-projects of that type was only about 1 percent of the total
                            number of sub-projects implemented by the project. They should be regarded as pilot activities to be taken up
                            by future operations, and their shortcomings should not negatively affect the project’s overall efficacy rating.
                            Accordingly, the evidence and positive results presented by the two reports cited above, arising from the
                            value chains supported by the project, substantiate the "Substantial" rating.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated substantial, based on the assessment and evidence outlined above for each of the
                            two objectives. With respect to Objective 1 on increased productivity, all of the targets were met or
                            exceeded. With respect to Objective 2, while there were some shortcomings, the main target involving
                            percentage of production marketed and the corresponding numbers of beneficiaries were exceeded, while
                            laying the foundation for subsequent expanded market development, for both primary and processed forms of
                            production.

                            While not reflected explicitly in the project objectives, the project also contributed to the improved wellbeing of
                            one of the vulnerable population groups, in terms of subprojects which improved living/housing conditions of
                            and nutritional support (for mothers’ groups) for a portion of the Batwa community residing in the project area.

                            Finally, the project carried out an independent satisfaction survey (PDO indicator #5) at the end of 2019 and
                            reported in Annex 1of the ICR, The survey assessed the degree of satisfaction of beneficiaries with general
                            project interventions involving both objectives. The survey revealed a general satisfaction rate of 96 percent,
                            far exceeding the target of 75%.

                            For these reasons this review concludes that the overall efficacy with which the PDO was achieved was
                            substantial.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR provides no substantive information on the ex ante economic analysis of this project. The only
information is the estimated economic internal rate of return (EIRR) at appraisal. This review notes that, with
respect to the ex-ante financial and economic analysis, the PAD stated "Given that (farm level sub-projects) are
to be demand-driven, the type and size of sub-projects cannot be known beforehand, and the economic and
financial analysis cannot be based on a pre-set portfolio of sub-projects. Rather, the analysis is based on the
typology of sub-projects expected to be implemented as a proxy for actual investments". The PAD also stated
that "no cost-benefit analysis has been prepared (for public investments) because benefits are hard to quantify"
(PAD, Annex 9, para 3). In its analysis, the PAD estimated crop and livestock returns and costs for sub-projects
and aggregated them to the project level according to the number of sub-projects expected to be funded during
project implementation. The total net benefit stream was compared to project costs to derive the project's net
present value (NPV) and to compute the project's financial and economic IRRs. Details of the methodology
used were provided in the PAD (Annex 9, para 12). The results showed a financial IRR of 28.2 percent and an
ERR of 21.2 percent. The NPVs (at a discount rate of 12 percent) were respectively: FBu33.7 billion (US$ 27.4
million) and FBu 10.4 billion (US$ 8.4 million).

The ICR analysis used the same methodology as in the PAD. It was performed on an incremental basis,
comparing the value of quantifiable benefits (incremental production, reduction in transport costs, and mitigation
of losses) versus project costs, “with” and “without” project interventions.

(a) The financial analysis presented in the ICR (paras.33-35) concluded that: (i) positive financial rates of
return for the farm/enterprise level analyses, based on different commodities, ranged between 20 - 42%,
and was based on “representative” model enterprises drawn from the project’s actual portfolio of subprojects for
the main commodities, accounting for almost 90% of the project’s portfolio. The ICR modified the approach to
assessing the financial analysis, according to each type of commodity-based farm model, rather than estimating
an aggregate financial rate of return, as was done in the PAD; this revised approach used in the ICR provides a
more meaningful assessment of financial returns; (ii) project-supported activities at the farm level provide clear
ex-post evidence that small producers have had substantial financial incentives to adopt the project-sponsored
production technologies. On the other hand, the ICR also states that "the cash flow analysis shows that
a subsidy was necessary to support the uptake of the commodity technologies" (para 35). The ICR observed
that in the absence of funding from financial institutions or other partners in the value chains, the small-scale
farmers would have found it difficult to cover their early negative cash flows without the subsidy. At the same
time, the ICR noted that financial analysis also assessed scenarios without the subsidy and concluded that it
"clearly demonstrated that the intrinsic long-term financial viability underpinning the new technologies
was positive". The ICR concluded therefore that "producers in the future should be able to negotiate co-financing
possibilities with other value chain partners as part of fully private contractual productive alliances, instead of
project-provided subsidies" (para 35). While the ICR provided evidence in footnote 19 that 21 such contracts
had been implemented for milk following the Additional Financing, milk marketing has unique features which
support contracting arrangements that other agricultural products do not. There was no evidence that small-
scale farmers in Burundi producing other products were able to "access finance and partnerships" to enhance
marketing efficiency, and hence justify scaling up the adoption of improved agricultural technologies. Indeed,
the evidence reported in the assessment of the achievement of Objective 2 is the opposite, since there was a
reported shortfall in the percent of producers with contractual marketing arrangements.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



(b) The economic analysis for the ICR generated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the entire
project of 21.3 percent (weighted average of the initial and AF phases). This rate is of similar magnitude as the
rate of 21.2 percent estimated at appraisal (PAD). The assumptions underpinning the ICR estimate were very
conservative, including all project costs, whereas on the revenue side, only the increase in the value of
production of the targeted commodities is included. On the other hand, this estimate was comparable to the
EIRR estimated in the PAD because the same approach was used. This is therefore a sound economic
performance.

(c) The cost-effectiveness analysis (ICR, para. 37) reveals how project costs compared with standard costs for
marshland development, road rehabilitation, and construction of social and productive infrastructure. The unit
cost analysis is compared with unit costs of similar investments, showing that this project was cost-effective for
marshland development (about 10% lower unit costs), all the more, because project interventions were demand
driven and customized to suit local irrigation perimeters, hence often requiring higher costs, as compared to
standard interventions. The comparative analysis for some other interventions showed that this project's costs
were higher, due to the remoteness of the project area and to various specifications used.

(d) The administrative efficiency of the project was deemed to be strong, partly because the project was able to
build on and use the administrative arrangement of a predecessor project. The project's management and
coordination costs were somewhat high at 13 percent of total actual costs, although the fragile/conflict conditions
in the country no doubt had an impact on costs The project has been singled out as a model of efficiency and
used by the World Bank in support of a number of initiatives that were outside its primary mandate, such as
support for the preparation and implementation of several World Bank projects. The ICR does,
however, mentions "some minor shortcomings that diminished its performance"(para 38).

In summary, the efficiency analyses indicates that the project was efficiently implemented in terms of generating
positive net financial benefits for farmers, positive economic returns for the national community, cost-effective
construction of public infrastructure, and generally strong project management. Hence, this review rates the
project's overall efficiency as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     85.00
 Appraisal                                                 21.20
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              21.30
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



6. Outcome

Based on the evidence regarding the project’s high relevance, and substantial efficacy and substantial
efficiency, this review concludes there were relatively minor shortcomings in the project’s achievement of its
objectives. Accordingly, the project’s overall outcome is rated “Satisfactory”.

The summary rationale for the ratings of the three core elements cited above is as follows:

(a) High relevance of the PDO, based on strong alignment with the Government’s national development and
sectoral policies and strategies and with the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategies/CASs (over 2 periods) and
the current Country Partnership Framework/CPF (FY18 – 22). All of these policies and strategies, which were
reflected in the project's objectives and components, emphasized the high priority of promoting agricultural
productivity, while also focusing on promoting climate change adaptation and mitigation practices, integrated
with expanded value-chain development and expanded access to competitive markets, while also targeting
vulnerable population groups.

(b) Substantial rating for efficacy, considering that the two main objectives and associated
targets/performance assessment for the two objectives were met, or exceeded in many cases, and attributed to
project interventions. The shortfalls, especially in objective 2, were due to project delays in the procurement of
equipment and related capacity building activities, and insufficient time to test the newly introduced activities,
which is one of the key follow-up actions agreed by Government authorities (ICR, para. 40, and information
provided to IEG by the Bank's project team).

(c) Substantial rating for efficiency, based on the performance assessment using various objective
performance measures, resulting in favorable financial and economic returns, cost-effectiveness, reasonable
overall level of administrative costs and good disbursement performance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is moderate risk to sustaining the outcomes and contribution to the project’s eventual impacts. The
ICR presents a candid assessment of 4 main risks, together with the specific and verifiable mitigation
measures, as summarized below (ICR, paras. 76 - 79).

(a) The low technical and organizational capacity of producer organizations (POs) and cooperatives to
manage post-harvest sub-projects: During the project’s initial phase, emphasis was placed on providing
appropriate training to beneficiary producers so that they would adopt the improved technical packages. This
was the cornerstone measure to ensuring sustainability of the sub-projects, particularly for milk production
and small ruminant sub-projects associating animal husbandry to crops (bananas and cassava). This likely
successful outcome of initial production sub-projects is to be contrasted with the outcome of the project’s AF
phase, involving value-addition/transformation sub-projects. Accordingly, the ICR is correct in concluding that
the outcome of these sub-projects remains “uncertain” (para. 76). Most of the post-harvest equipment and
infrastructures were delivered in the last months of project implementation. Training regarding the use of the

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



equipment was briefly conducted just before the equipment arrived, and therefore insufficient; a minimum of
operational training should have been provided on site at the time where the equipment was in use. To
mitigate this risk, the implementing partners (IRRI and IITA) have agreed to continue providing support to the
recipient POs and cooperatives, as part of their general development mandate in Burundi, to further train
these groups regarding on-the-job skills for a sufficient period to help them run the equipment properly and
address potential issues. The Bank's TTL confirmed to IEG the intention of the Bank team for Burundi to use
the on-going Great Lakes Region Integrated Agricultural Project to ensure this support by IRRI and IITA (IEG
note, dated January 27, 2021).

(b) Weak O&M Arrangements of Key Infrastructure: Water User Associations (WUAs) have limited
capacity, despite the project-provided training, to properly ensure the full operation and maintenance (O&M)
of infrastructure, especially the rehabilitated marshlands. According to its contractual arrangements with the
project, IRRI provided capacity building for WUAs. But this fell short of what was needed for proper O&M of
the marshlands irrigated systems. As a result: (i) some infrastructure built under the first phase are currently
not maintained properly; (ii) stealing of water is rampant; (iii) water fees are not collected systematically,
hence there are insufficient funds for O&M; (iv) there is weak governance, especially in the management and
accountability of the funds collected by the WUA. The ICR highlights various key actions which need to be
taken on an urgent basis with respect to marshlands and watershed rehabilitation and its O&M, as part of the
post-project period, including: (i) institutional assessment and creation of independent WUAs; (ii) adequate
organization regarding water use and budget management of the WUAs; (iii) regular collection of water fees
and transparency in their use; and (iv) O&M of watershed rehabilitated areas.

(c) Absence of legal framework for WUAs: The legal framework governing WUAs was not yet enacted at
the project's close, which constitutes a hurdle for proper O&M of marshlands. Finalization and
operationalization of the legal framework has been delayed, and the draft report is awaiting approval. The
approved legal framework would allow the collection of water fees by WUAs, which in turn could be used to
finance the O&M expenditures of key infrastructure. The ongoing World Bank-financed Great Lakes Project
has taken over the task of getting the legal framework approved and applied to its operating area (also
confirmed by the Bank's TTL during the interview with the IEG Evaluator).

(d) Inadequate O&M of Feeder Roads: Inadequate O&M for feeder roads is a recurring problem in Burundi,
given the lack of resources of communes. Project-rehabilitated rural roads come under the purview of local
authorities, and accordingly have been transferred to communes following work completion. The transfer was
predicated on the obligation by the commune to ensure adequate maintenance. However, evidence suggests
that the perennial lack of financial resources precludes communes to undertake proper maintenance, so that
the rural roads face the risk of reverting to their initial stage of being left again in disrepair and impassable
during part of the rainy season. The ICR was not clear on the mitigation measures being taken by the Bank
to address this important issue.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team, in close collaboration with the Government counterpart team, played an active role
  in the project’s identification, facilitating/supporting its preparation and conducting appraisal and final
  project design in a manner which addressed strategic constraints and strongly aligned with sound

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



  strategies, while also meeting Bank requirements (including the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguard
  outcomes).

  The project’s quality-at-entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory by this review, based on the following
  evidence (ICR, para. 73): (a) project design was strongly aligned to the Government’s national and
  sectoral strategic objectives and priorities of addressing the strategic issues in Burundi’s agrarian sector,
  notably food insecurity and rural poverty; (b) project design was also strongly aligned with the Bank’s
  CASs (over two periods) and the on-going CPF for Burundi; (c) project design was sound, and focused
  appropriately on improving agricultural productivity of smallholders, building on relevant experiences and
  lessons in Burundi and other countries, including from the Bank’s supported predecessor project
  (PRASAB: Rehabilitation and Support and Sustainable Land Management Project for Burundi); the
  results for PRASAB showed beneficiary producer organizations (POs) achieved increases in yields
  induced by the project’s dissemination of appropriate technological packages and improved access to
  finance; (d) the project’s AF phase supported an integrated approach to value addition and access to
  markets to enable farmers to sell their surplus production. This justified the introduction of processing and
  market access facilitation activities in the AF designed to consolidate achievements obtained during the
  initial phase; (e) the project appropriately focused on a few products (milk, bananas, cassava, fruits, and
  vegetables) that had shown potential, for which the project adopted a fully integrated value chain
  approach. The new technical production packages were meant to be scaled up to achieve economies of
  scale whenever possible and further consolidate gains; and (f) the Bank established a sound M&E
  system based on the M&E in the earlier PRASAB project.

  Notwithstanding these positive design aspects, implementation experience revealed three design
  shortcomings (especially involving the design of the AF phase): (a) the project’s design for value-addition
  sub-projects was “suboptimal” (ICR, para. 73) in the sense that it failed to fully take into account the
  complexity of these sub-projects and the timeline required for their implementation; (b) the inclusion of
  several nutrition-related interventions in the AF phase were not accompanied by specific performance
  indicators in the updated Results Framework, which could have provided an important tool for promoting
  further follow-up actions on an important strategic issue, following project closure; (c) the World Bank
  team anticipated that the Government would contribute US$2 million to project costs. In retrospect, “this
  was ill conceived” (ICR, para. 73). The Government’s contribution never materialized, as it faced a fiscal
  crisis, especially during the turmoil of the post-electoral period.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of Bank supervision support was moderately satisfactory, based on the evidence provided in
 the ICR (para. 74), including: (a) The World Bank project team ensured systematic implementation support
 of the project as reflected by the periodic missions scheduled on time (with the exception of the period
 during the post-election political crisis when field missions were restricted, in 2016); (b) the Bank’s Aide
 Memoires and Implementation Status and Results Reports prepared by each mission provided a good and
 candid identification and discussion of strategic and priority implementation issues and agreed follow-up
 and proactive actions, on a timely basis, especially by the Project’s PIU. These actions included:
 (i) simplification of the process of channeling funds to project beneficiaries; (ii) reallocation of proceeds

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



 following the strengthening of the US dollar versus the SDR (through a Level 2 restructuring);
 (iii) processing of an AF, to address strategic issues not covered in the initial design phase; (iv) integration
 of nutrition-related interventions and nutrition-smart farming in Component 1; (v) encouraging the
 suppression of goat imports following the PPR/Pests des Petits Ruminants outbreak; (vi) supporting the de
 facto creation of WUAs wherever irrigation schemes were developed, notwithstanding the delays in
 formalizing their legal status; and (vii) facilitating the construction of a facility for production of in-vitro
 planting material at ISABU/Institute of Agronomic Sciences of Burundi.

 Notwithstanding the Bank’s constructive and proactive approach taken during implementation, in
 retrospect, it is not clear to what extent the Bank (at various levels) took concerted actions to address three
 implementation issues: (a) formalizing the establishment and operationalization of the Water User
 Associations/WUAs; (b) resolving the implementation issues/delays involving the value-addition
 subprojects funded by the AF, which included an overambitious produce processing initiatives, within a
 limited and unrealistic time frame (e.g., possible extension of the project, even to help focus on these two
 pending issues); and (c) helping to ensure the release of Government’s counterpart contributions, which
 did not materialize, due to the fiscal and political crisis.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Bank's project team provided technical support to the Government's counterpart team and eventually
 established the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the design of the project's M&E system, building on the
 results and lessons from the PRASAB's Management Information System (MIS). The Government's PCU
 was responsible for the implementation of the M&E system, working closely with the Project's Inter-
 Provincial Coordination Units. PDO indicators captured the main outcomes and contribution to core
 impacts, which were expected from effective project implementation. However, some of the outcome
 indicators could have been improved, simplified and sharpened to reflect the project's design, as follows
 (ICR, para. 62):

 (a) The first PDO indicator, “Number of Direct Project Beneficiaries" does not measure outcomes, rather,
 this indicator should have been shown as an output indicator.

 (b) Two indicators related to “market access” partially overlapped: (i) PDO indicator #3 ‘Production of
 commodity in targeted value chains marketed by participating producers’ and (ii) PDO indicator #4
 ‘Increased volume of processed produce marketed (disaggregated by commodity)’. PDO indicator #4 was
 partly subsumed under PDO indicator #3 for the marketed fraction of project-affected production and




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



 could have been formulated as an intermediate indicator, measuring only the fraction of production
 processed, bearing in mind that all processed production is marketed.

 (c) Intermediate Indicator #4 ‘Participating producer groups/associations/cooperatives having contractual
 arrangements with marketing agents’, proved to have little meaning in the project context. In the rural areas
 of Burundi, few transactions are yet to be formalized under contractual arrangements, and it was not
 expected that this project would fundamentally change the status of these transactions.

 (d) Some of the target values for key project indicators related to productivity increases could have been
 more precisely specified as referring to the entire targeted value chains in project areas (instead of only the
 project’s subproject portfolio), hence needing a specific production survey in project areas to collect the
 required data, which was not done.

 (e) the AF phase included targeted support for improving nutrition-smart production and consumption
 practices of vulnerable Batwa sub-population, but there were no indicators proposed to the results
 framework to track these aspects.

 While these shortcomings were individually significant, they did not have a major detrimental impact on the
 efficacy of the project's M&E design.




b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E implementation focused on operationalizing the Results Framework, which faced several
  implementation challenges. To address and resolve these difficulties, the project supported the following
  M&E activities: (a) data collection, which was carried by the “Proximity Development Organizations
  (ODPs) at the grassroots level, using specific forms for each value chain supported by the project. Data
  were aggregated on a quarterly basis; (b) the participating Provincial Offices of Environment, Agriculture
  and Livestock (BPEAEs) managed the control and monitoring of data collection activities; (c) the project
  provided training to both the ODPs and the BPEAEs to develop their capacities in conducting the
  project’s M&E activities; (d) at the central level, the PIU managed the data processing activities; it vetted
  and aggregated the data; (e) In the process of data collection, international agricultural research institutes
  (ILRI and IITA) were closely involved during the AF phase, to help consolidate the M&E information for
  effective use (see below).

  At the central level, M&E activities were entrusted to the national M&E officer stationed in the
  PIU. During implementation, especially in following up on the AF, there were appropriate staffing
  changes involving several of the Project’s M&E experts, which helped ensure smooth and sustainable
  implementation (ICR, paras. 63 and 64).



c. M&E Utilization
  The Project's M&E information was generated and utilized effectively throughout project implementation,
  based on the evidence presented in the ICR (para. 65), as follows:



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



  (a) Overall, the M&E section of the PIU performed well on collecting, analyzing and providing decision-
  makers with a huge amount of useful and pertinent data, which were linked to the performance
  indicators of the results framework.

  (b) M&E data were used to monitor project activities on a day-to-day basis, and provided guidance to the
  Project Steering Committee/PSC during its annual
  meetings.

  (c) The data also informed stakeholders of project progress toward its outcomes and targets, as
  specified in the results framework.

  (d) M&E data were used in particular to inform the design of the AF phase, leading to the decision to
  refocus the project on scaling up sub-project activities and move to post-harvest and value-addition
  activities (processing and commercialization).

  (e) The M&E system’s results enabled identification of delays in implementing activities, especially
  commodity processing activities at the tail-end of the AF period. Accordingly, the data and information
  generated by the Project’s M&E system enabled both the Government and the World Bank to issue
  timely recommendations to address delays and other issues that were
  encountered.

  (f) The PIU deployed efforts to produce further statistical treatment to elaborate what the raw data
  revealed, as well as to conduct specialized qualitative surveys to complement statistical data and shed
  light on some key results. These additional efforts and course correction were made in part with the help
  of the entities involved in project implementation.

  Notwithstanding some of the shortcomings in the design stage of the M&E system, a substantial rating
  for M&E quality is justified because of the satisfactory implementation performance and effective
  utilization of M&E data to help steer project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as Category B (partial assessment), and triggered seven environmental
   safeguards: Environmental Assessment - OP/BP 4.01; Natural Habitats - OP/BP 4.04; Pest Management -
   OP 4.09; Indigenous Peoples - OP/BP 4.10; Safety of Dams - OP/BP 4.37; Involuntary Settlement - OP/BP
   4.12; and Projects on International Waterways - OP/BP 7.50.

   Based on the assessment of evidence presented in the ICR regarding compliance with the relevant
   safeguard issues identified in the PAD, the project’s overall progress with respect to environmental and
   social safeguards was Moderately Satisfactory. The ICR includes the following relevant supporting
   evidence (ICR, paras. 67 - 70).


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



  (a) The project adhered to the requirements and procedures laid out in the six safeguards policy
  documents publicly disclosed before project inception

  (b) There were some incidental safeguards issues during project implementation, but, overall, the project
  activities complied with applicable World Bank safeguards policies. The project encountered two issues
  which were resolved appropriately during implementation (para.
  67);
                                                                                      (c) At inception and during
  most of the project's implementation, the PIU operated without a specialized safeguard expert, with the
  responsibility to follow up on World Bank safeguard policies entrusted to short-term specialists. This proved
  a satisfactory arrangement. However, given the workload, the Bank recommended recruitment of a full-time
  environmental and social specialist within the PIU. This person was subsequently complemented by an
  external consultant to address the various complex social issues. The ICR provides further details on the
  main tasks carried out by the PIU to fulfill satisfactorily the environmental and safeguards compliance
  requirements (para. 69).

  However, the ICR recognized that the recommended end-project environmental and social audit was not
  carried out, therefore, it is difficult to determine whether or not there was compliance with Bank guidelines
  with respect to ascertaining whether: (a) all instruments related to involuntary resettlement and indigenous
  peoples were all comprehensively prepared and implemented; (b) there were any outstanding grievances
  from Project Affected People; and (c) the sustainability of interventions carried out in favor of vulnerable
  groups was established.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management (FM): Based on the evidence provided in the ICR, overall FM performance was
  satisfactory (para. 71): (a) the PIU had competent FM staff which conducted sound FM practices and
  performance, which was also enabled by continuity of the same staff throughout project implementation;
  (b) a drop in FM performance (around 2018 and 2019) warranted a drop in performance rating
  (“moderately satisfactory”), and whereby two key issues were addressed by mid-2019, to warrant an
  upgrading to “satisfactory”; (c) external audits were consistently submitted on time. The qualifications
  regarding the sub-projects were appropriately taken up and corrected, and the last project audit was
  unqualified.

  (ii) Procurement: Overall, the project complied fully with the World Bank procurement procedures;
  procurement activities were consistently rated Satisfactory during the life of the project. This performance
  was enabled by the PIU which had strong capacity in procurement matters. The procurement problems
  related to processing/value-addition sub-projects that occurred at the end of the project were due to
  external events, including the deficient performance of one of the technical assistance institutes recruited
  to support the project’s AF phase (ICR, para. 72).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



  Not Applicable (N/A)



d. Other
  The ICR highlights four other positive aspects arising from the project. While there are some attribution
  issues to determine the precise role of the project in generating these benefits, the nature and scope of
  these benefits are summarized below, based on the evidence presented in the ICR (paras. 41 – 48).

  (a) Gender (para. 41): The project has been successful in reaching a large number and proportion of
  women, comprising about 48% of the Project’s direct beneficiaries. It has successfully prioritized, targeted
  and reached women (and other vulnerable groups) through most activities and contributed to their
  empowerment and well-being. The Project’s satisfaction survey revealed the project has been very popular
  among women farmers, since they have benefited from new technologies and technical assistance on the
  part of the project, in particular, to grow vegetables and develop livestock activities (cows and small
  ruminants), and the project’s support and equipment to reduce their workload, as well as benefiting from
  nutrition and health education activities which were part of the AF phase;

  (b) Vulnerable People (para. 42): The project provided direct benefits to a special category of vulnerable
  people, the native Batwa people, who often have been marginalized in Burundi’s development process. The
  project financed 175 sub-projects which helped upgrade the Batwas’ livelihood conditions, including
  housing subprojects. The project relied on expanding the role of UNIPROBA, which was the national
  organization in charge of Batwa people’s affairs, for the implementation and monitoring of project activities.
  The ICR implied that UNIPROBA would build on this experience to continue to provide expanded and
  sustainable improvements for the Batwa peoples.

  (c) Institutional Strengthening (paras. 43 – 45): There were three different dimensions which the project
  supported, which will have positive implications for helping to sustain and scale-up project activities:

  (i) capacity building of public institutions, as part of component 1, and including prioritized training,
  equipment and infrastructure, especially involving the national and provincial agricultural extension and
  research systems (see para. 44 for further details); (ii) organizational capacity building of Producer
  Organizations (POs); and (iii) Water User Associations (WUAs) was one of the project’s main tasks, and
  their enhanced roles and capacities were vital to enable sustainability and scaling up of project benefits;

  (d) Nutrition (para. 46 and 47): The project, enabled by the AF phase, supported nutrition-smart farming
  and feeding activities, which proved to be extremely relevant and elicited great interest with beneficiaries.
  Project-implemented nutrition interventions were designed to address food insecurity, redress vitamin
  deficiency, and trigger household behavioral change regarding nutrition practices. The project financed 48
  nutrition sub-projects. Notwithstanding the relevance and introduction of these nutrition activities, they were
  incorporated late in the project, and remained limited in scope. The Project’s M&E system did not add any
  nutrition-related indicators. The ICR concluded (para. 47): “it is not clear what real impacts the project has
  had on the behavior, diets, and nutritional status of the target population. In that sense, what the project
  started regarding nutrition-sensitive agriculture activities is certainly an unfinished business that needs to be
  pursued.”

  (e) Climate Change: The project promoted climate change adaptation and mitigation practices that
  included watershed protection and promotion of enhanced climate-smart agriculture technologies and


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



   practices. Paragraph.48 in the ICR provides further details of the project’s specific contributions, which can
   be scaled up.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 This review concluded that there
                                                                                 were minor shortcomings in the
                                                                                 project’s relevance,
                                                                                 achievements and efficiency
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Satisfactory              which, in the absence of any
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                 significant shortcomings,
                                                                                 indicated a satisfactory outcome
                                                                                 rating, according to the ICRR
                                                                                 Guidelines.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents 6 sound lessons (ICR, paras. 80-85). The lessons that have broader application
than this project have been summarized below, with some sharpening of the text.

(a) A community driven development (CDD) design can be successfully implemented in an
FCV environment (para 80): This project successfully combined support to agriculture production,
infrastructure development, and access to markets in a participatory approach at the grassroots, It
was well suited as a model for other development operations in an FCV context providing targeted
support to smallholders and rural entrepreneurs for increasing agriculture productivity, infrastructure
development, access to market and capacity development of strategic actors, at various levels.

(b) Innovations Require Adequate Time and Support to Implement and Become Sustainable
(para. 81): Given the project’s introduction of improved technology involving processing and
sophisticated equipment in a low income country like Burundi, the lesson is that the relevant project
activities, especially if innovations involve sophisticated equipment, should be carried out with a
sufficient lead time, so that the project-funded equipment can be tested and made functional, and to
enable the operators to be trained, prior to project closing.

(c) Importance of Integrating Crop and Animal Husbandry Support for Enhanced
Productivity (para. 82): Most subprojects provided this type of integrated crops/livestock approach,
since most smallholders cultivated crops and raised different types of livestock. Therefore, the
project provided an important lesson regarding the rationale of the project supporting increased


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



productivity of both smallholder crops and livestock activities, which contributed to symbiotic
production increases, for the kinds of production conditions prevailing in the project area, or similar
contexts. This point was also reinforced by the project's Impact Evaluation Study (2020) and by the
Bank's TTL to the IEG evaluator during the interview with the project team (note, January 27, 2021).

(d) Approaches to promoting a successful “solidarity chain” with wider community benefits
will impart benefits to other beneficiaries (para 83): The producers benefiting from project-
supplied animals (cows) had the obligation as part of their sub-projects to ensure that one of the
offspring from the heifer would be given free of charge to another member of the Producer
Organization (PO) under strict social control, thereby generating wider benefits for the community.
These initial producer recipients also received specific training for enhancing their productivity. The
ICR correctly recognized two factors, which are also lessons, which could apply to other countries
with similar cultural conditions. The two emerging lessons from this project's solidarity chain are: (i)
to ensure the existence of appropriate preconditions for this solidarity approach, where this process
of a “solidarity chain” is particularly well attuned to the existing local social fabric of Burundi’s/or
another country’s rural areas, where population is dense, and strict community rules and norms
apply; and (ii) to include in the project's appropriate follow-up actions to ensure provision of training
for the second-round beneficiaries to further enhance their benefits, and also to ensure viable
approaches to scaling-up and sustainability of this mechanism to the next round of beneficiaries.

(e) Sound Market Analysis is an Important Necessary Condition for any Project that
Generates increased Production (para. 84): The project experience highlights the lesson, that a
project which generates production surpluses, especially by smallholders, the importance of carrying
out sound ex-ante market analysis, including assessing: market potential and the competitiveness of
the targeted value chains; and realistic domestic and export market outlets.

(f) Legislation to Empower Producer Organizations (POs) needs to be Timely to have a
Sustainable Impact (para. 85): The project highlights the vital role of Water User Associations
(WUA) to enable beneficiaries organized into POs to manage and maintain community-based
infrastructure provided by the project, in this case, marshland irrigation infrastructure. Accordingly,
the ICR highlighted the importance and need for the project to overhaul the entire regulatory
framework of WUAs to create and organize independent WUAs, which are essential to maximize
project impact and improve sustainability, including collection of water fees and management of the
funds by WUAs. The project’s specific lesson is to ensure that the project addresses relevant
legislative requirements early during project implementation to ensure adequate time for completion
of legislation prior to project closure, to the extent feasible, or at least, to ensure clear follow-up
arrangements so that legislation is completed within a reasonable period of time.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Bi-Ag. Past. Product. & Market Devel. (P107343)



Overall, the ICR is well written, analytical, evidence and results-focused, especially with respect to: (a) a
comprehensive results framework and with most sections were supported by generally adequate evidence,
albeit some limitations on the rigor of the project's attribution issues which were resolved through
discussions between IEG and the Bank Task team); (b) inclusion of strategic lessons which have application
for similar projects in Burundi and other countries in Africa; (c) candid in recognizing explicitly: (i) the most
important shortfalls of the project, especially regarding the implementation delays and sustainability challenges
of the agro-processing investments provided by the AF phase; and (ii) the various risks to development
outcomes, including the delays in approving and operationalizing the legislation of the WUAs (cited above).

One shortfall of the ICR was that, contrary to OPCS guidelines for ICRs which call for an efficiency section
to provide a concise and solid review of the ex-ante economic and financial analysis, this was not included in
the ICR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 22
