     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0022169

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P154672                                        Hebei Air Pollution Prevention

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                          Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86230                                     31-Dec-2018                                        500,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jun-2016                                    31-Dec-2019

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           500,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Vibecke Dixon                   Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives

   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) was:
   "To reduce emissions of specific air pollutants in the key sectors in Hebei".




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No


c. Components

   This operation used a Program-for-Results (PforR) lending instrument, with seven Disbursement-Linked
   Indicators (DLIs), for supporting five of the seven subplans of the Hebei Action Plan (HAP) (discussed in
   section 3a). There were four results areas (PAD, pages 10 -13). The DLIs to measure the key results are
   discussed in section 3b.
   1. Comprehensive control of industrial enterprises and reduced emission of multi-pollutant
   emissions (Sulphur Dioxide (SD2), Nitrogen Oxides (NOx), and Primary Particulate Matter 2.5 (PM
   2.5) from key industrial sectors. The program financing for this area was US$180.0 million. This area
   planned at ensuring that industrial enterprises in Hebei province met the government's reduced emissions
   standards on a daily basis, through installing a Continuous Emissions Monitoring system (CES). Activities
   in this area: (i) incentivizing the enterprises to invest in particulate removal equipment: (ii) providing CEM
   equipment to the provincial and municipal Environmental Protection Bureaus (EPBs): and (iii) training the
   staff of enterprises and the government on using the system.
   2. Area Pollution control and dust control. The program financing for this area was US$159.9
   million. This area planned to control air pollution especially in rural areas. Activities in this area: (i)
   incentivizing rural households to use clean and efficient stoves: and (ii) promoting environment-friendly
   fertilizers based on soil testing results.
   3. Prevention and control of emissions from mobile sources. The program financing for this was
   US$78.7 million. This area planned to control emissions from mobile sources. Activities in this area: (i)
   improving fuel quality ((gasoline and diesel with lower Sulphur concentration): (ii) eliminating old high
   emission "yellow sticker" vehicles (vehicles that did not meet government standards) and promoting new
   energy vehicles (NEV) for public transport, city services and government agencies: and (iii) strengthening
   the environmental management of vehicles.
   4. Establishment of monitoring systems and warning systems and planning tools. The
   program financing for this was US$80.0 million. This area planned to establish monitoring and warning
   systems and policy tools for reducing ambient PM2.5 concentration in the province over the next 10 -15
   years. Activities in this area: (i) strengthening the cooperation of the EPBs with meteorological
   departments through establishing weather monitoring and early warning systems: (ii) revising the province's
   environmental protection regulations and building capacity for environmental monitoring: and (iii)
   communication campaigns for controlling PM 2.5 and providing professional training on air quality
   management.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$968.0 million. The actual cost was US$1,175.0
   million.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



   Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$500.0 million. This amount
   was disbursed.
   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution (from central and provincial government earmarked
   funds) was estimated at US$468.0 million. The actual contribution was 44% more than planned
   at US$675.0 million.
   Dates. The project was effective on October 11, 2016 and scheduled to close on December 31, 2018. The
   project closed an year behind schedule on December 31, 2019.
   Other changes. The closing date was extended by a year when 75% of the loan
   was disbursed for providing additional time for collecting the data required for completing DLI 7 (a cost
   effective plan on air quality), and for completing disbursements of four DLIs that were either in the
   verification stage or awaiting approval.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Country context. Rapid economic development under a resource-intensive growth model in the years
  before appraisal, had contributed to growing air pollution, with concomitant economic costs and health
  impacts. The World Health Organization (WHO) identified air pollution as the world's largest single
  environmental risk, with 4.3 and 3.7 million deaths occurring worldwide annually, due to indoor and outdoor
  pollution. In China, published estimates ranged between 350,000 to 1.3 million annual deaths. The objective
  of reducing air pollution was hence important in the country context.
  Regional context. The JingjinJi Region comprising Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei, and neighboring provinces, was
  one of the highest polluted urban areas in the world, with annual average Particulate Matter 2.5 in the
  region, three times higher than the specified government standards. The source apportionment study,
  identifying the sources of ambient pollution and quantifying their respective contribution to
  pollution, indicated that industrial processes were the main source (contributing 54% of emissions), followed
  by residential emissions from burning coal (33%). The power sector accounted for 27% and 20% of
  Nitrogen and Sulphur dioxides respectively, and the transport sector for 26% of Nitrogen dioxide.
  Provincial context. Hebei province was responsible for 70% of PM 2.5 emissions in the region.
  This apportionment reflected the high concentration of polluting industries in the province (a power sector
  almost entirely coal-fueled, and iron and steel, cement and flat glass production). Hebei was also the largest
  agricultural producer in the region and had emissions due to the high application of nitrogen fertilizers, that
  was 5.6 times higher than the national average (which was about 30% higher than the world average). The
  objective of decoupling emissions from economic growth was hence important in the provincial context.
  Government strategy. At the national level, the State Council issued the Air Pollution Prevention and
  Control Action Plan (APPCAP) in 2013. This plan specified the goal of reducing ambient concentration of
  PM2.5 in China by 10% by 2017 (as compared to 2012). The plan also specified stringent measures for the
  three urban regions (including the JingjinJi region), and mandated the provinces to prepare timebound plans
  for reducing air pollution.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



Provincial strategy. The Hebei province prepared the Hebei Prevention and Control Plan (HAP) for 2013-
2017. The plan specified the goal of reducing ambient PM 2.5 in the province by 25% by 2017. This
plan included a list of actions to address air pollution under seven main subplans.

  •   1. Comprehensive control of industrial enterprises and reduced emissions of multi-pollutants.
  •   2. Area pollution control and dust control.
  •   3. Prevention and control of emission from mobile sources.
  •   4. Establishment of monitoring and warning systems and planning tools.
  •   5. Elimination of overcapacity and promotion of industrial transformation and upgrade.
  •   6. Adjustment of the energy structure and increase of the clean energy supply. and
  •   7. Supporting measures.

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Bank strategy for China. The strategic theme one of
the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013- 2016 specifically highlighted the need for "supporting
greener growth" through "demonstrating pollution control measures". The second engagement area of the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020 - 2025, highlighted the need for " promoting greener
growth, by facilitating the transition to a low carbon energy, including through reducing air pollution".
Bank's prior experience in China. The Bank has financed traditional lending operations in China on the
key sectors covered by this operation (environmental management, energy, transport and agriculture) - and
in some cases, using an integrated multi sectoral approach. This operation was the second operation using
the PforR instrument in China and the first in the province. The operation supported five subplans of the
HAP plan enumerated above (one to four and seven). Alongside this operation, the Bank had approved
another PforR operation - the Innovative Financing for Air Pollution Control in the JingjinJi region and
neighboring provinces (including Hebei), aimed at addressing air pollution through reducing coal
consumption in the region. To avoid duplication among the two operations, the HAP's sixth subplan was
excluded from this operation. The fifth sub-plan - elimination of overcapacity in the power sector - was
excluded, as it was deemed to be not amenable for a PforR instrument based on environmental and social
screening.
Rationale for PforR. The rationale for using this instrument for the HAP plan was: One,
although Hebei government had devoted significant resources for implementing the HAP Plan, they
were inadequate for achieving the goal of reducing air pollution by 25% in 2017. This was primarily due to
the lack of technical quality and coverage of measures, compounded by budgeting issues that prevented the
annual earmarked resources for the HAP plan to be spent on time: and two, a traditional investment lending
operation focused only on upfront specific infrastructure investments, would have precluded the Bank from
using a much larger opportunity to influence the entire HAP plan. The PforR s instrument provided
opportunities for incentivizing key specific measures for reducing air pollution, introducing international good
practices in the HAP, and providing incentives for the province to provide the earmarked resources to the
operation through a sharper focus on results and linking Bank disbursements to independently verified
results. There were seven DLIs (two each for results area one, two and four) and one for results area
one (discussed below).




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 12
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective

     To reduce emissions of specific air pollutants in the key sectors in Hebei.

    Rationale

    Theory of change. The results framework was logical. Incentivizing the industrial enterprises to invest
    in equipment for reducing emissions of multi-pollutants and installing CEMs that were integrated with the
    centrally managed CEM system of the EPBs, and training the staff of enterprises and government staff on
    using the system, were aimed at improving monitoring and enforcing air quality standards. Activities aimed at
    replacing coal stoves with clean stoves and providing incentives for promoting environmentally-friendly
    fertilizers were likely to control air pollution in rural areas. Activities aimed at increasing the number of
    clean energy electric buses (as opposed to diesel buses) were aimed at controlling pollution from mobile
    sources. These activities together were likely to reduce emissions of specific pollutants in key sectors, and
    thereby aid in realizing the HAP goal of reducing air pollution by 25% by 2017. The outcomes are however
    contingent on the implicit assumption that the clean stoves will continue to be used, the environmentally
    friendly fertilizers continue to be adopted, and the province has the technical skills and equipment for
    maintaining the electric buses. Activities aimed at developing a comprehensive inventory of air pollutants and
    preparing a cost effectiveness study for prioritizing investments in coming years were forward-looking, and
    aimed at controlling air pollution beyond 2017 in the province. The links between the activities, the DLIs and
    the outcomes were clear, and the intended outcomes were monitorable.
    Outputs (ICR, pages 46 -47).

        • 480 monitoring and enforcement staff of the EPBs, and 60 work safety supervision staff were trained, as
        targeted.
        • A Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) was established and a complaint hotline was made available
        to the public as targeted.
        • Hebei province disclosed an official website describing its performance on air quality management, the
        2017 work plan and its monitoring of data of air quality.
        • Twelve EPBs at the provincial and prefecture level implemented standard protocols on CEM systems for
        emission of air pollutants as targeted. The integration of the centrally controlled CEM with the municipal
        CEMs enabled real time data-sharing among the levels of government.
        • 100 enterprises in the state and municipal controlled lists (representing all the major enterprises in the
        province) were integrated in the improved CEM and enforcement system for monitoring air pollutants as
        targeted. The CEM data was made publicly available.


                                                                                                         Page 5 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



  •  1,221,500 clean stoves (stoves using gas and electricity) were deployed to replace older polluting coal
  stoves. This exceeded the target of 800,000 clean stoves. Support was provided to Hebei to design
  international campaigns targeting stove manufacturers and existing and potential users at the county
  level. .
  • Formula fertilizer based on soil testing were applied on 976,800 hectares of land under cultivation with
  seven crops. There were no targets for this indicator. Based on third party verification, nitrogen use
  efficiency increased to 37% (from 32%) before the program.
  • 4,632 clean energy electric buses replaced diesel buses. This exceeded the target of 4,632 clean buses.
  The diesel buses were disposed of, in accordance with national regulations. The ICR (paragraph 78)
  notes that thirty five dismantling enterprises in Hebei were upgraded in compliance with Chinese
  environmental regulations. Decommissioned vehicles were sent to these dismantling enterprises for final
  disposal. The number of disposed vehicles was verified by the third party entity. Given that the operation
  and maintenance of electric vehicles is considerably lower than diesel vehicles, it is likely that the electric
  buses will continue to be operated in Hebei.
  • A province-wide emissions inventory for 2015 was prepared following the technical guidelines from the
  Ministry of Ecology and Environment as targeted. The inventory was used by the province to determine
  the largest emissions sources in formulating its 2017 - 2020 strategy for controlling air
  pollution. The province has been regularly updating the inventory, as a tool for information and
  prioritization.
  • The cost effective comprehensive plan on air quality control for the next five years was approved by the
  province. This analysis indicated that industrial emission improvements through data monitoring and
  tightening enforcement control (DLI 1 and 2) are the most cost-efficient to reduce mean population
  exposure, followed by fertilizer efficiency (DLI 4). The electric buses were the least cost-efficient (DLI 5) to
  reduce ambient PM2.5 concentration. This analysis also found that the implementation of Hebei's air
  quality management measures avoids seven percent of carbon dioxide emissions by 2020 compared with
  a baseline in which no air quality action plan is implemented.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 19 - 20 and pages 36 -39).

  • There was a cumulative reduction of 454,000 tons of emissions of Sulphur dioxide (SO2) in the province
  by December 2019 from industrial enterprises, as compared to in December 2013. This represented more
  than three times the target of 150,000 tons. The emissions of nitrogen oxide in the province from industrial
  enterprises reduced by 3,269 tons, as compared to the target of 1,300 tons. The emissions reductions
  were achieved in large scale, heavy industries such as power generation, steel production, cement and
  glass production. The baseline for this indicator was zero.
  • There was a cumulative reduction of 3,269 tons of PM 2.5 emissions due to the clean stoves by
  December 2019, as compared to in January 2014. This exceeded the target of 3,269 tons. The baseline
  for this indicator was zero.




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



                   • There was a cumulative reduction of 51,272 tons of nitrogen oxides from the transport sector, due to the
                   replacement of diesel buses by electric buses in December 2019, as compared to in January 2014. The
                   baseline for this indicator was zero.
                   • With the four indicators far exceeding the targets, the mean population-weighted PM 2.5 in the JingjinJi
                   region reduced by around 33% in 2019 and by about 35% in Hebei province (as compared to the goal of
                   25% in the HAP).

             Given that the indicators were largely exceeded, efficacy is rated as High.



             Rating
      High
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                       Rate
                                                                        Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                       Available?
                                                                                                  0
            Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                                  Not Applicable
                                                                                                  0
            ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                                  Not Applicable

     * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 12
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)




6. Outcome


Overall relevance to the Bank, the government and the provincial strategies is High. Efficacy of the single
objective - to reduce emissions of specific key pollutants in the key sectors in Hebei is rated as High, as the
quantitative targets far exceeded the set targets, and the tools for driving the government's reforms going
forward were completed as targeted and the DLIs were fully relevant to the changing circumstances. Taking into
account the ratings discussed above, overall outcome is rated as Highly satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Environmental risk. The ICR (paragraph 97) notes that many of the operation results are irreversible (such as,
replacing coal stoves with clean stoves, diesel buses with clean buses and emission reduction in the industrial
sector through implementation of CEM technologies), There is also the likelihood that other program results
(such as use of the CEM system to monitor and control industrial emissions, agricultural practices to optimize
nitrogen use, and the emissions inventory), would continue. It is however not clear whether the clean stoves will
continue to be used and whether formula fertilizers will continue to be adopted, given that they depend on
change in people's behavior. It is also not clear whether the province has the skill set and equipment required
for maintaining the electric buses.
Government commitment. This risk is likely to be low, given that the province has approved the cost-effective
plan for further air quality improvements. Government commitment at the national and provincial levels is also
demonstrated by the level of counterpart funding for this operation, which was 44% more than planned at
appraisal.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     Resources secured by the preparation team from the Pollution Management and Environment Health
     Trust Fund (PMEH) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) aided in preparing the technical design of
     the operation. The DLIs were appropriate in that they were science-based and aimed at driving
     the government reform process forward. As the project was funded through specific budget lines of the
     government, implementation could commence before Bank loan disbursements. The implementation
     arrangements were appropriate, with the Working Group's Office (WGO) established within the Hebei
     Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB) responsible for project coordination (PAD, paragraph 65). The EPB
     was already responsible for monitoring emissions reduction from different activities, using an evidence-

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



  based approach (PAD, paragraph 68). Given that this was the first PforR in Hebei province, several risks
  were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with the institutional capacity for
  implementation, and fiduciary and social risks. Several mitigation measures were incorporated, including
  capacity building for environmental supervision, establishing a Grievance Redress Mechanism at the
  provincial level and improving public participation through a publicly accessible website. The arrangements
  made at appraisal for fiduciary and safeguards compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 9).
  The project closing date was extended by a year. According to the clarifications provided by the team, this
  extension was granted to complete DLI 7, which was required for completing the Greenhouse Gas and Air
  Pollution interactions and Synergies (GAINS) model. Given that this important step for informing policies on
  air quality management in China for the next five years, the Bank performance at quality-at-entry is rated
  as highly satisfactory.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  Formal supervision missions were held twice a year. The missions were supplemented with frequent
  informal discussions with Hebei authorities and technicians working in the operation.The supervision
  team included experts from multiple disciplines. This aided in providing support and guidance to the
  program. There were two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during the lifetime of the operation and transition in
  leadership was seamless, as the incoming TTL had been a team member from the beginning of the
  operation. The PMEH Trust Fund and the GEF provided critical support about the technical underpinnings
  and the research capabilities needed to implement the program. The Mid Term Review (MTR) held on
  January 29, 2018, was used to assess progress. The delay in the completion of DLI 7 was noted at the MTR
  and addressed when a formal program request was received from the Department of International
  Economic and Financial Cooperation of the Ministry of Finance, on December 6, 2018.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The results framework was logical and the key outcome indicators - reduction of Sulphur dioxides and nitrogen
  oxides from industrial enterprises, reduction of PM 2.5 emissions due to clean stoves and reduction of nitrogen
  oxides from the transport sector, were attributable to the operation activities. The baseline figures were set at
  zero to better estimate emissions and benchmark progress. The provincial Continuous Emissions Monitoring


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



  (CEM) Center, as part of the Working Group Office, was responsible for data collection (PAD, paragraph 65).
  The consolidation of results and indicator values in one centralized Project Management Office (PMO),
  facilitated centralized oversight.



b. M&E Implementation
  The operation completed reports for each DLI with the necessary data and evidence, and these reports were
  further reviewed for third party verification (ICR, paragraph 73). . The ICR notes that M&E was
  implemented as planned. The ICR (paragraph 23) reports that M&E was implemented thoroughly, and was
  reported regularly as part of the client-prepared Program progress report.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E results were used for monitoring performance and were also used strategically. For example, PDO
  indicators 1 and 2 on the reduction of Sulphur Oxide and Nitrogen Oxide emissions from enterprises
  included in the CEM depended on the implementation of the CEM upgrade, made by the province.
  Therefore, the Program's monitoring and evaluation efforts supported Hebei's monitoring efforts by designing
  methodologies to assess excess nitrogen fertilizer application and laboratory testing of emissions from
  stoves and vehicles. DLI 6 was also directly focused on strengthening Hebei's ability to monitor pollutant
  emissions.
  In sum, the M&E framework was rated as High.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  Environmental and social safeguards. The PAD (paragraph 109) notes that the PforR Program was to
  rely on the existing local legal frameworks and institutional systems for managing environmental and social
  safeguards. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared for the program and
  publicly disclosed (PAD, paragraph 114). The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that the environmental and social
  management systems under the national framework were effectively implemented, and the PforR was
  compliant with environmental and social safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that in the month before
  project closure, several public media platforms reported cases of carbon monoxide poisoning in Hebei due
  to the use of coal in new/clean stoves. The Hebei's Program Management Office confirmed that the cases
  had not taken place in the two municipalities where the PforR was implemented.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. A financial management assessment of the HAP program system was conducted at
  appraisal. The assessment concluded that the HAP's systems were adequate to meet the Bank's PforR policy
  and Directive (PAD, paragraph 28).The ICR (paragraph 89) notes that there were no significant financial
  management issues during implementation, and that the Program audit reports were unqualified.
  Procurement. The PAD (paragraph 98) notes that there were no large contracts valued at above current
  Operational Revised Committee thresholds (above US$50.0 million). An assessment of the existing
  procurement management system was conducted at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 99). Measures to address
  procurement risks were included in the Program Action Plan. The ICR (paragraph 90) notes that procurement
  under the program was implemented in a timely manner and there were no procurement issues.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


d. Other
    ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory      Highly Satisfactory       ---
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory      Highly Satisfactory       ---
Quality of M&E                  High                     High                      ---
Quality of ICR                                           Substantial               ---

12. Lessons

 The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this PforR operation.
1. A robust results framework and robust mechanisms for monitoring are key to realizing results in a
PforR operation. The PforR was applied for the first time in Hebei for managing air pollution in cooperation
with government agencies. Linking results to indicators that were verified by external third parties enhanced the
effectiveness of fiscal spending, besides increasing transparency and accountability.
2. Solid analytical underpinnings based on scientific knowledge can ensure success of the PforR
instrument. Many disbursement-linked indicators in this operation were based on the source apportionment
study that identified the sources of ambient air pollution and quantified their contribution to air pollution. This
provided the scientific basis for choosing the relevant disbursement linked indicators.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hebei Air Pollution Prevention (P154672)



3. Capacity building for preparing the Terms of Reference to the government counterparts prior to the
start of implementation can help in avoiding delays during implementation for a PforR operation. In this
operation, while the government's program progressed as planned, issues associated with Bank disbursements
were mainly due to issues associated with third party verification of results.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provides a clear rationale for a PforR instrument. The theory of change articulated in the
ICR is clear and provides clear linkages between the project activities, the output indicators and intended
outcomes that were measurable. The disbursement linked indicators were based on scientifically supported
data. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of this project. The ICR adheres to the guidelines and
provides a clear rationale for using the PforR as the lending instrument for this operation.
However, one problem with the ICR is its excessive length. The main body of the text at about 30 pages is
almost twice the recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR could have benefitted from better editing and
avoiding repetitions in the text.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
