     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022388

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127308                                   Science and Technology II

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Croatia                                   Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82580                                30-Jun-2017                                          23,087,463.89

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Apr-2013                               30-Apr-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           26,240,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            25,620,862.69                                               0.00

 Actual                                        23,087,463.89                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 5), the project development objective (PDO) of the Republic of
   Croatia Second Science and Technology Project was "to help Croatia absorb European Union (EU) funds in
   the research and innovation sector by capacitating selected public sector organizations and stimulating the
   demand for those funds from the business and scientific communities."

   A member of the EU beginning in 2013, Croatia is eligible to apply to, and receive funding from, the EU from
   the latter's facilities in the research and innovation sector including the European Regional Development Fund

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



   and the European Social Fund, both parts of the European structural and investment funds, and the EU
   Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation, which replaces the Seventh EU
   Framework Program for Research and Innovation

   This project followed the Republic of Croatia (First) Science and Technology Project, 2005-2011, financed by
   the World Bank, which aimed to enable research and development institutions to commercialize research
   outputs, and to increase the ability of enterprises, particularly small and medium enterprises, to invest in
   research and development activities. Both projects were stand-alone operations.

   For purpose of assessing the efficacy of the project in Section 4, the two parts of the PDO will be
   addressed together because the public sector organizations where capacity building would take place were
   also involved in stimulating demand for funding research and innovation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Capacity Building for the Absorption of the EU Funds (EUR 7.5 million in IBRD financing estimated at
   appraisal, EUR 6.2 million actual at closing) supported the provision of: (a) general technical assistance and
   training to the Republic of Croatia, the Ministry of Science and Education (MOSE), the Croatian Agency for
   Small and Medium Enterprises, Innovations, and Investments (HAMAG-BICRO), the Unity through
   Knowledge Fund and the Croatian Science Foundation (UKF/CSF), and other selected public sector
   organizations in the research and innovation sector to help improve their capacity to qualify for and manage
   EU funds; (b) technical assistance for the preparation of project applications; and (c) project management
   support.

   Research and Innovation Programs (EUR 12.2 million in IBRD financing and EUR 4 million in borrower
   contribution estimated at appraisal, EUR 13.4 million actual at closing) financed programs previously
   supported by the First Science and Technology Project to maintain and increase the pool of small and
   medium enterprises (SMEs) and researchers that could apply to future EU-funded grant schemes,
   specifically: (a) the HAMAG-BICRO programs --- the Proof of Concept Program, the Development Program
   for Knowledge-Based Companies, and the Program Za Istraživanje i Razvo; and (b) the MOSE and
   UKF/CSF programs --- Research Cooperability, Young Researchers and Professionals
   Program, Connectivity Program, Technology Transfer Office Support Program 20, and other absorption
   capacity programs related to EU scientific framework initiatives.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost Euro (EUR) 24 million at appraisal.

   Project Financing: The project was financed with a loan of EUR 20 million (US$26.4 million equivalent)
   from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The loan amount of EUR 19.7 million

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



   (US$23.1 million equivalent) was disbursed (98.3 percent of the loan in EUR terms). (The exchange rate
   was EUR 1.00 = US$1.312 at appraisal and EUR 1.00 = US$1.0855 at closing).

   Borrower Contribution: The borrower financial contribution was estimated at EUR 4 million (US$9.4 million
   equivalent) at appraisal.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 26, 2013, became effective on July 31, 2013, and closed on April
   30, 2020, roughly three years after the original closing date of June 30, 2017.

   Restructuring: The project was restructured five times: (a) on February 11, 2015, with US$7.16 million (27.1
   percent of the original funding) disbursed, to change the results framework, the financing plan,
   the reallocation between disbursement categories, the implementing agency, and the project institutional
   arrangements; (b) on April 4, 2017, with US$16.02 million (60.7 percent of the original funding) disbursed,
   to change the results framework, the financing plan, the reallocation between disbursement categories, the
   implementation schedule, and the loan closing date; (c) October 1, 2018, with US$20.35 million (77.1 million
   of the original funding) disbursed, to change the results framework, the project components and
   cost, the financing plan, the reallocation between disbursement categories, the implementation schedule,
   and the loan closing date; (d) on June 25, 2019,with US$22.64 million (85.8 million of the original funding)
   disbursed, to change the allocation between disbursement categories; and (e) on December 24, 2019, with
   US$23.58 (89.3 percent of the original funding) disbursed, to change the loan closing date.

   None of these restructuring changed the level of ambition of the project and consequently a split evaluation
   of outcomes is not indicated.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project development objective was relevant to the development priorities of Croatia at appraisal and
closing.

      According to Croatia Policy Notes: A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and Inclusive Growth,
       prepared by the Bank in 2012 ahead of Croatia's accession to the EU in 2013, research and
       innovation could yield benefits to the Croatian economy. Spending by the business sector on
       research and development (R&D) remained low, despite generous tax breaks (subsidies of about
       US$0.35 for every US$1 of R&D spending), amounting to about Euro 10 per capita, compared, for
       instance, to about Euro 130 per capita by Slovenia. Meanwhile, R&D by the public sector suffered
       from limited cooperation between public research organizations and private firms and poor rates of
       commercialization of government-funded technologies. The contribution of innovation to the
       productivity of the average firm in Croatia was about 30 percent less than in a peer group of eight
       EU countries. Yet, simulations indicated that increasing aggregate R&D spending to 3 percent of
       GDP, including to about 2 percent of GDP by the private sector, could raise GDP by about 5.8
       percent and exports by about 13 percent above the baseline by 2025. Moreover, greater and better
       innovation would help the Croatian firms to close the productivity gap with their competitors in the
       EU.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Science and Technology II (P127308)



                        The country's ongoing fiscal consolidation program at the time of EU accession limited the
                         availability of public funding for additional R&D spending. Alternatively, the country's EU accession
                         offered the prospect that it could benefit from the EU's cohesion policy, which aimed to reduce
                         disparities in the levels of development across the EU, and from the EU's five European structural
                         and investment funds, which aimed to invest in job creation and a sustainable environment across
                         the EU in five focus areas: research and innovation, digital technologies, supporting the low-carbon
                         economy, sustainable management of natural resources, and small businesses. The project
                         objective was aligned with the foregoing strategy to avail of EU funds to advance the country's
                         research and innovation agenda.
                        The National Reform Programme 2020, adopted by the government in April 2020 and part of the EU
                         European Semester Framework which defines economic policy priorities and measures to be
                         implemented by member states over the next 12-18 months, continued to place an emphasis on
                         "strengthening the national innovation system and innovation potential of the economy" and
                         "strengthening human resources as well as the science and technology system by aligning it with
                         the economy." The project objective remained consistent with these national economic policy
                         priorities.


The project development objective was aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Croatia at appraisal and
closing.

                        The Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Croatia for FY14-FY18 pledged Bank Group
                         support in three thematic areas: (a) public finance – supporting fiscal consolidation to speed up
                         sustained growth, with an emphasis on expenditure rationalization to ensure fiscal sustainability over
                         the medium-term; (b) innovation and trade competitiveness – improving competitiveness, focused
                         on structural, institutional, and governance reforms, to enable Croatia to catch up with its EU peers;
                         and (c) EU membership – helping Croatia maximize the economic benefits of becoming an EU
                         member state by increasing the country’s capacity to implement harmonized policies, to absorb the
                         large increase in EU funds, and help use these resources effectively. The project objective was
                         aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy's second and third thematic areas. The project would
                         help Croatia realize the benefits of accession to the EU, convergence to the wealth levels in
                         developed countries, and private sector-led growth through more and better R&D and innovation.
                        The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Croatia for the Period FY19-
                         FY24 committed Bank Group support in three focus areas: (a) enhancing public sector performance
                         and institutions; (b) preserving and leveraging natural capital to ensure low carbon growth; and
                         (c) strengthening market institutions to enable a dynamic enterprise sector. The project objective
                         was also aligned with the Country Partnership Framework's third focus area, specifically with the
                         objective "to promote entrepreneurship, competition, and innovation." The project and its
                         predecessor First Science and Technology Project were designed to help address binding
                         constraints in research and innovation including the lack of coordination between government
                         institutions, academia and private sector; the presence of barriers to science-industry collaboration;
                         and weaknesses in the governance of the innovation ecosystem.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Science and Technology II (P127308)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To help Croatia absorb EU funds in the research and innovation sector by capacitating selected public sector
               organizations and stimulating the demand for those funds from the business and scientific communities.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. The ICR (page 9) offered the following theory of change, which was not explicitly
               described in the Project Appraisal Document but could nonetheless be inferred from the project activities and
               the results framework. The provision to public agencies of general technical assistance in qualifying for EU
               funds and special technical assistance in the preparation of applications for project funding would raise the
               number of agency staff knowledgeable about EU funding procedures, allowing the agencies to deliver
               information to R&D institutions and beneficiaries, and enabling the country to produce three R&D policy
               documents required by the EU for Croatia to qualify for financing from European structural and investments
               funds and to submit project proposals to these EU funds. The provision of project funds to implement R&D
               and innovation programs earlier supported under the First Science and Technology Project would increase
               the number projects assisted by the agencies, raise the value of financing provided by the agencies' own
               resources and the beneficiaries' own investment, increase the number the intellectual property rights
               applications, increase the number of collaborative ventures between domestic and foreign research institutes
               and between homeland and diaspora researchers, increase the number of commercialization agreements
               between research and industry, and further build up the pipeline of research and innovation proposals for EU
               financing. Assuming that the policy framework was maintained and institutional capacity was strengthened,
               Croatia should be able to productively use the EU funds, thereby boosting economic growth through R&D and
               innovation and progressing toward eventual economic convergence with the developed EU states.

               Outputs. The project met two output targets for the objective to help Croatia absorb EU funds in the research
               and innovation sector by capacitating selected public sector organizations.

                     The number staff in the Ministry of Science and Education and its organizations and R&D institutions
                      (HAMAG-BICRO, UKF/CSF, Technology Transfer Office) trained on EU procedures for project
                      preparation and implementation increased from eight in the baseline to 185 by the project closing
                      date, exceeding the target of 30. According to the ICR (page 38), the training enhanced the capacity
                      of the research and innovation stakeholders to use and manage EU funds: (a) HAMAG-BICRO
                      served as an intermediary for several EU funds programs, most notably the IRI grant schemes; (b)
                      many HAMAG-BICRO project beneficiaries were recipients of EU-funded IRI grants; (c) the UKF
                      helped prepare new research program for financing by the European Social Fund (managed by the
                      CSF) and steered beneficiaries to use both the European structural and investment funds and the
                      highly competitive central European funds for R&D; and (d) Technology Transfer Office acted as a
                      central support unit to researchers preparing applications for the IRI infrastructure program and
                      managing the EU-funded Centers of Excellence (which included 10 Centers of Excellence and 35
                      scientific institutions throughout Croatia).



                                                                                                               Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Science and Technology II (P127308)




      The number of workshops and conferences delivered to R&D institutions and beneficiaries reached
         four, exceeding the target of three.

The project met nine of ten output targets for the objective to help Croatia absorb EU funds in the research
and innovation sector by stimulating the demand for EU funds from the business and scientific communities.

      The total number of projects financed by HAMAG-BICRO increased from 44 in the baseline to 250 by
         the project closing date, exceeding the target of 188. The contracted projects included: (a) 40 projects
         under the Proof of Concept Program Call No. 4; (b) 49 projects under the Proof of Concept
         Program Call No. 5; (c) 62 projects under the Proof of Concept Program Call No. 6; (d) 54 projects
         under the Proof of Concept Program Call No. 7; (e) nine projects under the Development Program for
         Knowledge-Based Companies; (f) 21 projects under the Program Za Istraživanje i Razvoj; and (g) 15
         projects under the Technology Transfer Office Support Program. According to the ICR (page 40), the
         government continued, beyond this operation, to finance the Proof of Concept Program for the private
         sector and contracted for 83 projects for the Proof of Concept Program Call No. 8, worth EUR 4.4
         million; the projects have been under implementation since December 2019.
        The total value of projects financed by HAMAG-BICRO increased from EUR 2.5 million in the baseline
         to EUR 23.4 million by the project closing date, exceeding the target of EUR 17.8 million. In addition
         to the amount contracted by UKF/CSF, this indicator includes the amount co-funded by final project
         beneficiaries. Unlike the PDO-level indicator of almost identical wording, this results indicator includes
         funds from the project and the co-funds mobilized by the project beneficiaries themselves. These
         amounts are significant --- 40 percent additional funds, amounting to EUR 1.9 million, were invested
         by national and foreign beneficiary institutions and the private sector in 59 UKF sub-projects.
        The number of products, processes, and designs developed in projects within HAMAG-BICRO for
         which intellectual property rights will be sought reached 82 by the project closing date, exceeding the
         target of 72. These consisted of: (a) four under the Development Program for Knowledge-Based
         Companies; (b) eight under the Program Za Istraživanje i Razvoj; (c) 31 under the Proof of Concept
         Program Call No. 4 and Call No. 5; (d) 18 under the Proof of Concept Program Call No. 6; (e) 10
         under the Proof of Concept Program Call No, 7; and (f) eight under the Technology Transfer Office
         Support Program.
        The number of researchers from the public sector included in projects under the Development
         Program for Knowledge-Based Companies and the Sponsored Research Development
         Program within HAMAG-BICRO increased from four in the baseline to 88 by the project closing date,
         exceeding the target of 80.
        The number of foreign research institutions collaborating in UKF/CSF projects reached 73, exceeding
         the target of 49.
        The total value of projects committed to and financed by the UKF/CSF was EUR 6.7 million,
         exceeding the target of EUR 4.6 million. In addition to the amount contracted by UKF/CSF, this
         indicator includes the amount co-funded by final project beneficiaries. Unlike the PDO-level indicator
         of almost identical wording, this results indicator includes funds from the project and the co-funds
         mobilized by the project beneficiaries themselves. These amounts were significant --- 40
         percent additional funds, amounting to EUR 1.9 million, were invested by national and foreign
         beneficiary institutions and the private sector in 59 UKF/CSF sub-projects.
        The number of collaboration projects between diaspora and homeland researchers at the UKF/CSF
         was 38 by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 32.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Science and Technology II (P127308)




      The number of commercialization and collaboration agreements signed with industry reached 11 by
       the project closing date, exceeding the target of four. There were three collaboration agreements and
       eight licenses under the Technology Transfer Office Support Program.
      The value of collaboration and commercialization agreements signed with industry was EUR 35.4
       million by the project closing date, failing to achieve the target of EUR 200 million. This indicator was
       designed based on the experience of the First Science and Technology Project, which predominantly
       financed programs supporting the later stages of innovation. In contrast, this project placed a
       greater focus on the early stages of the innovation chain (Proof of Concept Program), where the risks
       are higher and market failures more evident. In addition, the allocation for the program of technology
       transfer was reduced during implementation.
      The share of UKF grants submitted by female applicants rose from 20 percent in the baseline to 42
       percent by the project closing date, close to the target of 42.25 percent.

In addition, the project recorded the following three gender-related outputs.

      The share of HAMAG-BICRO projects submitted by female applicants rose from 0 percent in the
       baseline to 25.2 percent by the project closing date. No target was set for this output indicator.
      The share of UKF/CSF grants assigned to female researchers rose from 10 percent in the baseline to
       43.7 percent by the project closing date. No target was set for this output indicator.
      The share of HAMAG-BICRO projects assigned to female applicants rose from 0 percent in the
       baseline to 19.3 percent by the project closing date. No target was set for this output indicator.

Outcomes. The project achieved two outcome targets for the objective to help Croatia absorb EU funds in the
research and innovation sector by "capacitating selected public sector organizations".

      The set of innovation and research and development (R&D) policy documents required for absorption
       of the EU funds were prepared as planned. The target was to meet the ex-ante conditionality for the
       use of EU funds for R&D. By the project closing date: (a) the Strategy on Education, Science and
       Technology was adopted by the Parliament in October 2014; (b) the Smart Specialization Strategy
       was approved by the European Commission in March 2016; and (c) the National Research
       Infrastructure Roadmap was updated and adopted following the approval of the Smart Specialization
       Strategy.
      Six project proposals were prepared for submission to the EU funds, meeting the target. One project
       was completed and five are in various stages of implementation: (a) the R&D Grant Scheme for
       Strengthening the Capacities for Research, Development, and Innovation (EUR 12.8 million) was
       developed by MOSE in 2012 and served as background and reference for a scheme implemented
       under the 2007-13 European Regional Development Fund --- the grant supported R&D and
       innovations through technology transfer and commercialization; (b) the Cooperation Program with
       Croatian Scientists in Diaspora Research Cooperability (EUR 5.6 million) was developed by
       UKF/CSF and designed using the experience of the Research Cooperability Program and was funded
       by the European Social Fund --- the grant scheme (grant funds were awarded to 23 sub-projects)
       promoted the cooperation of Croatian science with the Croatian diaspora; (c) the Open Scientific
       Infrastructural Platforms for Innovative Applications in Economy and Society (EUR 72 million)
       was developed by the Ruđer Bošković Institute --- the project will expand the Institute's intellectual
       property, capital equipment, and know-how, while boosting cooperation between science and
       business sector; (d) the Centre of Competence for Translational Medicine (EUR57 million)
       was developed by the Children’s Hospital Srebrnjak --- the project will develop a medical center linking

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Science and Technology II (P127308)



                                    clinical practice and research, develop personalized therapy and innovative drugs, and introduce new
                                    technologies in chronic diseases; (e) the Croatian Scientific and Educational Cloud (EUR 25.9 million)
                                    was developed by University Computing Centre at the University of Zagreb --- the project will support
                                    the main component of the national e-infrastructure of the science and education system, ensuring
                                    efficient and sustainable computer and data storage resources and services to the academic
                                    community; and (f) the Centre for Advanced Laser Techniques (EUR16.2 million) was developed by
                                    the Institute of Physics --- the project will upgrade existing, and develop completely new, infrastructure
                                    based on advanced laser techniques.

                            These were substantial capacity building efforts.

                            The project met three outcome targets for the objective to help Croatia absorb EU funds in the research and
                            innovation sector by "stimulating the demand for EU funds from the business and scientific communities".

                                  The total value of projects in the pipeline for funding through the grant scheme managed by HAMAG-
                                   BICRO increased from EUR 3.6 million in the baseline (2012) to EUR 45.4 million by the project
                                   closing date, close to the target of EUR 46 million. Covering 250 sub-projects of HAMAG-BICRO and
                                   59 sub-projects supported by UKF/CSF, the amount includes only the value covered by loan proceeds
                                   and national counterpart funding, and does not include funds invested by the beneficiaries
                                   themselves.
                                  The total value of projects in the pipeline for funding by EU funds originated from UKF/CSF projects
                                   increased from EUR 1.6 million in the baseline to EUR 66.3 million, exceeding the target of EUR 24
                                   million. Projects were submitted to: (a) the Horizon 2020 and other European central programs ---
                                    notably the European Research Council, Marie Curie Fund, Future and Emerging Technologies,
                                   Erasmus, FLAG-ERA Consortium --- valued at EUR 44.3 million; (b) the INTERREG programs of the
                                   European Territorial Cooperation, valued at EUR 5.8 million; and (c) the Operational Programme
                                   for Competitiveness and Cohesion 2014-2020 and Operational Programme for Effective Human
                                   Resources 2014-2020 under the European structural and investment funds, valued at EUR
                                   16.2 million. According to the ICR, EUR 22.7 million of funding had been awarded and the
                                   associated projects were in implementation by the project closing date.

                            The project stimulated a substantial demand for research and innovation funds.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project substantially achieved the capacity building and the demand stimulation elements of the PDO. It
                            met 11 of 12 output targets and all five outcome targets for the objective to help Croatia absorb EU funds in




                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Science and Technology II (P127308)



  the research and innovation sector by capacitating selected public sector organizations and stimulated the
  demand for those funds from the business and scientific communities.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency - Economic Rate of Return. The Project Appraisal Document (pages 10-11) did not
compute an economic rate of return for the project, but stated that according to one study, the "social rate of
return" of R&D investment in Croatia was about 73 percent. The ICR (pages 17-18 and 54-67) presents a more
systematic analysis of the economic return of the project, based on the work of the Institute of Economics -
Zagreb: (a) based on the four large R&D infrastructure projects, the economic rate of return of the first
component of the project (Capacity Building) over the period 2013-32 was 24.3 percent --- the benefits consisted
of investments, new scientific publications, human capital formation, social value of learning-by-doing, and social
capital development; (b) the economic rate of return for the second component (Research and Innovation) was
not calculated because it was regarded as a technical assistance and hence had no measurable economic
benefits; but, (c) the overall economic rate of return for the project was computed as 61.4 percent based
on benefits such as private investment, externalities and social returns.

Financial Efficiency - Financial Rate of Return. The Project Appraisal Document and the ICR both contend that
the project was designed to mobilize additional investments for programs supported by the operation. On this
basis, both documents compute a separate financial internal rate of return for the project based on the amount
of EU structural and investment funds that the programs were, respectively, estimated to or able to
mobilize. The Project Appraisal Document (page 11) projected that the operation would mobilize EUR 205-255
million of EU structural and investment funds and estimated the financial internal rate of return of the project at
100 percent. The ICR (pages 55 and 60) reported that the operation actually generated EUR 301.4 million of
additional financing (EUR 171.4 million for four infrastructure projects approved for EU financing and EUR 130.3
million mobilized separately by HAMAG-BICRO and UKF/CSF beneficiaries). The ICR (page 60) summarized
the financial internal rate of return of the project calculated by the Institute of Economics - Zagreb as follows: (a)
the internal rate of the first component of the project (Capacity Building) was not shown separately; (b) the
internal rate of return of the second component (Research and Innovation) was 23.3 percent, using only the EU
structural funds mobilized by the component; and (c) the overall internal rate of return for project was 57.4
percent, using EU structural funds mobilized by the first and second components and national contributions
mobilized by the first component, or 106.8 percent, using EU structural funds mobilized by the first and second
components but not national contributions mobilized by the first component.

Operational Efficiency. The project financing was fully disbursed. Project administrative costs were kept at 11
percent of total project cost, lower than the originally estimated 12 percent of total project cost. The project was
restructured five times and closed three years later than originally scheduled.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                         Page 9 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              61.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project development objective was highly relevant to the development priorities of the government in
research and development and innovation and also relevant to the country partnership strategy of the Bank
Group in Croatia. The degree of achievement of the objective to help Croatia absorb EU funds in the research
and innovation sector by capacitating selected public sector organizations and stimulating the demand for those
funds from the business and scientific communities is rated as substantial. The project met 11 of 12 output
targets and all five outcome targets. The efficiency of the project is rated as substantial. The project posted
high estimated economic and financial rates of return, the latter based on additionality criteria. Implementation
of the project though was delayed, primarily because of unplanned changes to the institutional structure
governing the research and innovation sector, and closing lagged three years behind schedule. This review
concluded that the project's objectives were achieved with minor shortcomings in relevance, efficacy and
efficiency and its overall outcome is therefore rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the project's development outcome appear to be moderate.

Political risk. The change in government in 2016 and the changes in leadership at the MOSE (there were
five Ministers over the duration of this project) led, in many cases, to changes in the post of Project
Coordinator over 2013-2020, which adversely affected the pace of project implementation, according to the
government's completion report, enclosed in the ICR (page 71). Nonetheless, the project was completed in
its entirety, and it appears that political commitment to the objective of strengthening the government's and
the private sector's capacity to mobilize EU and other resources for research and innovation remains strong
and consistent. The country's 2020-24 program pledges to use country's EU funds (Croatia was allocated
EUR 22 billion under the long-term EU Budget for 2021-27) to boost competitiveness based on new

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Science and Technology II (P127308)



technologies.

Policy Risk. The adoption by Croatia, under this project, of three key policy and strategy documents --- the
Strategy on Education, Science and Technology, the Smart Specialization Strategy, and the National
Research Infrastructure Roadmap --- aligns the country's research and innovation programs to the strategies
of the EU for supporting innovation in member states. Reinforcing this policy commitment moving
forward, Competitive Croatia, part of the country's 2020-24 program, aims to boost investments for
entrepreneurship, innovation, and new products to HRK 5 billion and increase R&D expenditures from the
current one percent of GDP to 2.5 percent.

Project Pipeline Risk. A strong pipeline of R&D projects built over the past five years will likely sustain the
project objective in the near- to medium-term, albeit some systemic issues remain to be addressed. The
project brought capital infrastructure upgrades and strengthened the related human resources.

Institutional Risk. Decisions on the restructuring of the public research organizations of the country to make
the national innovation system more efficient and performance-based remain pending. There have
been some setbacks in the institutional framework for the national innovation system, according to the ICR
(page 30). HAMAG-BICRO had not been able to scale up several programs, with the exception of the Proof
of Concept Private Program, because of poor leadership. The organization had also lost staff. The CSF
must continue to review its process for the award of funds to adhere to strict merit-based principles.

Economic Risk. The government's ability to sustain project outcomes depends in part on the health of public
finances and of the overall economy. According to the IMF 2019 Article IV Consultation with the Republic of
Croatia, the economy had become stronger over the last five years because of strong budget management
by the government and skillful policies by the central bank. However, fiscal performance has recently
become encumbered by numerous spending demands, and for, this reason, the government has been
forced to withhold planned tax reductions and shift spending priorities towards more and better public
investment. The government will need to focus on areas where “hard” physical infrastructure needs
improvement, while also upgrading “soft” technological infrastructure to position the economy attractively in
the next generation of European value chains in information and communications technology and business
services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank conducted the necessary due diligence during project design. The Bank carried out policy
  analyses and technical assessments of options to support the Croatian research and innovation
  system. It drew on the experience gained from the First Science and Technology Project to design the
  project components, choosing project-level interventions for this investment operation while keeping
  policy reforms under the purview of the proposed Second Economic Recovery Development Policy
  Loan. The design was underpinned by analytic work, including Estimating the Impact of R&D and
  Innovation in Croatia (Seker, 2011), Croatia Policy Notes: A Strategy for Smart, Sustainable and Inclusive
  Growth (World Bank, 2012), and Main Findings of the Comprehensive Monitoring Report on Croatia's
  State of Preparedness for EU Membership (European Commission, 2012). The Bank supported project


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



  design activities with an advance from the Project Preparation Facility, the revolving fund that finances
  the preparation and limited implementation activities of investment projects. It also conducted intensive
  consultations with stakeholders, providing them with adequate opportunity and sufficient time to "own the
  agenda", according to the ICR (page 28).

  The Bank addressed "unknowns" about the EU funds at the time of project appraisal. It was feared
  that the R&D approach advanced by the project might not be compatible with the rules for the use of EU
  funds. Specifically, while the project advocated a "nurturing" approach to innovation by SMEs, including
  through the extension by sub-project selection teams of hands-on assistance in the preparation of
  candidate firms' business plans, the EU required a separation of duties between sub-project selection
  teams and sub-project assistance teams. The Bank addressed this issue by: (a) engaging the
  government in extensive discussions about R&D sector interventions; (b) contributing to the development
  of the government's Smart Specialization Strategy; and (c) designing the project broadly to allow for
  adjustments in project activities as information about the EU funds became available.

  The Bank considered the availability of counterpart funds to be the principal operational risk in the use by
  Croatia of EU funds, although it judged the overall implementation risk of the project to be moderate. The
  use by member states of EU funds required counterpart budgetary contributions for project preparation,
  pre-financing (EU funds were drawn down with a lag), and co-financing, apart from direct contribution to
  the EU budget itself. Croatia had historically provided adequate budgetary resources for Bank projects
  even under constrained conditions, as illustrated in the First Science and Technology Project. Yet,
  the risk remained because of recent tightened fiscal policy. To mitigate the risk, the Bank recommended
  the careful programming of government resources. The government was cognizant of the issue and
  had collaborated with the Bank in developing a sound fiscal consolidation strategy, supported by policy
  loans (the Economic Recovery Development Policy Loan) and technical assistance (the Public Finance
  Review).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank provided intensive supervision of the project. The task team leader, the sector operations staff,
 and the procurement specialist were based in country, while financial management and task management
 expertise were available from staff based in neighboring countries. According to the ICR (page 29), the
 government considered the supervision arrangements helpful, with the task team leader available to the
 MOSE and project stakeholders on a daily basis. The guidance and expertise provided by task team
 leader was valuable to the sub-project preparation activities for the large infrastructure projects submitted
 for EU financing. The experience and learning gained by the management team from previous operations
 was useful, as was their ability to engage with the EU directly.

 The Bank was proactive in identifying project implementation and M&E issues. Many problems were
 addressed in the five restructuring episodes. The Bank responded correctly to the merger of the Croatian
 R&D organizations. The merger between the Croatian Agency for Small Entrepreneurship and Investment
 (HAMAG) and the Business Innovation Croatian Agency (BICRO) into the Croatian Agency for Small and
 Medium Enterprises, Innovations, and Investments (HAMAG-BICRO) was announced after the project was

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



 negotiated, requiring a project restructuring. The Bank was closely involved in the merger between UKF
 and CSF into UKF/CSF, insisting on measures to preserve the ability of the agency to generate high-quality
 scientific work.

 The Bank prepared 15 Implementation Status and Results Reports over the seven-year duration of the
 project, or two a year, the average for Bank investment financing projects.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (page 19) stated that "M&E activities will be carried out by the
 PIU. Project implementation will be monitored using quantitative and qualitative indicators. The PIU will
 start collecting these indicators from the beginning of the project providing periodical benchmarking and
 presenting the progress of the project towards its objectives in quarterly reports." The Project
 Implementation Unit at the MOSE, the body responsible for management of the project activities, including
 coordination, procurement, financial management, disbursement, and reporting, was also responsible for
 the M&E of the project. The MOSE, HAMAG-BICRO, and UKF/CSF would provide M&E data to the Project
 Implementation Unit. Because the same institutions participated in the preceding First Science and
 Technology Project, they were expected to be familiar with the M&E activities of Bank operations.

 The PAD (pages 17-21) defined 14 output indicators and six outcome indicators, with baseline values and
 annual and cumulative targets, to measure the achievement of the project objective, both over time and at
 project closing. In addition, the Project Appraisal Document defined two gender-related output indicators
 for purely monitoring purposes (the indicators did not carry any targets). The Restructuring Papers revised
 the results framework for the project, with the final set of results indicators consisting of 12 output and five
 outcome indicators. Moreover, the Restructuring Papers maintained three gender-related output indicators
 for monitoring purposes (the indicators did not carry any targets). According to the ICR (page 26), it was
 anticipated that some results indicators would need to be changed because the project was prepared in
 2012 and the operating environment for the EU funds was not all known at that time, including the
 institutional framework for the European structural and investment funds.

 In addition, the PAD (pages 39-41) expressed an interest in conducting a systematic impact evaluation of
 the project, considering that it would be difficult to observe the full outcome of the research and innovation
 interventions within a short period and that it would require a longer time span to assess the quality of the
 knowledge spillovers created by the project. The impact evaluation would be confined to the research and
 innovation programs, particularly the commercialization efforts, supported by HAMAG-BICRO and
 UKF/CSF. As with the First Science and Technology Project, the plan was to conduct surveys of project
 beneficiaries, with unsuccessful applicants serving as a comparator group, to evaluate the innovation

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



 outcomes of the project. Indicators from the Community Innovation Survey and the Innovation Union
 Scorecard of the EU Commission would be used for the analysis. The process would build on the ex-post
 evaluation conducted for the First Science and Technology Project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E indicators were tracked and updated on a quarterly basis. The Project Implementation
  Unit reported the M&E data updates in quarterly progress reports. The Bank also reported the M&E data
  updates in its Implementation Status and Results Reports prepared after each supervision mission.

  An impact evaluation analysis was also conducted. According to the ICR (pages 25-26), the collection
  of data on innovation proved difficult for various reasons: (a) there were three different approaches to the
  evaluation based on different profiles of beneficiaries and activities; (b) there were changes in
  stakeholders and in project management and leadership teams, including as a result of institutional
  reshuffling; and (c) at some point, the effort lacked a strong ownership. The impact evaluation was
  eventually completed, however, despite the initial challenges. The evaluation included a survey of
  beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries, covered all project components and programs, and analyzed the
  project’s efficacy and efficiency. The evaluation provides a wealth of data and findings for future
  programs, the salient points of which are summarized in an annex to the ICR (pages 54-67).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used to inform project management and to make necessary adjustments in the
  project. Since the project was restructured five times and there were frequent changes in the results
  framework, the M&E data provided useful information.

  According to the ICR (page 26), the MOSE is reviewing the findings and lessons learned from the M&E
  and impact evaluation analysis to inform future programs in research and innovation, regardless of the
  source of financing. The impact evaluation, in particular, has reportedly increased the awareness
  among stakeholders of the importance of M&E tools in the programming activities related to the new EU
  funding cycle, where a greater focus is expected on results rather than on administrative checks. In
  2018, the MOSE requested the assistance of the Bank in conducting a systemic review of the country's
  science, technology and innovation financing system to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
  public spending in the sector.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment Category "B" at
   appraisal and triggered OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment. An Environmental Management

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Science and Technology II (P127308)



  Framework was prepared for the European Social Fund to guide the implementation of sub-projects, while
  specific safeguards measures were prescribed in Environmental and Social Management Plans and in
  the Control List of Materials. According to the ICR (pages 26-27): (a) environmental and occupation, health
  and safety risks were related mostly to the use of small amounts of hazardous chemicals and volatile gases
  in laboratories; the generation of small amounts of hazardous and infectious medical, inert, and other types
  of wastes, and any unethical treatment of animals; (b) however, no large, significant, or irreversible impacts
  arose during project implementation; (c) the European Social Fund successfully screened out
  Environmental Assessment Category "A" sub-projects and only supported Category "B" and Category "C"
  sub-projects; (d) no non-compliance with environmental standards was recorded; (e) supervision of
  safeguards compliance was carried out regularly and documented in Aide Memoires and back-to-office
  reports; (f) the safeguards implementation capacity of the UKF was consistently rated high; and (g)
  however, there were lapses in safeguards management and compliance reporting by HAMAG-BICRO,
  which dragged the rating for overall safeguards compliance down to moderately satisfactory.

  Social Safeguards. The project did not trigger any social safeguards. There was no land acquisition under
  this project, and no applicants were allowed to participate in the project if they needed to acquire land for
  their sub-projects. The rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing buildings was permitted for the purpose
  of conducting experiment or tests, although such activities were also not expected. Works were not funded
  under the project. With these restrictions, the project did not trigger OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: The Loan Agreement (pages 11-12) required: (a) compliance with the Guidelines:
  Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and
  Grants by World Bank Borrowers and the Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants under
  IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers; and (b) the use of international
  competitive bidding for the procurement of goods and non-consulting services and quality- and cost-based
  selection for the procurement of consultant services. Other methods of procurement would have to be
  specified in a Procurement Plan. Moreover, the Procurement Plan would have to specify contracts
  requiring prior-review by the Bank; all other contracts would be subject to post-review by the Bank. The
  ICR (page 27) reports that: (a) there were delays with procurement during project implementation, related
  to the preparation of large R&D infrastructure projects for EU financing, but the issues were addressed
  proactively through timebound action plans; (b) posting a procurement specialist in the Croatia country
  office allowed for direct and regular interaction with the Project Implementation Unit; (c) regular
  implementation support missions helped with procurement issues; and (d) procurement was rated
  satisfactory throughout project implementation.

  Financial Management: The Loan Agreement (page 10) required the government to maintain a financial
  management system following the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development General
  Conditions for Loans of 2012, including by preparing and submitting to the Bank quarterly interim financial
  reports and having the annual (fiscal year) financial statements audited. The ICR did not raise any issues
  with financial management during project implementation. According to the ICR (page 27): (a) a financial
  management system (SCALA accounting software) was procured and utilized throughout the project; (b)
  financial management reports were issued quarterly as were reports for HAMAG-BICRO and UKF/CSF on
  the project funds used; (c) the quarterly interim unaudited financial reports of the project and of


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Science and Technology II (P127308)



   participating entities were submitted to the Bank for review in the agreed time frame and were considered
   acceptable and dully disclosed; and (d) financial management was rated moderately satisfactory
   throughout project implementation, with appropriate control procedures in place and with project in
   compliance with all financial covenants.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 31-32), with some adaptation.

A strong and stable institutional framework for research and innovation is essential to
advance a country's R&D and innovation goals. In this project, the merger between HAMAG and
BICRO disrupted the ready implementation of the capacity building efforts and research and
innovation programs supported by the Bank. The merger was politically motivated and not properly
studied, according to the ICR (page 20), as the two agencies served different SMEs with
"incompatible objectives." The Bank also strove to preserve the ability of the UKF/CSF to conduct
high-quality scientific work following UKF's merger with CSF, according to the ICR (page
20). Croatia received the recommendations of an international panel of experts for the government
to reorganize and restructure its 25 public research institutes. The implementation of the
recommendations would strengthen the governance of R&D and innovation programs in the country.

Spending by stakeholders of their own in-country resources for research and innovation
strengthens the sustainability of R&D and innovation development programs. In this project,
Croatia tapped the EU structural and investment funds to finance its research and innovation
programs. But, according to the ICR (pages 31-32), the EU resources were more suitable for
supporting interventions that were mature and stable, with the EU financing procedures being highly
complex and less amenable to initiatives that were novel and experimental, needing flexible funding
structures. The use of the government's own budgetary resources would allow for the funding of

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Science and Technology II (P127308)



newer and more discretionary approaches to R&D and innovation. But more importantly, the use of
their own resources provide stakeholders the ability to sustain their R&D and innovation programs in
the long run, whether the programs are mature and structured or novel and experimental.

Government staff who are more knowledgeable of research and innovation concepts,
processes, and dynamics are able to support R&D and innovation programs more
effectively. In this project, the Bank supported capacity building at public agencies to qualify for,
and manage, EU funds. While staff at these agencies were trained at, and gained expertise in, the
preparation of applications for EU project funding, they were less knowledgeable about, and familiar
with, R&D and innovation topics themselves, according to the ICR (page 32). The lack of expert
knowledge at the Project Implementation Unit of R&D, coupled with the inexperience
at engaging private research institutes and business firms in the innovation ecosystem, slowed the
implementation of the project, according to the ICR. Future research and innovation programs could
benefit not only from the development of administrative skills at project implementing agencies, but
also from the ready availability, either acquired externally or developed in residence, of substantive
technical expertise, experience, and aptitude in research and innovation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR follows the guidelines and presents a good record of the project. The ICR (page 9) articulates the
theory of change underlying the project, which was not explicitly formulated in the Project Appraisal
Document. The record of achievement in each of the project components is succinctly summarized in the
discussion on efficacy (pages 14-16) and fully documented in the annex on efficiency (pages 54-67). In
particular, the key performance achievements of the private Proof of Concept Program, the public sector Proof
of Concept Program, the UKF/CSF programs, the Development Program for Knowledge-Based Companies, the
Program Za Istraživanje i Razvoj, and the Technology Transfer Office Support Program are documented in
detail in Annex 4.

The ICR offers a candid assessment of the efficacy of the project objective. While the project achieved 11 of
the 12 output targets and all five outcome targets set for the operation, the ICR highlighted the weakened
institutional framework for research and innovation in government following the mergers of HAMAG and BICRO
and UKF and CSF. In a box on the national innovation system (page 19), the ICR explains that the mergers of
the agencies were not well considered and adversely affected the quality of the governance structure and
system for research and innovation in the public sector. Moreover, the recommendations of an international
panel of experts on the restructuring of 25 public research institutes faced potential political opposition. Overall,
the analysis offered by the ICR was cogent. The lessons offered were also useful.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Science and Technology II (P127308)



Substantial




                                                                   Page 18 of 18
