     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022164

1. Program Information



 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Benin                                       Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                           Approved Operations
 0                                            0

 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P160700                                      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit




 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-61530                                   30-Jun-2018                                        40,635,930.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Nov-2017                                 30-Jun-2018
                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                              40,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                               40,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                           40,635,930.00                                            0.00




P166115_TBL
 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Benin                                       Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P166115                                     Benin Second Fiscal Reform & Growth DPF ( P166115 )




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-61530,IDA-63070                         30-Jun-2019                                            14647950.00

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  30-Aug-2018                                 30-Jun-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                               0.00

  Revised Commitment                              15,000,000.00                                               0.00

  Actual                                          14,647,950.00                                               0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Igor Pejovic                 Judyth L. Twigg               Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective (PDO) was: (1) to support macroeconomic stability by strengthening fiscal
management; and (2) to promote economic growth by increasing agricultural productivity and competitiveness
and strengthening the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity. The PDO changed with the
second DPL when the phrasing of the first two objectives changed and a third objective was introduced. The
revised PDO was: (1) to strengthen fiscal management; (2) to increase agricultural productivity and strengthen
the financial viability of the power sector; and (3) to improve equitable access to education and health services.

The wording of the first objective changed, as the economic situation within the country improved and more focus
was placed on fiscal management, dropping the part related to macroeconomic stability. The second objective
contains two aims that are not interrelated and have different results chains, and therefore this ICRR will rate the
two elements of the second objective separately. Agriculture remained a focus of the second objective, though
the longer-term aim of increasing competitiveness in agriculture was dropped, retaining only the objective to
increase agricultural productivity. Similarly, for the power sector, an initial objective to improve both financial
viability and production capacity was narrowed to financial viability only. DPL 2 added another objective aimed at
improving access to education and health. The inclusion of this new objective reflected the government's goal to
invest in improving human capital.

For the purposes of this ICRR, the PDOs for this programmatic series are taken to be the following:

PDO1: strengthen fiscal management



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



PDO2: increase agricultural productivity

PDO3: strengthen the power sector’s financial viability and production capacity

PDO4: improve equitable access to education and health services


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
Reflecting the unpacking of PDOs, this series is considered to have had the following four pillars/policy areas:

Pillar 1: fiscal management

Pillar 2: agricultural productivity

Pillar 3: power sector’s financial viability and production capacity

Pillar 4: human capital development

Pillar 1 (fiscal management) had five prior actions in DPF1 and three prior actions in DPF2:

- PAs 1 and 2: Increasing compliance with tax procedures and reducing tax evasion. In DPF1, the Ministry
of Economy and Finance (MEF) piloted an electronic system to exchange information between the Tax Direction
(DGI) and the Directory General of Customs and Indirect Taxes (DGDDI). In DPF2, the MEF launched a new
system for the electronic reporting of corporate taxes and made its use mandatory for all large registered firms in
order to simplify tax collection.

- PA 3: Simplifying tax collection and encouraging compliance with tax procedures. In DPF1, the DGI
allowed the largest 100 taxpayers registered in its database to process their tax payments through a verified
banking system.

- PAs 4 and 5: Strengthening evidence-based policy making. In DPF1, the MEF established the Tax Policy
Unit. In DPF2, to lower tax expenditures, the MEF notified cell phone companies that tax exemptions granted to
them previously would not be renewed.

- PA 6: Enhancing the accuracy of the Recipient's public payroll. In DPF1, the MEF carried out a staff
census on all public sector employees, including civil servants, military, police officers, and pensioners in order
to identify ghost employees within the public sector.

- PAs 7 and 8: Combating fraud and better targeting of beneficiaries. In DPF1, the MEF facilitated payments
through a verified banking system: for pension salaries over 50,000 CFA Francs; for governmental scholarships;
and for periodic benefits of active civil servants. In DPF2, to enhance the accuracy of public payroll, the Ministry
of Labor and Public Function (MTFPAS) and the MEF unified the wage management system by harmonizing and
linking the MTFPAS database of civil servants with the MEF database used to pay civil servants’ salaries,
benefits, and other monetary compensation.




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



Pillar 2 (agricultural productivity) had three prior actions in DPF1 and three prior actions in DPF2:

PAs 9 and 10- Promoting the development of agriculture value chains within identified agro-ecological
zones. In DPF1, the Council of Ministers established Territorial Agricultural Development Agencies relevant for
the needs of each agro-ecological zone. In DPF 2, to promote agricultural research, the Council of Ministers
adopted the National Program for Agricultural Research by recruiting agents for experimental stations, and the
National Institute for Agriculture Research launched agro-ecological zone-specific research activities.

PAs 11 and 12- Enhancing accessibility to credit in the agricultural sector. In DPF1, the Council of Ministers
created the National Fund for Agriculture Development with a mandate to promote private investments in the
agricultural sector. In DPF2, in order to promote larger-scale adoption of improved technology in the agriculture
sector, the Council of Ministers adopted the National Agricultural Extension Strategy (NAES) that promotes the
delivery of extension services by private operators.

PAs 13 and 14 - Improving quality of agricultural products. In DPF1, the Central Laboratory for Food Safety
was reinforced by renewing its accreditation in accordance with European Union standards, extending the scope
of its monitoring mandate, and executing a partnership protocol with the Benin Agency for Food Safety. In DPF2,
to increase and monitor the quality of agricultural products, the government adopted a National Policy for Quality
and started implementing its Action Plan for food quality and safety in the agriculture sector by defining quality
standards for pineapple.

Pillar 3 (power sector) had two prior actions in DPF1 and two prior actions in DPF2

PAs 15 and 16 - Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector. In DPF1, the Recipient cleared all
its arrears accumulated against Benin Electric Energy Company (SBEE) and ensured that SBEE cleared 50% of
its arrears accumulated against joint Benin/Togo-owned power generation and transmission utility, Benin Electric
Community (CEB), in line with the SBEE and CEB's arrears clearance plan from DPF2.

PAs 17 and 18 - Ensuring timely payments of electricity bills to SBEE. In DPF1, the Ministry of Energy,
Water and Mines initiated the replacement of conventional electricity meters with prepaid electricity meters. In
DPF2, to support the financial viability of the power sector, the Inter-State High Council for CEB adopted a
wheeling charge of FCFA 10 per kWh to compensate the bi-national utility CEB on the use of transmission
networks to transit energy to SBEE.

Pillar 4 (human capital) had two prior actions as a part of DPF2:

PA 19 - Improving equitable access to education services. In DPF2, the Ministry of Pre-School and Primary
Education required all newly recruited primary teachers to be deployed to communities where the pupil/teacher
ratio was higher than the current national average.

PA 20 - Improving equitable access to health services. In DPF2, the Ministry of Health required that at least
80 percent of newly recruited key health care professionals be deployed to Priority Health Care Precincts
identified by the Ministry based on the ratio of health personnel to inhabitants.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



The project consisted of two Fiscal Reform and Growth Credits (FRGs). The first project, “First Fiscal Reform
and Growth Credit” (FRG1: P160700), in the amount of USD 40 million, was approved on Nov 28, 2017. It
became effective on December 14, 2017, and it closed on June 30, 2018. The second project, "Benin Second
Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit” (FRG2: P166115), in the amount of USD 15 million, was approved on August
30, 2018. It became effective on November 16, 2018, and it closed on June 30, 2018.

The project consisted of two Fiscal Reform and Growth Credits (FRGs). The first project, “First Fiscal Reform
and Growth Credit” (FRG1: P160700), in the amount of USD 40 million, was approved on Nov 28, 2017. It
became effective on December 14, 2017, and it closed on June 30, 2018. The second project, "Benin Second
Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit” (FRG2: P166115), in the amount of USD 15 million, was approved on August
30, 2018. It became effective on November 16, 2018, and it closed on June 30, 2018.

The planned cost of DPF1 was USD 40 million, and its actual cost was USD 40,635,930. The planned cost of
the DPF2 was USD 15 million, and its actual cost was USD 14,650,000.

DPF1 was fully funded by the World Bank, while DPF2 was augmented with a Policy-Based Guarantee
provided by the International Development Association (PBG; P167278) in the amount of EUR 180 million.

The PBG was used to support Benin’s efforts to facilitate access to international financial markets and address
increasing debt service, while also creating space for greater private sector access to domestic sources of
credit, with longer tenor at lower cost. The PBG was used to support raising long term and affordable
commercial loans which attract participation from European institutional investors. Benin used this to support
two commercial loans for a total of EUR 387 million, 2.5 times the value of the PBGs. The funds raised were
used to retire domestic debt and contribute to the stabilization of Benin’s debt. The non-financial success of
PBG was that it also helped improve the debt management unit’s capacity to analyze the debt portfolio and
honed their negotiations skills with international bankers.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives of the Series were highly relevant at appraisal and remained relevant at closing. PDO 1
 (strengthen fiscal management), was highly relevant because Benin, as a member of the West African CFA
 franc zone, consistently reported high current account deficits that were financed by foreign direct investment
 and concessional capital inflows (Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19-FY23). The DPF series
 supported the authorities’ efforts to strengthen fiscal management by improving revenue collection and by
 managing public expenditure more efficiently, particularly wages and transfers. At the time of FRG1 approval,
 it was stated that growth could also be higher if public investment and social outlays were not constrained by
 a revenue ratio that is among the lowest in SSA (PID Report Number: PIDA27744). The second operation
 continued supporting this objective, as uncontrolled increases in the wage bill and off-budget expenses
 had led to significant increases in public debt (by almost 20 percent of GDP) and in the fiscal deficit (from 1.9
 percent of GDP in 2014 to 8 percent in 2015, including grants) (PID Report Number: PIDA25112).

  PDO 2, to increase agricultural productivity, was highly relevant because of the need to transform agriculture
 from a sector with low productivity and largely subsistence-based activities to one capable of meeting its
 potential for high growth. There was also a need for the sector to shift to more export-oriented production that
 would contribute to overall economic growth far more than it was doing in June 2018, and to produce new

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



jobs for a rapidly growing labor force (CPF). Additionally, agriculture employs about 50 percent of the
population and is the economy’s leading formal sector foreign exchange earner. FRG 2 continued supporting
the agriculture sector, recognizing that its overall productivity could be improved once deficiencies in
the agriculture policy framework and governance structure were addressed and constraints to farming, such
as limited access to input and output markets and food safety and quality, were tackled.

PDO 3 (strengthen the financial viability of the power sector) was relevant given that inconsistent supply of
electricity was noted as a leading constraint to private sector growth, particularly in the light manufacturing
and agricultural processing sectors. Strengthening the financial viability of the power sector was essential to
increasing electricity production capacity in a fiscally sustainable manner. At the time of FRG1 approval, the
goal was to improve financial management of the electricity utility SBEE, and to facilitate planning for the
cost-effective supply of electricity. These two measures continued during FRG2 in order to improve the power
sector’s long-term sustainability (PID Report Number: PIDA27744).

PDO 4 (improve equitable access to education and health services) was also relevant. Benin remains a
country with low levels of educational attainment. With adult literacy rates at approximately 50 percent (35
percent for women and 61 percent for men in 2011) and a high proportion of 19–24-year-olds with fewer than
10 years of education, Benin’s active labor population lacks the educational profile necessary to further
reduce poverty, increase labor productivity, and create better jobs. Furthermore, addressing regional
disparities in well-being was an important aspect of the CPF because Benin’s lagging regions in general
exhibit lower levels of prosperity and access to public services the further one travels away from the coast
and toward the North (CPF - Report No. 123031-BJ). This is why PDO 4 was introduced in FRG2. Access to
education and health care services varied considerably across income groups and locations despite some
improvement over the last decade. A key challenge was disparity in the allocation of primary school teachers
and key health care staff (doctors, nurses, and midwives) across regions, with a relatively low number
allocated in poor and marginal areas of the country (PID Report Number: PIDA25112).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The series targeted binding constraints within Benin by aiming to support fiscal management and address
critical issues in the agriculture and power sector. These constraints were mentioned periodically in the Benin
Country Economic Memorandum (Report No. 4686-BEN). Additionally, improving equitable access to
education and health would help increase the human capital within the country. The issues of electricity and
agriculture are stated in the Government Action Plan (GAP) and the Economic Competitiveness Support
Program for Benin. By appraisal, the macroeconomic policy framework was adequate to launch the FRG
series. The adequacy was justified given the nascent economic recovery in Benin, with a clear fiscal
consolidation path anchored in the country’s fixed exchange rate under the monetary-exchange regime of the
West Africa Economic and Monetary Union and GAP. Favorable growth prospects in 2017 were driven by a
recovery in the cotton and cashew crops. In addition, already in 2016, the newly elected government had
reduced spending. The Bank and IMF shared similar views about the overall macro-framework, and
coordination was effective. Prior actions were relevant and had a clear results chain towards the achievement
of long-term goals of increasing growth and productivity through adequate short-term actions aiming at
increasing fiscal stability and mobilization of revenue, and middle-term actions related to higher investments
and growth led by the private sector. When it comes to agriculture, the effect of the adopted measures will
likely be seen over a longer period, as they aimed at improving the structural competitiveness of the sector.

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)




Pillar 1 - Fiscal Management

Prior Actions 1 and 2: To increase compliance with tax procedures and reduce tax evasion, the MEF piloted
an electronic system to exchange information between the DGI and the DGDDI. Integrating this data allows
authorities to assess and validate information in domestic value-added tax declarations or corporate income
tax declarations, thus improving risk management (audit) of existing taxpayers and the broadening of the tax
base. Although this PA may not have had a critical impact on the achievement of the objective, it did provide
a major contribution.

Prior Action 3: To simplify tax collections and encourage compliance with tax procedures, the DGI has
enabled the largest 100 taxpayers registered in its database to process their tax payments through a verified
banking system. As these large firms (estimated to be approximately 500) are responsible for 70 percent of
corporate tax revenue in Benin, this prior action would allow the government to track and control tax
payments in a more efficient way.

Prior Actions 4 and 5: To strengthen evidence-based policy making, the MEF has established the Tax
Policy Unit within its structure. This unit would bring order into otherwise hectic tax policy formulation and
assessment, as it would develop the necessary tools to measure and track tax expenditures and lower the
constraints that Benin had due to tax expenditures, as the non-renewal in 2017 and 2018 was equivalent to a
revenue gain of 0.21 pp. of GDP.

Prior Action 6: To enhance the accuracy of the public payroll, the MEF has carried out a satisfactory staff
census on all public sector employees, including civil servants, military, police officers, and pensioners. The
identification and monitoring of civil servants were needed to establish a baseline and identify fictitious or
ghost civil servants, as the wage bill accounted for 44 percent of total current expenditures in Benin.

Prior Actions 7 and 8: To combat fraud and better target beneficiaries, the MEF facilitated payments
through a verified banking system by integrating the human resource management information system at the
Ministry of Public Service and the payroll system at the MEF. The reconciliation and interconnection aimed at
preventing any deviance between the two databases in the future, which would decrease unnecessary costs.

Pillar 2 – Agricultural productivity

Prior actions 9 and 10: To promote the development of agricultural value chains within identified agro
ecological zones, the Council of Ministers established Territorial Agricultural Development Agencies relevant
for the needs of each said agro-ecological zone in FRG1. The development of several agencies would
improve the management of each zone and consequently the entire country leading to increased productivity
by determining which crops or agricultural products should be grown in each zone. Although overall
productivity could have been increased even without the introduction of these agencies, they did play an
important role and contributed to the achievement of this objective.

Prior Action s11 and 12: To enhance access to credit in the agricultural sector, the Council of Ministers
created the National Fund for Agriculture Development with a mandate to promote private investments in the
agricultural sector, and the NAES was adopted. These prior actions were adequate as they established a



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



 foundation needed for attracting and including the private sector in agriculture, thus improving productivity
 and driving innovation.

 Prior Actions 13 and 14: The development of the Central Laboratory for Food Safety (LCSSA) and its
 partnership with the Benin Agency for Food Safety led to the implementation of the Action Plan for food
 quality and safety, thus increasing the reliability of Benin’s exports as well as their expansion by meeting the
 international food quality standards. At one point the export of pineapples to Europe had been banned in
 2016 due to food quality issues.

 Pillar 3 - financial viability of the power sector

 Prior actions 15 and 16: To strengthen the financial viability of the power sector, the government cleared all
 its arrears accumulated against SBEE and ensured that SBEE cleared 50 percent of its arrears accumulated
 against CEB. These two prior actions enabled the power sector utility companies to guarantee the reliability
 of the system, because the SEB could maintain its grid and extend it to possibly address the long-term needs
 of the sector.

 Prior Actions 17 and 18: To ensure timely payments of electricity bills to SBEE, the Ministry of Energy,
 Water and Mines initiated the replacement of conventional electricity meters with prepaid electricity meters.
 This prior action was relevant as it allowed SBEE to improve the reliability of its revenue, thus improving its
 services.



 Pillar 4 - Equitable access to education and health services

 This objective was added in FRG2 and it did not have any prior actions in FRG1.

 Prior Action 19: In order to improve equitable access to education services, the Ministry of Pre-School and
 Primary Education has required all newly recruited primary teachers to be deployed to communes where the
 pupils/teacher ratio is higher than the current national average. This prior action is a step in the right direction,
 as more teachers will be sent to parts of the country where they are most needed.

 Prior Action 20: In order to improve equitable access to health services, the Ministry of Health decided to
 send new health care workers to specific areas of the country. This action is also a step in the right direction,
 as it means that more people will be able to seek medical care where there are more health workers.

 However, the relevance of these two PAs was only marginally satisfactory, as a mere increase of the number
 of teachers does not necessarily translate into higher levels of access to education and health services. A
 more suitable prior action would have been to set up mechanisms to track the number of people receiving
 education or health services, or to task existing offices with carrying out these mechanisms. These PAs
 therefore had a moderate contribution to the achievement of the objectives.



Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                         Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The Results Indicators related to Objective 1 - Strengthening Fiscal Management were adequate and
measured the achievement of this objective by tracking tax exemptions, the share of non-customs taxes paid
through digital systems, and management of pensions and salaries.

RI 1: Tax expenditures associated with tax exemptions granted to cell phone companies was an adequate
albeit very partial measurement of a stronger fiscal management system, as it addressed unnecessary
expenditures. The government decided not to renew the tax exemptions given to cell phone companies, as
these exemptions amounted to 0.21 pp of the total GDP in 2017 and 2018, which provided more income for the
state budget.

RI 2: Share of non-customs taxes paid through the banking system and the e-payment system was an
adequate indicator, as it monitored the development of the administration system needed for more efficient tax
management.

RI 3: Percentage of civil servants’ salaries and benefits processed through the unified wage
management system and RI 4: Share of payments of pensions (above CFAF 50,000), scholarships, and
civil servants’ benefits processed through the banking system were both adequate ways to monitor the
achievement of the first objective, as they directly related to better fiscal management of public expenditures.


The Results Indicators related to Objective 2 – Increase agricultural productivity were inadequate as they
didn’t capture productivity.

RI 5: Number of agro-ecological zone—specific experiments launched was not an adequate way to track
the increase of agricultural productivity, as the number of zones or experiments does not necessarily translate
into higher productivity. This RI only partially measured progress towards reaching this objective.

RI 6: Moving average (three years) of the quantity (tons) of processed cashew (C), processed pineapple
(P), and processed rice (R) was not relevant to the objective of increasing productivity in that it measured
volumes rather than productivity (i.e., without reference to the input side of a productivity measure). . It therefore
cannot be taken as evidence of progress toward PDO2.

RI 7: Share of cashew (C) and pineapple (P) tested by LCSSA which meet international standards was a
quality indicator but it did not capture agricultural productivity.

The Results Indicators related to Objective 3 – Strengthen the financial viability of the power sector were
specific and pinpointed crucial technical improvements needed for the achievement of this objective.

RI 8: SBEE’s arrears with CEB was a relevant indicator as the SBEE accumulated substantial arrears to the bi-
national (Togo and Benin) transmission utility (Communauté Electrique du Benin, CEB) which imported
electricity from Ghana and Nigeria. Due to the fragile fiscal position, the public sector had also accumulated
arrears towards SBE and Benin wanted to gain more independence when it comes to power supply.



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



  RI 9: SBEE’s revenue collection rate from all public sector institutions was relevant for measuring the
  achievement of this objective. However, it could have been more clearly noted what was meant by “all” public
  sector institutions. Would this indicator, for example, encompass local governments?

  RI 10: Percentage of revenue protected through the installation of smart energy meters for large
  companies was important, as a steady flow of revenue is crucial for adequate investment and maintenance
  planning. This was one additional way to maintain financial stability of the power sector in Benin.



  The Results Indicators related to Objective 4 - Improve equitable access to education and health
  services sought to capture equity considerations by measuring progress specifically in disadvantaged areas.
  However, they could have measured the actual increase in the number of people successfully accessing
  education and health services instead of the percentage of teachers and health workers deployed.

  RI 11: Percentage of newly recruited teacher deployed in communes with pupil/teacher ratio higher than
  the national average could have been formulated differently, as the presence of teachers does not necessarily
  mean higher access for students. It might have been better to formulate this indicator through the number of
  students who signed up for classes or the increase in the percentage of children and young people participating
  in any level of the education system.

  RI 12: Percentage of newly recruited health personnel deployed in Priority Health Precincts only captures
  a part of what determines access to health services. It might have been better to set the indicator so that it
  measured the number of people who approached and applied for any health service.



  Rating

  Moderately Unsatisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen fiscal management
               Supported by PAs 1 through 8; and RIs 1, 2, 3, 4



               Rationale
               Under this objective, the achievement of three RI targets was judged to be high, ,and the achievement of one
               RI target modest with a delay. RI 3 and RI 4 collectively improved the system of monitoring human resources




                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



costs, which is about 30 percent of government spending, leading to an overall improvement of fiscal
management.



- RI 1: Tax expenditures associated with tax exemptions granted to cellphone companies. Target (2019): less
than CFAF 1 billion. The achievement of the RI target was high, as tax exemptions were cancelled for all cell
phone companies as of 2019. However, availability of funds doesn’t necessarily imply improvement of the
fiscal management.

- RI 2: Share of non-customs taxes paid through the banking system and the e-payment system. Target
(2019): greater than 65 percent. The achievement of the RI target was high, as 79.6 percent of large firms
paid taxes through banking and e-payment systems in 2019, and 97 percent in 2019.

- RI 3: Percentage of civil servants’ salaries and benefits processed through the unified wage management
system. Target (2019): > 80 percent. The achievement of the RI target was modest and with a delay, as the
databases were unified, but this was effective only for all new civil servants that entered the system since the
unification. The process of unification is still ongoing for all other civil servants, with the validation of the
system expected in H1 2020.

- RI 4: Share of payments of pensions (above CFAF 50,000), scholarships, and civil servants’ benefits
processed through the banking system. Target (2019): > 80 percent. The achievement of the RI target was
high, as virtually all payments above the threshold are now done through the banking system, using the civil
servants' bank account details. This means the indicator is close to 100 percent and has exceeded its target.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase agricultural productivity
Supported by PAs 9 through 14; and RIs 5, 6, 7



Rationale
Under this objective, while two of three RI targets were achieved (and one mostly achieved), the RIs were not
sufficiently relevant to this objective, focusing on quality and output volumes rather than on productivity. As a
result, the achievement of this objective cannot be verified and is therefore efficacy is considered to be
negligible.

- RI 5: Number of agro-ecological zone-specific experiments launched. Target (2019): >15. The RI target was
achieved, as 22 experiments were launched in 2019 (5 more than expected) providing evidence, among

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



others, on seeds adaptation, usage of fertilizers, and maintenance of crops for Benin’s principal crops
(pineapple, cashew nuts, cotton, corn, palm oil, rice and fisheries). However, the RI did not adequately
capture the PA's impact toward the objective of increased agricultural productivity, as the number of agro-
ecological zones or experiments does not necessarily lead to increased productivity. Thus, the achievement
of the target is judged to be negligible. A numeric target, such as the type and number of newly planted
crops or cultures, would have better captured the achievement of the objective.

- RI 6: Moving average (three years) of the quantity (tons) of processed cashew, processed pineapple, and
processed rice.



                    Baseline 2016             Baseline 2017         Target 2016            Result 2019
Processed cashew 5,600                        7,600                 8,500                  5,920
Processed pineapple 52,000                    81,800                100,000                177,735
Processed rice      33,300                    52,000                69,500                 254,100



This target was mostly achieved (a decline in international prices of cashew by about 50 percent in 2019
contributed to lower output for cashews), but the increase in the quantity of processed crops may have
stemmed from higher inputs, rather than increased agricultural productivity.

- RI 7: Share of cashew and pineapple tested by LCSSA meeting international standards. This target was
achieved, and higher quantities of tested crops and agricultural products improves the possibility for Benin to
export more goods abroad (or avoid having certain goods banned simply because they do not meet
international standards). It might lead to increased production of certain crops or products in order to respond
to foreign demand, but it cannot yet be verified.

                             Baseline 2017               Target 2019                 Result 2019
Cashew                       88.6 percent                > 90 percent                94 percent
Pineapple                    88.1 percent                > 90 percent                97 percent

Rating
Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen financial viability of the power sector
Supported by PAs 15 to 18; and RIs 8, 9, 10


Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



Under this objective, one target was achieved, one was partially achieved, and one was not achieved.



- RI 8: SBEE’s arrears with CEB: Baseline (2017): CFAF 39.2 billion. Target (2019): <CFAF 10 billion. Result
2019: CFAF 11.82 billion. This target was partially achieved, and the achievement of the target is judged to
be modest. The ICR does not explain why this target was not achieved.

- RI 9: SBEE’s revenue collection rate from all public sector institutions. Target (2019): >50 percent. The
result in 2019 for the central government was 95 percent, and 65 percent for parastatal and local
governments. This target was achieved, and the achievement of the target is judged to be high. Higher
collection rates as a result of the installation of pre-paid meters at government institutions was an important
factor for the achievement of this result.

- RI 10: Percentage of revenue protected through the installation of smart energy meters for large companies.
Target (2019): >40 percent. The result in 2019 was 0 percent. It was expected that this target would
be achieved in 2020. This target was not achieved , and the achievement of the target is judged to be
negligible, as the installation was delayed due to procurement issues. Forty-six thousand smart meters were
received as of December 2019, and their complete installation was expected by end 2020 (ICR, p. 28).



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve equitable access to education and health services
Supported by PAs 19 and 20 in FRG2; RIs 11,12




Rationale
Under this objective, one target was partially achieved, and one target was not achieved. Moreover there
were shortcomings in the relevance of the indicators to the objective.

- RI 11: Percentage of newly recruited teachers deployed in communes with pupil/teacher ratio higher than
the national average. Target (2019): >90 percent. This target was partially achieved, and the achievement of
the target is judged to be modest. 65% of newly deployed teachers were to communes with higher-than-
average pupil-teacher ratios, meaning that 35% of teachers instead of the targeted maximum of 10% were
not deployed to underserved regions. This RI could have been phrased in a way that would take into account
which group of people would have access, thus failing to properly assess the “equitable” portion of the
objective.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



                  - RI 12: Percentage of newly recruited health personnel deployed in Priority Health Precincts. Target (2019):
                  >70 percent. This target was not achieved, and thus the achievement of the target is judged to be negligible,
                  as the recruitment of 1,384 health personnel in 2018 was delayed (ICR, p. 28). The recruitment of additional
                  health personnel did not happen, so the government reassigned existing staff, allowed direct recruitment
                  (using districts' own resources), restricted public health providers from working two jobs (one in the private
                  sector), and rationalized the allocation of health resources. According to the ICR, these measures improved
                  the level of service in eight priority precincts. However, the original target was not met, as no additional health
                  workers were recruited. The conclusion from the previous RI can also be applied for this one in terms of the
                  adequacy of the RI, as the number of newly recruited health workers does not necessarily translate into more
                  equitable access.



                  Rating
                  Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The FRG series achieved the targets for six of its twelve results indicators, partially achieved targets for four
other indicators, and did not achieve targets for two indicators. However, several RIs, including all RIs for PDO2,
were not sufficiently relevant and did not therefore provide sufficient evidence of achievement. Achievement of
the first PDO is rated satisfactory and second PDO is rated as unsatisfactory. Objective 3 is rated moderately
unsatisfactory, and 4 is rated unsatisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With satisfactory relevance of prior actions and a moderately unsatisfactory efficacy, outcome of the series is
Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

                                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)




Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Program outcomes are likely to be sustained, although there are risks. Benin has already delivered credible
fiscal consolidation and improved economic growth, successfully completing six reviews and an IMF program.
Measures taken under the fiscal objective such as e-reporting and e-payment should be sustainable and
supported by other donors (Canada) as well as a follow-up DPO series. Monitoring by the Tax Policy Unit
should, over time, subject tax expenditures to evidence-based assessment. The power sector is more fragile.
However, measures such as the introduction of a performance-based management contract for SBEE, as well
as the change in mandate of the CEB, should support the actions taken in the FRG series. There are some
areas where sustainability concerns are greater. The government is pushing ahead on addressing cost/price
issues in the power sector, but tariff reform and private sector participation in generation are difficult reforms.
There have been important achievements since the end of FRG series, with the adoption of a tariff increase in
December 2019 that puts tariffs closer to cost recovery. Similarly, the adoption of a new Electricity Code in
January 2020 paves the way for private sector participation in the energy sector. However, these efforts face
important challenges linked to political economy considerations.

Risks have been heightened in the context of the COVID-19 crisis. Benin’s real economic growth is expected to
decelerate significantly to 3.2 percent in 2020. Setbacks can be expected. The crisis will affect the liquidity and
solvency of state-owned enterprises, in particular the electricity utility. While the medium-term outlook remains
favorable, high uncertainty on the duration and depth of the crisis still creates risks to the sustainability of the
program.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Strong analytical underpinnings in the form of previous WBG analysis, and particularly the support of ongoing
projects in the power, agriculture, education, and health areas, were key to the design of the series. Further, this
analysis went beyond World Bank work, using relevant academic research when needed (notably in education
and health, ICR, p. 31, table 6). Additionally, some of the main elements of the reform agenda, such as the
domestic measures in the fiscal objective, are linked to work done by other development partners. However,
risks related to the technical design of the program were underestimated. The introduction of the
health/education objective added risks given that PAs were only introduced in the second DPO in the series.
Finally, the reforms of the power sector were overly ambitious, as they initially aimed to reform the sector to
some extent. The overall complexity of these reforms, including the many areas covered by the series
(agriculture, energy, education, health, and fiscal), deserved more careful consideration of the risks linked to the
technical design. In addition, M&E design could have been more systematic, as the definition and sources of
some RIs were inadequate, making it difficult to evaluate results. Other results data were difficult to track down
and obtain because of low institutional capacity within the government and the coordinating unit’s lack of clear


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



authority to collect information on M&E. The project team added that mitigation measures and strong
commitment by the authorities helped to manage this risk, and low institutional capacity was not a major
obstacle to implementation and stability. This is true as the existence of Bank-financed IPFs in the sectors
chosen (agriculture, energy, health and education) also supported the implementation of the different actions
and mitigated against sector risks by ensuring continued support by the specialists.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Sector strategy and policy risks were effectively mitigated. For example, when it became evident that the prior
actions in the health/education objective would not be met as expected in 2018, a letter was immediately sent to
the Bank, and Bank sector specialists assisted the government in finding alternative ways to achieve the PDO.
The Bank made necessary adjustments to the program to maintain relevance and to adjust to different rates of
progress in different reform areas. The Bank adjusted indicative triggers to improve specificity (Objective 1) and
likelihood of implementation (Objective 2) given low institutional capacity and the time frame of the series. These
adjustments helped maintain program relevance.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Despite some shortcomings in recognizing risks related to the introduction of the health/education objective and
the fact that some goals were unlikely to be achieved during the time frame of the series, the Bank monitored
the project in an efficient way and communicated with the government in a timely manner to offer support
whenever an issue would arise. The Bank also made a creative decision to allow and support a PBG, which led
to a synergy with project goals and might lead to additional benefits for the country even after the end of the
project.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)




a. Social and Poverty

The FRG series is expected to have a positive impact on poverty reduction. In the short run, the fiscal measures
reduced risks to macroeconomic stability and, in the longer term, should free up fiscal space to permit increases
in social spending. Moreover, the government has pledged to use one-third of the fiscal spaced freed up by the
debt re-profiling (made possible by the PBG) to increase social spending. The Poverty and Social Impact
Assessment (done for FRG1) laid out the broader importance of improving efficiencies in the electricity sector to
ensure broader access. A lack of reliable power impacts the few poor households who have access, and putting
the utility on a sustainable path is a first step to increasing electrification more broadly (70 percent of the
population lacks access). The improvements in student/teacher ratios in underserved areas supports the
broader human capital agenda of the GAP.



b. Environmental

Measures supported by the FRG series are not likely to have negative impacts on the environment. While it is
too soon to measure these outcomes, the measures supported in agriculture, especially the shift to increased
autonomy around an agro-ecological paradigm, would be expected to better match geography with strategy,
including a strategy around climate-smart agriculture (crop diversification, land management, inputs). Similarly,
putting the electric utilities back on a viable financial footing reduces the pressure to use short term (thermal)
generation and creates space for investments in sustainable energy needed to meet growing demand. While the
Electricity Code was passed in January 2020, under the new DPO series, it was initially conceived as part of
FRG1. As adopted by Parliament, the code sets explicit targets for renewable energy and improved private
sector participation in the sector.



c. Gender

The actions on education and health, if they translate into improved access (which is not adequately measured)
would have positive gender outcomes. In particular, improving health services in underserved poor areas should
reduce high levels of maternal mortality, preterm birth, and malnutrition. In the long term, if sustained, the
actions should improve Benin’s human capital gap between male and females. Unfortunately, disaggregated
data was not measured through the results framework to assess gender utilization (or outcomes) for school
enrollment or health services.



d. Other

-



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)




The ICR is clearly written and concise. It is candid and critical. It provides sufficient and convincing evidence
related to prior actions, results indicators, and achievement of objectives. It also provides a balanced narrative of
the positive and negative sides of preparation as well as implementation, intervening factors, and context. The
ICR describes the PBG in a separate table, as it had a significant impact on the success of the series. It also
devoted attention to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on development outcomes and the future viability of
achieved outcomes.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                    While the operation met several
                                 Moderately             Moderately                  RI targets, they did not
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory              accurately capture the impact of
                                                                                    the PAs on the objective.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                    Some indicators could not
Relevance of Results                                    Moderately
                                 ---                                                monitor the achievement of
Indicators                                              Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    objectives
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG concurs with the general lessons of the ICR:

Lesson 1: Longer term engagements are necessary to achieve overhauls in sectors. The reforms from
FRG1 related to the power sector aimed at addressing short-term and medium-term bottlenecks of the sector.
Achieving those objectives together with fiscal sustainability has been only possible due to the continuous
programmatic series, that is, the FRG series and the following DPO series which completed reforms initially
expected in the FRG series. However, the late introduction of PAs in health and education made it difficult to
track progress and impact.

Lesson 2: To achieve greater and faster impact of reforms, it is important to coordinate with other
donors and Bank-financed investment loans. The process of monitoring is enhanced as problems can be
identified quickly, experts can be mobilized to support the authorities, and mitigation measures can be agreed
upon. This was the case with deployment of health personnel, where reforms had to be revised to attempt to
achieve the objective using alternative methods.

Lesson 3: Innovative solutions and flexibility to support government requests can bring additional
benefits. During this project, the government requested to use a PBG after a careful analysis of the debt

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      First Fiscal Reform and Growth Credit (P160700)



portfolio, development of a debt management strategy, and its strengthened capacity over recent years, which
enabled it to create more fiscal space.

Lesson 4: Additional effort is needed to integrate M&E into government systems from the outset,
particularly in a low-capacity country. During this series, there were shortcomings related to the M&E
framework in terms of a lack of proper definition of some indicators from the outset. This made traceability
difficult, sometimes even requiring reaching out to the original author of the results indicators.

To these lessons, IEG adds the following:

Lesson 5: Any project or series with human capital strengthening should include consideration of gender (if
even in the collection of sex disaggregated data), especially in countries such as Benin where there is a
significant human capital gap between males and females.

Lesson 6: The World Bank’s policy-based guarantees may offer creditworthy low-income African countries a
way to obtain external financing at better-than-commercial terms in support of credible fiscal and social reforms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
This project is unique because of the impact that the PBG had on the success of the project. In the absence of
the PBG, the government would not have been able to address increasing debt service and support its efforts
to facilitate access to international financial markets, while also creating space for greater private sector access
to domestic sources of credit, with longer tenor debt and lower financing costs (ICR, p. 24). For this reason, a
PPAR is recommended.




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 19
