     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022396

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P095977                                   NP: Road Sector Development Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48320,IDA-50020,IDA-58650,IDA-       30-Jun-2012                                        126,444,070.00
 H3390,IDA-H6290

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Dec-2007                              15-Jan-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            42,600,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            128,515,589.07                                            0.00

 Actual                                        126,444,070.00                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                John R. Eriksson            Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is for residents of the beneficiary districts to have all-season road access,
   thereby reducing travel time and improving access to economic centers and social services.
   (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, page 4 and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4).

   The implementation of this Road Sector Development Project (RSDP) took 12 years. In line
   with the Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS) guidelines for projects extending over ten years, an

                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



   interim Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) was prepared and subsequently validated in an
   interim ICR Review by IEG in 2017. This Review covers both the original project and the AF, and the ratings
   assigned by IEG in this final ICR Review replace the ratings assigned in the interim ICR Review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two original components (PAD, pages 5 and 6). (see 2e below for total estimated project
   cost and actual cost).

   1. Road development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$42.9 million. With AF1, the revised
   estimate was US$59.0 million. With AF2, US$27.0 million was approved . The total estimated amount for
   this component was US$120.0 million. The actual cost was US$113.7 million (including US$40.8 million for
   the original project, US$60.2 million for AF1, and US$12.7 million for AF2).

   Activities in this component included: (i) upgrading 297 kilometer (km) of existing dry season roads to all-
   season standards with sealed gravel components: (ii) periodic maintenance on 450 km of the strategic
   highway and feeder road network: (iii) road safety audits and road safety works: and (iv) carrying out a
   program of compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of displaced persons. With AF1, the road
   upgrading works were scaled up from 297 km to 700 km and periodic maintenance was expanded from 450
   km to 2,550 km.

   The following changes were made on July 8, 2011, with financing from AF2: (i) An additional 20 km
   for slope stabilization and all-weather surfacing works: (ii) Major and minor bridge maintenance was added
   in the wake of the 2015 earthquake (55 bridges/ 2,000 meters for major maintenance and 300 bridges/
   9,000 for minor maintenance of bridges): and (iii) Construction of 33 bridges, along gaps in the strategic
   road network and replacing three bridges damaged in the earthquake.

   2. Institutional Strengthening & Policy Reform. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$6.6
   million. US$13.0 million and US$8.0 million was approved with AF1 and AF2 respectively. With this, the
   total cost was US$27.0 million. The actual cost was US$20.1 million (US$9.3 million for the original project,
   US$7.1 million for AF1 and US$3.7 million for AF2.

   This component planned to strengthen the institutional capacities of the Department of Roads (DOR), the
   Roads Board Nepal (RBN) and the Ministry of Planning and Works (MOPPW). Activities in this
   component: (i) Technical Assistance (TA) for (i) Human Resource Development (HRD): (ii) Geo-technical,
   Environment and Social Development: (iii) Information Technology (IT) and Developing Management
   Information System (MIS): (iv) Road Assessment Management: (v) Road Safety Action Plan: (vi) Effective
   Quality Assurance: (vii) A mechanical training center: (viii) Strengthening Roads Board Operations: (ix)
   Technical Audit: (x) Equipment and logistics: and (xi) preparing for a follow up project.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



  The following component was added during AF2:

  3. Resilience Enhancements. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$20.0 million. The actual cost was
  US$14.5 million. Activities in this component: (i) 1,600 meters of modular steel bridges, and (ii) heavy
  equipment for the DOR's fire heavy equipment division at selected DOR staging sites for rapid response to
  unforeseen failures along the strategic roads network.

  Project Preparation Advance (PPA) and contingencies were estimated at US$1.0 million for the original
  project and US$4.0 million for AF1. With this, the total was US$5.0 million. The amount disbursed was
  US$2.9 million (including US$1.7 million for the original project and US$1.2 million for AF1).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The total estimated project cost (including for the original project, AF1 and AF2), was
  US$173.0 million. The actual cost was US$151.3 million.

  Project financing. The original project was financed by an IDA grant of US$42.5 million. AF of
  US$75.0 was approved on August 25, 2016, and AF of US$55.0 million was approved on June 15, 2016.
  With this, the Bank financing was US$173.0 million. About US$6.9 million was cancelled due to the savings
  from the depreciation of the Nepalese Rupee relative to the US$ on January 21, 2015 and US$20.0 million
  of AF2 was cancelled on June 2019. According to the information provided by the team, an undisbursed
  balance of US$8.67 million in the AF2 grant was cancelled.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$8.0 million at appraisal. Their
  actual contribution was less than planned at US$4.7 million.

  Dates. The original project became effective on February 21, 2008 and closed on June 30, 2015. The AF1
  became effective on July 8, 2011, and closed on June 30, 2017. The AF2 became effective on January 15,
  2017, and closed on January 15, 2020.

  Other changes. The changes made through the two AFs (Level 1 restructurings), and six level 2
  restructurings are listed below.

  First Level 2 restructuring on September 6, 2010.

        The closing date of the original grant was extended by 18 months from June 30, 2012, to December
         31, 2013, for completing the project activities.

  These changes were made with the AF1 (Level 1 restructuring) on July 8, 2011.

        As indicated in section 2d, the project scope was expanded, and targets were revised to reflect the
         increase in scope.

  Second Level 2 restructuring on January 21, 2015.

        Funding was reallocated between categories.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



      Savings of US$6.9 million realized due to the depreciation of the Nepalese Rupee was cancelled.

Third Level 2 restructuring on June, 18, 2015.

      The closing date for AF1 was extended to June 30, 2016, to enable the government to cope with the
       disruptions and delays caused by the April 2015 earthquake and the trade blockage at the border
       with India, and to resolve the technical challenges involving the design of bridges on major
       highways.

Fourth Level 2 restructuring on February 3, 2016.

      Funds were reallocated between categories, with more funding for institutional strengthening
       activities.

Fifth Level 2 restructuring on June 15, 2016.

      The project closing date for AF1 was extended from June 30, 2016, to June 30, 2017.

These changes made through the AF2 (Level 1 restructuring) on June 15, 2017.

      As indicated in section 2d, a new component was added to enhance the resiliency of project
       roads. The project scope was expanded to include construction of 33 bridges along gaps in the
       strategic road network, and replacement of three bridges damaged in the 2015 earthquake.
      The following PDO indicators were added: an indicator to measure the enhanced resilience of the
       RSDP roads; an indicator to measure bridge vulnerability; and an indicator to measure enhanced
       access as reported by beneficiaries.
      The PDO indicator for the percentage reduction of black spot in the strategic road network was
       dropped due to the increase in cost.

Sixth Level 2 restructuring on June 10, 2019.

      The closing date for AF2 was extended from July 15, 2019, to January 15, 2020, and US$20.0
       million of the undisbursed amount was cancelled.
      The scope of activities associated with maintenance of bridges was reduced to 1,500 meters (from
       2,000 meters) of major maintenance and 6,245 meters of minor maintenance (from 9,000
       meters), as these activities were carried out by the government.

A split -rating application: While the new indicators were added at the PDO-level during AF2, these were
access and resilience enhancement activities that were left over from the earlier operations (slope
stabilization and bridge construction), as well as to respond to the needs emerged/identified in the wake of
earthquakes of April and May of 2015 (major & minor maintenance of quake-affected bridges, modular steel
bridges and equipment to enhance resilience and the ability to respond in emergencies). This represents
the expanded project scope in line with the additional funds allocated. The PDO remained unchanged,
without reflecting the resilience focus of added activities.




                                                                                               Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Nepal, the poorest country in South Asia, with a per capita Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) of US$270 in 2005 and the slowest growing economy in the region (with growth estimates
for 2005 -2006 of 2%, compared to the regional average of 8%), was just recovering from a ten year
insurgency in the years before appraisal. In the transport sector, 12 of the 75 administrative districts
lacked road connectivity, and another 14 had only seasonal tracks. Given that access to all-season road is
a critical measure of access in Nepal, as the monsoon rains make earthen roads impassable for many
months at a time, improving service delivery through access to all season roads in the remote and security-
affected areas was important to the government strategy.

Government strategy. The PDO continues to be well-aligned with the government strategy. Nepal's
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the tenth Five-Year Plan (2002-2007) identified improving transport
connectivity as among the top priorities. The government's Priority Investment Plan (PIP) prepared in 1997
and updated for 2007 - 2016, highlighted the importance of improving accessibility to the Strategic Road
Network, by specifically bringing the population within two hours walk in the Terai (the southern plains that
border India), and four hours walk in the hill districts (north of the Terai), to an all season road. The
government's 14th periodic plan (2017-2019) and the 15th periodic plan (2020 -2024) identified improving
physical infrastructure and improving accessibility as priorities.

Bank strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Bank's Interim Strategy
Note (ISN) of 2007 proposed that the emerging development agenda focus on public investments in the
remote areas of Nepal for increasing inclusion. Pillar one of the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
for 2014-2018 underscored the need for "Increasing Economic Growth and Competitiveness" , through
explicitly focusing on market access to the poor, and facilitating national and regional integration, through
improving transport connectivity. The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) reiterated the
need for increasing transport connectivity, through improved maintenance of roads, constructing safe,
climate resilient and cost-effective bridges, and improving connectivity in rural areas.

Bank prior experience. The Bank financed several projects in Nepal, including the Road Maintenance and
Development Project, that closed on June 30, 2007. This project supported the government's Priority
Investment Plan (PIP - 1997) for the transport sector and updated the plan for 2007 -2016. The updated
PIP highlighted the importance of improving accessibility to the Strategic Road Network in the Terai and in
the hill districts. This project directly responded to that priority.

Relevance of the lending instrument. A Sector Investment Lending (SIL) was used for the project
designed as a "fast track" operation, as opposed to other options (an adaptable Program Loan and a
Sector- Wide Approach (SWAp). A SIL approach, unlike an adaptable program loan, was flexible, and
provided for the Bank's exit if the security situation deteriorated during implementation. A swap approach
was deemed inappropriate, given the time it would have taken to harmonize the implementation framework
and reach consensus on design standards, safeguard policies and implementation guidelines with other
donors.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



               Relevance of PDO. Although the PDO was relevant to the Government and Bank strategies for Nepal, the
               PDO statement - providing all season road access for residents of beneficiary districts -
               was narrow, and focused only on the infrastructure investments financed by the project. Given that the
               project included institutional strengthening activities, and 15% of Bank-financing was allocated for this
               component, a reworded PDO statement would have better represented the range of activities supported by
               the project. This would also have aided in formulating relevant indicators for monitoring the institutional
               dimension of the project. The relevance of objective is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             For residents of the beneficiary districts to have all-season road access, thereby reducing travel time and
                             improving access to economic centers and social services.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The outputs of activities, such as upgrading roads and slope protection works, periodic
                             maintenance of the strategic road network and road safety works, were likely to improve the condition of the
                             road network, reduce travel time, and increase the share of population with access to all-season roads and
                             economic centers and social services. The activities that were added with AF2 - construction of bridges,
                             rehabilitation of bridges damaged by the earthquake, and major and minor maintenance of bridges, together
                             with the activities discussed above, were likely to enhance resiliency, and these activities were likely reinforce
                             the PDO of improving access to economic centers and social services in the project-intervened areas of the
                             participating districts. The project also supported institutional strengthening of the respective transport
                             agencies for improving management of road assets. Unlike the infrastructure investments, the institutional
                             strengthening activities lacked a coherent strategy and were not linked to the PDO. The theory of
                             change does not explicitly state the assumptions made to realize the institutional dimension of the project.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 22 -31).

                                        680 kilometers (km) of non-rural roads were rehabilitated, short of the target of 705 km.
                                        Periodic maintenance was provided on 2,595 km of highways, exceeding the target of 2,550 km.
                                        The road safety action plan was approved by the government as targeted.
                                        Geotechnical assessments were completed as targeted. Capacity building activities for environmental
                                         and social aspects were completed and awareness activities for HIV- AIDS were completed as
                                         targeted.
                                        6.68 million days of temporary employment was created on road sites, exceeding the target 2.50
                                         million. 663, 211 jobs went to women far exceeding the target of 250,000. 280,907 jobs were provided

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



       for Dalits and 3,280,292 for Janjits (target 250,000) (historically disadvantaged groups in
       Nepal). There were no targets for this indicator.
      The Human Resource Policy in the Department of Roads (DOR) was updated and a three- year
       training plan was finalized. The DOR staff were trained. (No targets were specified for this indicator).
      The upgrading of roads in remote districts in the mid-western and far-western regions of the country,
       intended to improve access to the isolated communities, presented engineering challenges, in view of
       the difficult physical environment. This influenced the choice of upgrading materials and technologies
       used. Based on past pilot projects, the roads in this project used a unique, low cost design comprised
       of a particular river bed gravel sized, that was locally sourced and hence cost effective.
      Major maintenance activities were provided on 1,500 meters of bridges, as per the revised target
       (although short of the original target of 2,000 meters).
      Minor maintenance activities were provided on 9,500 meters of bridges, as targeted.
      1,500 meters of modular steel bridges for rapid response were provided as targeted.
      With respect to the resilience -added activities, only six bridges (145 meters) were fully completed
       when the project closed, well short of the target of 31 bridges (670 meters). The ICR (paragraph 15)
       reports that by March 15, 2020, an additional five bridges had 80% of works completed and another
       nine bridges had 70% of works completed, achieving an overall weighted physical progress of 64%.
       The ICR (paragraph 35) explains that in the absence of a proper design review mechanism with site
       verification, bridge alignments and heights were found to be not appropriate to the construction site
       and contributed to delays in contract implementation. With regard to roads with enhanced resilience
       measures, with 0.73 km of roads rehabilitated at project closing against a target of 16 km, the target
       was significantly underachieved. By May 2020 (four months after closing), 4.6 km of roads had been
       rehabilitated by GoN, corresponding to 42% of the target. This target was defined at the PDO level,
       while these are clearly output-based indicators.
      The activity of strengthening planning for the strategic road network and bridges was not completed
       due to the delays in completing the inventory survey.

Outcomes

    The share of population with access to an all season road, increased from 8% at the baseline on June
       25, 2007, to 15% when the original and AF1 closed, exceeding the target of 14%.
    The journey time in the project area to economic centers (markets and district
     headquarters) decreased from four hours at the baseline to 1.9 hours in June 2016, exceeding
     the target of 2.6 hours.
    The journey time to social centers (schools, colleges and hospitals) decreased from 4 four hours at
     the baseline to 1.2 hours, exceeding the target of 3 hours.
    752,000 people benefitted from project activities, slightly short of the target of 800,000. This shortfall
     was due to the slightly fewer than planned km upgrading of roads. 53% of the beneficiaries were
     women as targeted. According to the sampled beneficiary survey, at 82% positive response against
     the target of 70%, the target has been exceeded.
    The ICR provides no details on the extent to which the project activities contributed to the institutional
     strengthening of the respective agencies in areas pertaining to providing for road maintenance,
     management of road assets, and road safety.




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



                            In sum, efficacy is rated as substantial, although there were moderate shortcomings in activities pertaining to
                            resilience and reducing vulnerability through construction of bridges.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            On balance, efficacy of achieving the PDO is substantial, although there were moderate shortcomings in
                            activities pertaining to resilience and reducing vulnerability through roads and bridges works.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal for activities with associated
   rehabilitation of roads under the original and AF 1 projects. These activities accounted for 70% of Bank financing
   for the project. The benefits from improved roads were assumed to come from four sources: (1) time savings. (2)
   reduction in vehicle operating costs. (3) prevented road closures. and (4) modal shift benefits (based on the
   assumption that road improvements would enable switching from using mules or porters to trucks). The ex-post
   Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for the original project was 41%, above the 12% threshold, as
   compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 23%. The ex-post EIRR of the AF1 project was 29% as compared to the ex-
   ante EIRR of 23%. The ex post EIRRs were higher than expected, due to the higher than expected traffic flows
   on the rehabilitated roads.An economic analysis was conducted of the three completed road sections involving
   seal and slope stabilization interventions (financed by AF2). The ex post EIRR was 27% as compared to the ex
   ante EIRR of 13%.

   Administrative and operation issues. There were several administrative and operational shortcomings during
   implementation. Operational issues in the initial years, exacerbated by frequent staff rotation at the Department
   of Roads, affected implementation of institutional strengthening activities. After starting the project on
   emergency reconstruction, the Bank failed to engage fully on the institutional strengthening and the extension of
   the project did not help in taking the agenda forward. Although 15% of the Bank financing for the project were
   allocated for institutional strengthening activities, there were no appropriate indicators for monitoring the extent
   to which the project activities contributed to improving the asset management of roads. According to the
   borrower and stakeholders comments (ICR, page 37), it is not clear if the road safety aspects were included in
   all roads upgrading and slope stabilization contracts (Borrower's ICR, page 47). There were significant delays in
   implementing the activity associated with the bridges component (AF2 activity), due to poor contract
   management and supervision issues. Only six bridges were fully completed as compared to the target of 31

                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



bridges, when the project closed. Although the project spanned a twelve year implementation period, over half
(52%) of the AF2 funding was unutilized and cancelled when the project closed.

In sum, efficiency is rated as modest in view of the significant operational and administrative shortcomings, in
particular during the last years of implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      70.00
 Appraisal                                                  35.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      70.00
 ICR Estimate                                               23.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government and the Bank strategy is substantial. Efficacy of the project
development objective is rated substantial, although there were moderate shortcomings in activities pertaining
to resilience and reducing vulnerability through roads and bridges works. Efficiency is modest, in view of the
administrative and operational shortcomings, in particular during the last years of implementation, with 52% the
additional funding unutilized and cancelled. Taking these ratings into account, the overall outcome is rated
moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. There are technical risks, given the limited number of experienced engineers at
the Department of Roads (DOR), and limited technical capacity, especially at the Bridges branch of the DOR.

Government commitment. Given that the DOR gets a separate maintenance budget from the government
and local bodies get separate unconditional grants for local maintenance, the risk associated with
government commitment is rated as low to medium. In this context, the ICR (paragraph 56) notes that the


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



government has also allocated a significant grant (US$80.0 million) financed by the Bank, to undertake
periodic maintenance of high traffic sections of the strategic road network.

Fiduciary risks. The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that government programs in Nepal remain vulnerable to
fiduciary risks. Although the government has introduced e-bidding which has to an extent, improved DORs
fiduciary systems, there are still residual risks associated with transparency of the fiduciary systems.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the experience from the prior Bank-financed project (The Road
  Maintenance and Development Project). Lessons incorporated at design, included preparing technical
  designs based on field surveys given the difficult terrain, and focusing on upgrading roads rather than
  constructing roads (where blasting might be required). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including
  substantial risks associated with technical design, weak implementation capacity, and possibility of
  disruptions due to conflict in project areas. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included
  increased monitoring, dialogue with the client, and keeping the technical design simple. With mitigation
  measures, the overall risk was rated as moderate (PAD, page 19). The implementation arrangements
  were appropriate, with the Department of Roads (DOR) the main implementing agency, a project
  Coordination Unit (PCU) of the Foreign Cooperation Branch (FCB) in the DOR as the project coordinator
  and a Project Management Unit (PMU) in three locations near construction sites for day-to-day
  supervision (PAD, page 7). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance
  were appropriate (discussed in Section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings at quality-at-Entry. One, the institutional strengthening component of
  the project was ambitious in the range of activities it sought to support (Human Resources, Road Assets
  Management, Road Safety and Road Board). The activities lacked a coherent strategy or prioritization,
  and lacked a clear exposition of how these activities were going to impact the efficiency of the transport
  agencies. This was exacerbated by lack of appropriate indicators for monitoring the institutional
  dimension of the project (discussed in section 9a).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 23 supervision missions were conducted over an eleven-year implementation period (twice a year
 supervision missions on average). The AF2 project addressed critical needs, such as constructing bridges
 and rehabilitating bridges that were damaged in the 2015 earthquake, and by introducing a new resilience
 component for future disaster related events on the strategic road network. As noted in the Borrower's ICR



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



 (Annex 7), the support provided by the supervision team aided in safeguards compliance. The ICR
 provides no information on the continuity of leadership during the implementation period.

 Given the shortcomings associated with the institutional dimension of the project, the Bank was not
 effective in helping the project advance the institutional strengthening and policy reform agenda. The team
 responded to this constraint through progressive downward revision/recalibration of its expectations, as
 described by the ICR (paragraph 53), rather than through identifying and pursuing alternative avenues for
 furthering the reform agenda.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The two key outcomes indicators of the original and AF1 projects - percentage increase in population in
 project districts with access to all season roads, and decrease in journey time to key economic and social
 centers - were appropriately linked to the PDO. Baseline data and targets were specified for these
 indicators. A project-specific results monitoring tool was developed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 28).

 There were shortcomings in M&E design. There were no key outcome indicators for monitoring the
 institutional strengthening component of the project (even though 15% of the Bank financing was for this
 component). The M&E design of the AF project focused only on indicators relevant to the AF project, rather
 than the overall project objectives. The indicators on reduced bridge vulnerability and resilience
 improvements were not directly linked to the PDO, and were output-oriented and inappropriate for
 monitoring outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 40) notes that not all indicators were reported diligently during implementation and
  there were issues in updating some data, due to the inadequacies in the Department of Roads (DORs)
  M&E system. Frequent staff transfers and replacement of staff with not enough experience in monitoring
  hampered M&E implementation.



c. M&E Utilization




                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



  The M&E data was mainly used as a progress management tool and for adjusting some components
  during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 41) notes that there is no evidence that the project's M&E
  framework or data would be used beyond the project life.

  In sum, the overall quality of the M&E framework was rated modest, mainly due to the shortcomings in
  M&E design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank Safeguard
   policies. Four safeguard polices were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01);
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): and Forests (OP/BP 4.36).
   (PAD, page 18).

   Environmental Assessment and Forests. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
   was prepared to address possible environmental issues at appraisal, as the precise location of project
   activities were not known. This framework included measures to address issues with forests
   safeguards. This framework was subsequently updated in April 2013. The ICR notes that compliance with
   social and environment safeguard policies were rated as moderately satisfactory when the project
   closed. According to the information provided by the team, there were no issues with the safeguards on
   forests.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 61) notes that about two hectares of land acquisition was
   expected and displacement of some families was expected in project activities associated with upgrading
   roads. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to address issues of compensation,
   resettlement and rehabilitation of the affected families. The ICR (paragraph 45) notes that cash
   compensation was paid in full for 91 Project Affected Households (PAHs), in lieu of 76 parcels and 48
   structures. In the case of remaining 24 households with 19 land parcels and 11 structures, compensation
   remained outstanding when the project closed, as the affected household did not provide the required
   documentation for clearance for payments. The ICR does not report of any issues with the safeguards on
   indigenous people.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. A financial management assessment conducted at appraisal concluded that
   the arrangements were adequate, and the financial isk was rated as moderate (PAD, paragraph 56). The
   ICR (paragraph 46) notes that there no significant financial issues during implementation and the financial
   audits were unqualified.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



   Procurement. A procurement assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the arrangements were
   satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 54). The ICR (paragraph 47) notes that the Department of Roads (DOR)
   successfully utilized e-procurement, and there were no significant procurement issues during
   implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three main lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
with some adaptation of language.

1. Road investments have the potential to contribute to economic recovery in post-conflict
environments. This project implemented in a post-conflict environment in Nepal, highlighted the
contribution of improving all-weather infrastructure in remote districts, so that the residents feel
connected to the essential services and economic opportunities. The beneficiary survey results
showed positive response on improvement in accessibility to social and
economic service facilities, reduced travel time, and improvement in economic development.

2. Major project restructuring and Additional Financing (AF) must be relevant to the original
project goals. The Bank in this project was able to quickly mobilize additional support through AF1
and 2. However, it is important to critically assess whether the advantages of a long ten plus years
engagement with the same PDO would be offset by the loss of the opportunity to engage the
government in a fresh dialogue before a new operation.

3. Supporting innovative approaches to developing and using local materials can be cost
effective and aid in promoting local entrepreneurship. This project demonstrated the value of



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NP: Road Sector Development Project (P095977)



providing incentives for using locally-sourced material and upgrading low traffic roads at a lower
cost.

The ICR draws the following lesson from this project.

The Project Development Objective (PDO) needs to be representative of the range of
activities supported by the project. Although 15% of the Bank financing for this project was
allocated for the institutional strengthening component, these activities were not clearly linked to
the PDO. A more representative PDO would have aided in formulating indicators that were relevant
for monitoring the institutional dimension of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, concise and at 16 pages adheres to the recommended length. The theory of Change
provided in the text is logical, and provides a clear link between the infrastructure investment activities, the
outputs and outcomes. However, no mention is made of the assumptions underlying each level of the Theory of
Change. The ICR candidly acknowledges the shortcomings associated with the institutional strengthening
component of the project and how the team could have better addressed the issues. The ICR draws reasonably
good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

One minor shortcoming is that the description of project restructurings is at times confusing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
