     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022423

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P132750                                  SNRTP

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53360,IDA-H8990                      15-Jul-2019                                         83,519,545.70

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Dec-2013                              15-Jan-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          91,504,644.91                                               0.00

 Actual                                      83,519,545.70                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Peter Nigel Freeman          Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, 11) was:

   " To enhance the availability and reliability of transport connectivity for rural communities in the
   participating districts "



                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



   This review regards the PDOs of enhancing availability and reliability of transport connectivity as
   complementary objectives. The review hence does not parse the objectives and treats it is a single objective.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were two components (PAD, pages 14 - 16).

   A. Institutional Strengthening, Technical Assistance and Monitoring. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$19.7 million. The cost of this component increased significantly due to the inclusion of three
   additional districts that were severely affected by the devastating earthquake of April 2015, which added
   about 500 kilometers (km) of roads under routine maintenance, 70 km of roads under periodic
   maintenance, and 22 meters of new crossing structures. The revised estimate of this component was
   US$26.9 million. The increase in costs of this component was met by a combination of factors, including
   reallocation of funding between project components and counterpart funding. The actual cost was US$22.1
   million. This component planned to finance the following activities:

   (i) Technical Assistance (TA) and training to the participating districts, the Department of Local
   Infrastructure Development and Agricultural Research (DoLIDAR), the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local
   Development (MOFALD), and the National Vigilance Center (NVC); (ii) Beneficiary monitoring of the
   physical works financed under component B; (iii) TA for preparing technical audits and verification activities
   for component B activities; and (iv) financing analytical studies and technical preparation activities.

   B: Civil works. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$155.7 million. The revised estimate with the first
   restructuring of the project was US$148.5 million. The actual cost was US$127.5 million. This component
   planned to finance activities pertaining to upgrading/rehabilitating rural roads and maintenance of rural
   roads. This component consisted of two parts (or windows) of sequenced activities.

   (i) Output based maintenance approach to support routine and periodic maintenance of roads and
   structures. Under this approach, release of IDA funds were linked to completing road maintenance
   activities, according to a pre-specified set of Maintenance Performance Indicators (MPIs), and verification of
   outputs by a third party.

   (ii) Upgrading and rehabilitation. This window planned to finance the rehabilitation of roads and crossing
   structures.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SNRTP (P132750)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$175.4 million. The actual cost was US$149.6
  million. The actual cost was lower than expected, due to a combination of factors, including depreciation of
  the Nepali Rupee (NR) relative to the US$ during implementation and reduction in project scope (discussed
  below).

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant of US$72.0 million and an IDA Credit of
  US$28.0 million. With this, the Bank financing for the project was US$100.0 million. The amount disbursed
  at closure was US$83.5 million. The difference between the appraisal estimate and amount disbursed was
  due to the depreciation of the NR relative to the US$ during implementation.Other donors were expected to
  provide co-financing of US$11.5 million. Financing from other donors did not materialize during
  implementation. There was parallel financing for complementary road sector activities from the United
  Kingdom Department for International Development (DFID).

  Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution was estimated at US$63.9 million at appraisal. The borrower
  contribution was revised upwards to US$75.4 million, in the wake of lack of co financing from other donors.
  Their actual contribution was US$66.0 million.

  Dates. The project approved on December 23, 2013, became effective on April 2, 2014, and was scheduled
  to close on July 15, 2019. The project closed six months behind schedule on January 15, 2020.

  Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

  The following main changes were made through the first restructuring on June 7, 2018 (Restructuring
  Paper).

        As indicated in section 2, the project scope (the number of km of roads under routine maintenance,
         the km of roads under periodic maintenance and number of crossing structures), even before the
         project roads were selected, was expanded substantially due to the inclusion of three districts that
         were severely affected by the devastating earthquake in April 2015). Costs of several project
         activities (such as, rehabilitation of roads, crossing structures and periodic road maintenance) that
         were based on limited available information had to be revised based on conditions on the ground,
         This resulted in reducing the targets for the more expensive rehabilitation and upgrading of major
         works (road rehabilitation, periodic maintenance of roads and construction of crossing structures)
         and increasing the targets for the less expensive routine road maintenance work (ICR, paragraph
         21).
        Funds were reallocated between project components. and,
        The counterpart funding figures were revised upwards, in the wake o the lack of funding from other
         donors.

  The following main changes were made through the second restructuring (Restructuring Paper February 15,
  2019).

        Following the adoption of a new constitution, Nepal transitioned from a unitary to a three-tier
         governance structure comprising federal, provincial and local authority levels. The names of

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



          implementing agencies were changed as part of this restructuring (The Department of Local
          Infrastructure and Agricultural Roads (DoLIDAR) became the Department of Local Infrastructure
          Development (DOLI) and the District Technical Offices (DTOs) became the Infrastructure
          Development Offices (IDOs).
         Fund were reallocated between components.
         The closing date was extended by six months from July 15, 2019, to January 15, 2020, to ensure
          completion of ongoing activities.

   Split rating. There was a rather substantial reduction of targets for activities associated with rehabilitation
   of roads, periodic maintenance on roads and construction of crossing structures. Hence, this assessment is
   based on a split rating of objectives, when 41.5% of the total disbursement of US$83.52 million was
   disbursed before the restructuring of 2018 and the balance 41.5% was restructured after restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Nepal is one of the least developed countries in the world, with the second lowest Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) in South Asia. Nepal's economy is agrarian, with a third of the GDP coming from
the agricultural sector, which accounts for 64.5% of all employment in the country (World Bank
data). Improving connectivity in Nepal was important in the country context, for ensuring affordable and safe
transport networks socio economic growth and rural poverty reduction.

Sector context. Nepal's local road network was generally poor, with less than 20% of the network passable
during the monsoon season (June to September), rendering many communities isolated. Local road
linkages often only provided seasonal coverage due to frequent failures, inadequate drainage, low quality
surfacing, haphazard road construction without appropriate engineering, and lack of crossing structures.
District level Government officials, who were responsible for managing rural roads, were both under-
resourced and capacity constrained. Improving transport connectivity and institutional strengthening of the
district level road agencies was hence important to the government strategy.

Government strategy. The Priority Investment Plan (PIP) prepared in 1997 and updated for 2007,
highlighted the importance of improving accessibility to the core strategic road network, by specifically
bringing the population within two hours walk in the Terai (the southern plains bordering India), and four
hours walk in the hill districts (north of the Terai), to an all-season road. The government's 14th periodic
plan (2017-2019) and the 15th plan (2020 -2024) identified improving physical infrastructure, and improving
accessibility as priorities.

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Interim Strategy Note
(ISN) of 2007, proposed that the emerging development agenda focus on public investments in remote
areas for inclusive growth. The Pillar one on the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2014 -2018,
underscored the need for "Increasing economic growth and competitiveness" through explicitly focusing on
market access to the poor, and facilitating national and regional integration through improving transport
connectivity. The Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2019-2023, also highlighted
poor transport connectivity as a top constraint for the business environment. The CPF aimed at addressing
the persistent shortcoming in the strategic and local road networks through strengthened planning and road

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SNRTP (P132750)



               management, as well as improving the quality and resilience of transport infrastructure including through
               constructing bridges.

               Bank's prior experience. This project built on the two previous Bank supported rural transport
               infrastructure projects ( Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Projects). While these projects
               demonstrated the potential to achieve transformational results for rural communities, they also indicted
               the need for a more strategic approach for addressing road maintenance activities. Given that road
               maintenance was important for improving rural connectivity, the design adopted a sequencing
               approach, through focusing on maintenance of the core road network, before districts could access funds
               for rehabilitating roads and crossing structures.

               Although the PDO was well-aligned with the government and Bank strategy, the level of ambition at which
               the PDO is pitched does not reflect/build on the previous engagement of Bank in rural transport projects.
               Given this, the relevance of the PDO is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance the availability and reliability of transport connectivity for rural communities in the participating
                             districts.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The results framework was logical. The outputs of activities associated with rehabilitating
                             rural roads, periodic and routine maintenance on rural roads and constructing crossing structures, were
                             aimed at improving the condition of the rural road network. These outputs could plausibly be expected to aid
                             in enhancing connectivity for rural communities in the participating districts. The sequencing of activities
                             through focusing on road maintenance (through an output-based performance approach), before districts
                             could access funds for rehabilitation of roads and crossing structures was likely to reinforce the intended
                             outcomes. The technical assistance activities aimed at updating the district transport plans, annual
                             maintenance plans, using beneficiary monitoring mechanism and enabling the key districts to use the material
                             testing laboratories, were aimed at strengthening the institutional capacities of road sector agencies in the
                             participating districts.These activities were likely to enhance the reliability of transport connectivity in the
                             participating districts. The causal links between the project activities, their outputs and outcomes were clear,
                             and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

                             Outputs (pages 5 -6 and pages 43 - 45).



                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SNRTP (P132750)




      1, 048 km of rural roads were rehabilitated when the project closed, well short of the original target
         of 2221 km.
         Periodic road maintenance was provided on 1,587 km of the core rural road network using the output-
         based maintenance approach at project closure. This was well short of the original target of 2,309 km.
        Routine road maintenance using the output-based maintenance approach was performed on 5,500
         km of the district core network, exceeding the target of 3,067 km.
        1,178 meters (m) of crossing structures on the district core road networks were rehabilitated, well
         short of the target of 4,500 m.
        Periodic maintenance was provided on 4,427 m crossing structures using the output-based
         maintenance approach, exceeding the target of 2,100 m.
        Routine maintenance was provided on 4,000 m of crossing structures, well short of the target of 5,850
         m.

Technical assistance was provided by the International Labor Organization (ILI) for institutional strengthening
of the respective sector agencies in the participating districts. These activities included:

      The Rural Transport Information Management System (RUTIMS) ( a data repository for managing
         rural roads) was developed. The system was used for digitizing 13,955 km of the road inventory. The
         participating districts generated annual road maintenance plans using the system.
        37 Local Road Users Committees (LRUCs) or Village Road Co-ordination Committees were formed
         for improving transparency and accountability, exceeding the target of 33. Material testing laboratories
         were established in 37 project districts, exceeding the target of 33.
        Transport Master Plans were prepared by the participating districts as targeted. These plans identified
         the District Core Road Network (DCRN) and prioritized the CDRN for road maintenance,road
         improvements (upgrading/rehabilitation) and constructing new roads.
        The Performance Assessment Tool (PAT) for contract monitoring was adopted in four participating
         districts. The ICR (page 44) notes that the tool could not be replicated in other districts due to the
         change in the implementing agencies in the wake of Federalism.
        Technical Assistance was provided to the participating districts for undertaking routine and periodic
         road maintenance.
        A Global Positioning System (GPS) was developed to help users to monitor field level
         activities. Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) guidelines were developed, including through
         awareness measures.
        2,769 professional staff of the implementing agencies in the participating districts were trained in
         areas of safeguards and fiduciary management.
        Temporary employment was provided to about 2,700 maintenance workers organized in 650 Routine
         Maintenance Groups (RMGs). The workers included 64% women, 35 percent Dalits (historically
         disadvantaged groups) and 37% indigenous people. The project activities also provided 6.5 million
         person-days of employment through upgrading and maintenance of roads activities.
        About 88 site-specific Gender Action Plans were prepared during implementation. 148 skills training
         sessions were conducted for 1,855 participants across the project districts as part of the Vulnerable
         Community Development Plan (VCDP). 39% of the participants were women.

Outcomes.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SNRTP (P132750)




      The project activities were expected to increase the percentage of population with access to an all-
       weather road (within two hours walking distance in the participating Terai districts, and four hours
       walking distance in the participating Hill districts). 12.17% of the population had access to an
       all weather road in the project-intervened areas at project closure. This exceeded the target of 4%. In
       the Terai districts, the population within two hours walking distance to an all-weather road increased
       by 12.35%, whereas in the Hill districts it increased by 11.81%.

      The project activities were expected to increase the percentage of the core road network in the
       participating districts that were reported to be in "good" or "fair" condition. The ICR (paragraph 15)
       notes that this indicator was not measurable, as there was no baseline, and there was no monitoring
       system in place for the entire classified road network. To determine the project's contribution, an
       alternative approach was used for determining the condition of the 278 km of roads upgraded under
       this project. The sample comprised 20 roads (15 paved roads and five gravel roads) from 17 districts
       in both the Terai and Hills regions. The survey indicated that 79% of the roads rehabilitated under this
       project were in good or fair condition. The ICR provides no details on how the sample road section
       was determined.

Impact study.

An impact study was conducted near to the closing date to assess the project's contribution to
the development outcomes. The methodology entailed a survey of 1,620 households and other stakeholders
(communities, vehicle owners and drivers, transport associations and hotel operators from 21 of the 37
participating districts). The main conclusions of the study were:

      The average distance to reach an all-weather road decreased by 60% in the case of paved roads and
       44% in the case of gravel roads in the participating districts. The average travel time to reach an all-
       weather road decreased by 61% in the case of paved roads and 42% in the case of gravel roads.
      The average travel time for the people to reach socio-economic centers was reduced by 24% in the
       case of paved roads and 15% in the case of gravel roads. The travel time to health services for
       pregnant women decreased by 18%. The average travel time to seek immunization services for
       children decreased by 21%.
      The vehicle operating cost decreased by 28% in the case of paved roads and by 17% for the gravel
       roads, while the trips by people in the participating districts to shops and restaurants increased by
       63% and 47% in the case of paved roads and by 57% and 69% in the gravel roads.

Though there were clearly benefits from the road works, the evidence base is not clear whether the reduction
of works against the original targets limited the overall impact of the project. Given that the original targets
were not realized in a number of cases, efficacy is rated as modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SNRTP (P132750)



Although the PDO of enhancing the availability of transport connectivity for rural communities in the
participating districts were unchanged, the targets for activities associated with rehabilitation of roads,
periodic maintenance on roads and construction of crossing structures were revised downwards significantly.

Revised Rationale
Outputs (pages 5 -6 and pages 43 - 45).

In addition to the technical assistance activities provided by the International Labor Organization for the
institution strengthening of the respective agencies described above, the following outputs were produced.

      1, 048 km of rural roads were rehabilitated when the project closed, slightly short of the revised target
         of 1210 km.
        Periodic maintenance was provided on 1,587 km of roads using the output-based maintenance
         approach, exceeding the revised target of 1,400 km. The ICR (page 20) notes that with subsequent
         continuation of works by the Government from their own resources, as of June 2020, the total length
         of roads covered under periodic maintenance reached 1,601 km.
        Routine road maintenance was provided on using the output-based maintenance approach on 5,500
         km of the district core network, as per the revised target.
        1,178 m of crossing structures on the district core road network were rehabilitated when the project
         closed. This was slightly short of the revised target of 1,270 m.
        Periodic maintenance was completed on 4,427 m crossing structures, exceeding the revised target
         of 2,100 m.
        Routine maintenance was completed on 4,000 m of crossing structures, as per the revised target.
        Temporary employment was provided to about 2,700 maintenance workers organized in 650 Routine
         Maintenance Groups (RMGs). There were no targets for this indicator. The project activities also
         provided 6.5 million person-days of employment through upgrading and maintenance of roads
         activities.
        About 88 site-specific Gender Action Plans were prepared during implementation. There were no
         targets indicated for this activity.
        148 skills training sessions were conducted for 1,855 participants across the project districts as part of
         the Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP). 39% of the participants were women.

Outcomes.

      12.17% of the population had access to all weather roads in the project-intervened areas when the
         project closed. This exceeded the target of 4%. In the Terai districts, the population within two hours
         walking distance from an all-weather road increased by 12.35%, whereas in the Hill districts, the
         population within four hours walking distance from an all-weather road increased by 11.81%.

      The project activities were expected to increase the percentage of the core road network that were
         reported to be in "good" or "fair" condition. The ICR (paragraph 15) notes that this indicator was not
         measurable, as there was no baseline, and there was no monitoring system in place for the entire
         classified road network. To determine the project's contribution, the condition of the roads (good or
         fair) roads upgraded under this project an alternative approach was used. This involved measuring the
         condition of the roads upgraded under this project. This covered a total length of 278 km of roads
         upgraded under this project. The sample comprised 20 roads (15 paved roads and five gravel roads)


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 SNRTP (P132750)



                                     from 17 districts in both the Terai and Hills regions. The survey indicated that 79% of the
                                     roads rehabilitated under this project were reported to be in good or fair condition.

                              Impact study.

                              An impact study was conducted near to the closing date to assess the project's contribution to
                              the development outcomes. The methodology entailed a survey of 1,620 households and other stakeholders
                              (communities, vehicle owners and drivers, transport associations and hotel operators), from 21 of the 37
                              participating districts). The main conclusions of the study were:

                              The average distance to reach an all-weather road decreased by 60% in the case of paved roads and 44% in
                              the case of gravel roads in the participating districts. The average travel time to reach an all-weather road
                              decreased by 61% in the case of paved roads and 42% in the case of gravel roads.

                              The average travel time for the people to reach socio-economic centers was reduced by 24% in the case of
                              paved roads and 15% in the case of gravel roads. The travel time to health services for pregnant
                              women decreased by 18%. The average travel time to seek immunization services for children decreased by
                              21%.

                              The vehicle operating cost decreased by 28% in the case of paved roads and by 17% for the gravel roads,
                              while the trips by people in the participating districts to shops and restaurants increased by 63% and 47% in
                              the case of paved roads and by 57% and 69% in the gravel roads.

                              Given that the revised targets were realized for the most part, efficacy was rated as substantial after
                              restructuring.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated modest under the original targets given that works fell well short of the original design and
                            this inevitably affected the number of people affected and the benefits they were expected to accrue. Key
                            outcome targets do not provide sufficient evidence that the delivered works compensated for the reductions
                            experienced in the project.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1

                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SNRTP (P132750)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  Efficacy is rated substantial, given that the revised targets for road rehabilitation, periodic maintenance of
  roads and construction of crossing structures were realized for the most part.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency


Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure using the Highway
Development and Management Model (HSM 4), The methodology entailed comparison of "with project
improvement" with the alternative of "without the project" (that is, without road improvement and minimum road
maintenance). The analysis was conducted for activities associated with road maintenance activities
and rehabilitation of roads. These activities accounted for 89% of the estimated cost at appraisal and 85% of the
actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from savings on vehicle operating costs and savings in
journey time of passengers and goods. The Net Present Value (NPV) discounted at 12% discount rate
was positive in all the project intervened sections. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
slightly higher at 32%% as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 30%, due to the higher than anticipated traffic flows
on the project-intervened areas.

Administrative and operational issues. One aspect of the design was the maintenance component, where a
relatively small sum of US$918,450 was leveraged to encourage the Government to spend over US$31 million
towards addressing road maintenance activities.

There were however operational shortcomings during implementation. Road selection did not occur until one to
two years into implementation. Despite the savings generated due to the significant depreciated of the Nepali
Rupee relative to the US$ during implementation, costs of several project activities were higher than expected at
appraisal, due to a combination of factors including: (1) inclusion of three additional districts that were severely
affected by the devastating earthquake of April 2015: (2) cost estimates of road rehabilitation activities were
based on the assumption that the roads would be selected from a pool of roads used in a predecessor
project that met specified quality standards: (3) the length of roads that required periodic maintenance was
lower than envisaged at appraisal, because the road network in hill districts were mostly earthen roads requiring
upgradation, instead of the relatively cheaper periodic road maintenance activities: (4) costs of routine road
maintenance activities were higher due to the higher share of earthen roads in the hill districts: and (5) the actual
costs of labor and construction materials originally based on costs of an earlier project, proved to be much
higher during implementation. The underestimation of costs led to the reduction in project scope. Although the
project scope was reduced, the activities were completed, at a relatively higher standard than anticipated at
appraisal and the project closed just six months behind schedule.

In sum, efficiency is rated as substantial, given the economic justification for the project.




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SNRTP (P132750)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      89.00
 Appraisal                                                 30.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      85.00
 ICR Estimate                                              32.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government and Bank strategy is substantial. Efficiency is substantial. A split
rating was used to assess the project outcome, in view of the rather significant reduction in project scope
(US$41.52 million before restructuring in 2018 and US$42 million after restructuring, with the total disbursement
of US$83.52 million). Efficacy was rated modest under the original targets and substantial under the revised
targets.

Taking into account the ratings indicated above, the outcome rating was moderately unsatisfactory under the
original targets, and satisfactory under the revised targets. Weighing these two ratings with the respective
shares of Bank disbursement before and after restructuring, and adding the two weighted outcomes yields an
overall rating of moderately satisfactory (0.50*3 + 0.50*5 = 4).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



Institutional and financial risks. The risk to sustainability of project outcomes is high, given that it is
unclear whether the provincial districts with continue to adhere to the various best practice measures
introduced under the project for planning, procurement and implementation of works ( ICR, paragraph 48). It
is also not clear that the participating districts will continue to accord high priority to road maintenance
activities, that are clearly needed for sustainability of the outcomes. According to the clarifications provided
by the team, in terms of process, the funds for maintenance are provided by the respective tier of
government, such as, for example, the provincial governments for the provincial roads and village
municipalities for the village roads. The team also clarified that the provincial governments and the village

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



municipalities also receive funds for the federal government. The team clarified that these resources are
expected to be available for maintenance of road under the respective tier of government (including for the
roads rehabilitated under this project).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The project was prepared based on the experience from the prior Bank-financed in Nepal - Rural Access
  and Decentralization Project - and from the experiences of a Bank-financed decentralization project in
  Mexico, and rural projects in Vietnam and Peru. Lessons incorporated at design, included a sequencing
  approach, with road maintenance activities preceding road rehabilitation activities, field-based support to
  oversee district level implementation, and focusing on relatively small value interventions to maintain
  roads along existing alignments within available right of ways (PAD, pages 15 -16). As indicated in
  section 5, a notable aspect of the design was the road maintenance component, where a modest
  amount of about US$918,450, was leveraged to encourage the government to spend more than US$31
  million, towards routine and periodic road maintenance activities. Several risks were identified at
  appraisal, including weak implementation capacity of district institutions and governance risks. Mitigation
  measure incorporated at design, included support for beneficiary monitoring, physical verification of
  maintenance works and training district agencies on technical aspects. Even with mitigation
  measures, project risk was rated as High. (PAD, page 19). The implementation arrangements were
  appropriate, with a Kathmandu-based Central Project Management Unit (PMU) in the Department of
  Local Infrastructure Development and Agricultural Roads (DoLIDAR) responsible for coordination, and
  two regional MUs to supervise district-level implementation. (PAD, page 30). Appropriate arrangements
  were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

  There were nevertheless shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, individual roads were not selected until
  one to two years after project effectiveness. Two, as discussed in section 3, the design was overly
  ambitious. The costs of several project activities, which were based on the cost estimates of the prior
  Bank-financed rural roads project were high than expected at appraisal. This necessitated significant
  reduction of targets: and (ii) there were also M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Twelve supervision missions were conducted during the project lifetime, implying twice a year supervision
 missions. The ICR (paragraph 46) notes that these missions were supplemented by multiple technical

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



 visits. The supervision teams were multi-disciplinary with an appropriate skill mix. According to the
 information provided by the team, the continuity of leadership was maintained, with three Task Team
 Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime. The team also clarified that the TTLs were based in Nepal
 Country Office, except during December 2016 to December 2017, when the project was managed by a
 TTL based at Headquarters. The supervision team responded proactively in identifying problems and
 challenges. For instance, the ICR (paragraph 32) notes that the project faced severe governance
 challenges including, the sudden transfer of senior project management staff, inconsistencies in project
 supervision procedures, gaps at the sub project level in the technical quality of construction works,
 procurement and safeguards compliance, and delay in the operationalization of the grievance redressal
 system. The supervision team responded to these issues through developing an action plan in February
 2017, focusing on enhancing supervision and auditing, enhancing the use of Information Technology tools
 (IT) for effective monitoring and additional checks on safeguards compliance. The supervision team aided
 in managing the transition arising from the transfer of frontline Project implementation responsibility from
 the District Development Councils (DDCs) and District Technical Officers (DTOs) to the Provincial
 governments.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The project adopted a three-tiered framework structuring for Monitoring and Evaluation at the project,
 district and sub-project levels to measure outputs and outcomes. The two key outcome indicators -
 the percentage of population within two- and four- hours walking distance in the participating Terai and hill
 districts respectively from an all- weather roads and the percentage of the core road network in the
 participating districts that were reported to be in "good" or "fair" condition - was appropriate for monitoring
 project performance. However the second indicator had no baseline figures. The M&E design also
 envisioned an impact survey at closure. The Results Framework moreover did not have any specific
 indicators for measuring the outcomes of capacity building activities provided under the auspices of this
 project. The ICR (paragraph 31) notes that the systems for measuring and monitoring key project
 development indicators had not been established at the start of implementation.




b. M&E Implementation

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



  The ICR (paragraph 31) notes that the M&E was generally implemented as designed and regularly
  monitored and reported. However, one limitation was the absence of a system to regularly monitor and
  measure the condition of the core road network for assessing performance against the second PDO
  indicator. The project hence had to rely on a substitute measure, which was the condition of a sample set
  of roads upgraded under the project. The ICR (paragraph 36) notes that detailed monitoring during
  implementation assisted in decision-making and in adjusting response to the changing circumstances
  (including revising targets for activities such as, upgrading roads and crossing structures). The ICR
  observes that the trimester reports were shared with the Bank regularly and most of the project
  documents were made available in the public domain.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 37) notes that the M&E was utilized for monitoring project performance. The ICR
  (paragraph 37) notes that the implementation of M&E improved with the operationalization of project
  management tools in the latter years of the project.

  In sum, M&E is rated as modest, especially in view of the shortcomings at design.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a Category B project under World Bank safeguard policies: Six safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.04): Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10):
   and, Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental impacts. Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) were prepared to
   address the site-specific impacts for each project. The ICR (paragraph 39) notes that in addition to the
   ESMP, the following plans were also produced during implementation: (i) Voluntary Land Donation Impact
   Mitigation Plan (VLDP): (ii) Gender Action Plan (GAP) and (iii) Vulnerable Community Development Plan
   (VCDP).

   The ICR (paragraph 40) notes that environmental safeguards performance at the end of the project was
   rated as "moderately satisfactory". According to the information provided by the team, there were no
   adverse impacts on natural habitats, forests, physical cultural resources, and indigenous peoples.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared during implementation. Social
   safeguards performance was rated as moderately satisfactory during implementation (ICR, paragraph 41).
   The ICR notes that the project activities involved land acquisition, involuntary resettlement. disturbance of


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



   livelihood activities and loss of common property resources, as well as 921 residential structures and 1371
   minor structures and 31 people's livelihoods were affected due to the project activities. The ICR (paragraph
   41) notes that livelihood losses were compensated as per the provisions of the ESMP. A total of 11.033
   Project Affected People (PAP) lost land from road construction activities. Of these 9,263 were compensated
   in line with the RAP. The remaining PAP were absent from the sub-project locations and not yet claimed
   their compensatory payments. Hence the project has deposited the compensation amount in an Escrow
   Account. According to the information provided by the team, the remaining PAs were to contact their
   respective Infrastructure Development Offices (IDOs) for payments. The team also clarified that following
   the outbreak of COVID -19, the IDOs were closed and have not to date been able to implement the
   payment arrangements.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment of the financial management capacity of the implementing
   agency was conducted at appraisal. The financial management arrangements of this project were similar
   to the financial management arrangements of the prior Bank-financed project, which had been rated as
   moderately satisfactory. These arrangements were nonetheless deemed to be satisfactory (PAD,
   paragraph 47). The ICR (paragraph 43) notes that financial management was rated as moderately
   satisfactory. The ICR (paragraph 43) notes that there were delays in payment to the consultants, delays in
   depositing liquidated damages, delays in establishing implementation offices at the provincial level. The
   ICR notes that these issues were rectified and there was significant improvement in financial management.
   The audit reports, which were deemed to be acceptable to the Bank and unqualified were submitted, albeit
   with some delays.

   Procurement. As assessment of the procurement management capacity of the implementing agency,
   conducted at appraisal, concluded that the procurement arrangements were satisfactory. The procurement
   risks identified at appraisal, included the risks due to the relatively large number of procurement entities,
   the scattered nature of activities, and the significant procurement workload needed to executer many
   small sale works. The mitigation measures, included establishing two separate Project Management Units
   (PMUs) with dedicated procurement specialists and training procurement official to the central and field-
   based staff. The ICR (paragraph 42) notes that procurement management was rated as moderately
   satisfactory during implementation. The Bank's Integrity Vice President conducted an administrative
   inquiry, which substantial allegations of corruption involving certain officials, who were removed from the
   Project (ICR, page 11). The team, however, confirmed that there were no cases of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SNRTP (P132750)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Based on a split rating applied
                                                                                 due to the reduction in scope,
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 efficacy is rated modest under
                                                                                 the original targets.
                                                                                 There were shortcomings in
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 Quality-at-Entry
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. The design elements need to directly address the key challenges associated with
road maintenance activities. Given that maintenance of rural roads often receives inadequate
attention due to lack of prioritization and inadequate funding in developing countries, the project
adopted a "maintenance first" approach, through sequencing project activities with road
maintenance activities taking precedence over road rehabilitation activities. Further, the design
leveraged a small amount of IDA financing to mobilize several multiples of government spending
towards road maintenance.

2. The estimated costs at design needs to be updated at appraisal. In the case of this project,
the selection of roads was made two years after effectiveness. The costs of these activities proved
to be much higher than expected at appraisal. This necessitated rather significant reduction in
targets.

3. The design of rural roads project should aim at providing jobs for local communities. In this
project, routine maintenance groups were mobilized for routine maintenance predominantly from the
local areas near each road and trained for providing routine maintenance. In this project, the impact
study showed that 2,700 maintenance workers from local communities received temporary
employment. This included 64% women and 37% indigenous people.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SNRTP (P132750)



The ICR is well written, concise and adheres to the recommended length of 15 pages. The theory of change
provides a good analysis of the links between project activities and how these activities were aimed at the
intended outcomes. The ICR candidly acknowledges the issues concerning monitoring and evaluation, and
draws sound lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

However, the ICR contains few details on the continuity of leadership and environmental safeguards. The ICR
could also have included a summary of the methodology followed in administering the impact survey, and could
have provided more information under the relevance section. Even though the indicator targets changed
considerably during implementation and the scope reduced rather significantly, the ICR did not use a split rating
as required by the guidelines in assessing the outcome.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
