     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022354

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P152659                                     Gambia Electricity Support Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Gambia, The                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57870,IDA-D1140                         31-May-2021                                             18,857,882.38

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 10-May-2016                                 31-Mar-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                18,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                 18,385,411.40                                               0.00

 Actual                                             18,857,882.38                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo           Fernando Manibog              Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financial Agreement (FA) on page 5, "the project development objective (PDO) is to increase the
   availability and reliability of electricity supply for existing customers". The statement of the PDO in the project
   appraisal document (PAD) on page 7 was identical to the one in the FA and was unchanged until the project
   closure.




                                                                                                       Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



   The assessment of project performance will be based on the parsing of the PDO in two sub-objectives as
   follows:

   (i) To increase the availability of electricity supply for existing customers, and

   (ii) To increase the reliability of electricity supply for existing customers.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   At appraisal, the project had three components, which were revised three times as described below:

   At appraisal, the project had three components, which were revised through three restructurings in March
   2017, August 2017, and March 2019 as described below:

   Component 1: Expansion of available generation capacity at Kotu and Brikama. Cost at appraisal of
   US$7.0 million, Actual amount of US$16.80 million. This component was originally to fund
   investments aimed at rehabilitating the Kotu and Brikama power plants. Specific investments included (a)
   the purchase and installation of two new Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO) engines; (b) the rehabilitation of an HFO
   engine at Brikama power plant; and (c) the rehabilitation of damaged equipment and the provision of
   operational reliability to improve plant efficiency at the Kotu power plant.

         Revised Component 1: During the March 2017 restructuring, the Component 1 was renamed as
           "Increase Electricity Supply" and aimed " to increase electricity capacity and supply" with the
           following changes taking place: (i) the subcomponent b was modified to finance the rehabilitation
           and repair of additional engines, (ii) the funding for subcomponent c for the rehabilitation activities in
           Kotu was put on hold until additional sources of financing were identified, and (iii) a subcomponent d
           was created for fuel purchase with an allocation of US$8 million. During the August 2017
           restructuring, changes were as follows: (i) an additional US$3 million was allocated from Component
           2 and 3 to cover the funding of the cross-border lines, (ii) bring back auxiliary equipment at Kotu to
           help stabilize supply, and (iii) to cover full cost of replacement engine at Brikama. During the March
           2019 restructuring, the budget for rehabilitation of damaged equipment in Kotu was increased to
           reflect a cost overrun.

   Component 2: Reduction of technical and commercial losses in the Great Banjul Area (GBA). Cost
   at appraisal of US$4.5 million, Actual amount of US$0.70 million. At appraisal, this component aimed to
   fund investments in the transmission and distribution network to improve the continuity and quality of



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



  supply. Specific investments included the acquisition of new transformers and the replacement of other
  equipment, and the metering improvement.

        Revised component 2: During the March 2017 restructuring, Component 2 was reduced in scope
         and financing with the removal of the upgrading and rehabilitation of existing distribution systems in
         the GBA, thus delaying the network upgrades until new financing became available. During the
         August 2017 restructuring, Component 2 resources were reduced as a cost saving, and the
         corresponding amount was allocated to Component 1. During the March 2019 restructuring, there
         was an increase in the number of prepaid meters to be financed from 13,000 to 23,000 and the
         cancellation of network upgrades.

  Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Implementation Support. Cost at appraisal of
  US$7.0 million, Actual amount of US$1.00 million. At appraisal, this component aimed to finance (i) a
  four-year service contract for NAWEC management support to reform the utility (b) installation of a new IT
  system to streamline NAWEC’s operations, and (c) the funding of an owner’s engineer to support
  implementation including procurement, and (d) finance capacity building activities and strategic studies.

        Revised Component 3. During the August 2017 restructuring, resources devoted to funding the
         service contractor and owner’s engineer contracts for component 3 were canceled and allocated to
         Component 1. During the March 2019 restructuring, there was a cancellation of the planned SCADA
         system training.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$18.5 million. At closing, all resources
  were disbursed, and the actual total project cost was US$18.5 million. The operational Portal shows a
  different amount (US$18.9 million), arising from exchange rate variation. As explained above, there were
  major category reallocations and changes in costs for each of the three components during the project’s
  three restructurings.

  Financing. At appraisal, the project financing was estimated at US$18.5 million, provided by an IDA credit
  of US$12.46 million, and an IDA grant of US$6.04 million. As the total cost amounted to US$18.5 million, all
  funds were totally disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, there was no planned borrower's contribution and there was
  none during project implementation.

  Dates: The project was approved on May 10, 2016 and became effective on August 16, 2016. The project
  went through three level-2 restructurings as follows: (i) the two first restructurings took place successively
  on March 23, 2017 and August 31, 2017 and brought in changes in the results framework, and
  the components and costs, (ii) the third restructuring took place on March 14, 2019, with changes in the
  results framework, components and costs, the loan closing date, the safeguard policies triggered, and the
  implementation schedule. A medium-term review was completed on May 07, 2018, and the project was
  closed on March 30, 2020, 14 months ahead of the original closing date.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               Country Context: At project appraisal, the Gambia was a Fragile, Conflict and Violence-Affected (FCV)
               country and was in a major political crisis. The project implementation coincided with a political transition,
               which profoundly shifted the political landscape within which the project was being implemented. As a
               result, while this project initially suffered from the adverse effects of the political crisis, it was a positive
               factor to the new government, as the latter used it to partially address the people’s expectations
               for improved electricity service. Significant investments and technical assistance provided by the project
               were instrumental to revitalizing both the operational and financial viability of the energy sector. This project
               intended to address some of the most urgent needs to stabilize the energy sector of a fragile
               economy by improving the delivery of energy services as a contribution to creating the conditions for
               economic growth. Finally, the PDO was aligned with one of the eight strategic priorities of the Government's
               2018-2021 National Development Plan, which aimed at building the country's infrastructure and restoring
               energy services.

               The PDOs were consistent with the World Bank's re-engagement strategy: Because of the FCV
               situation of the country, the only World Bank's instrument of dialogue was a Country Engagement Note
               (CEN) covering the FY18-FY21 period, which aimed to provide the critical short-term assistance needed to
               address macro-fiscal challenges. The CEN and the Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD) were together
               expected to inform the 2021 Country Partnership Framework (CPF). This was the first energy project of
               the World Bank in The Gambia, and the PDO was fully aligned with one of the two objectives of the CEN
               aimed at restoring macroeconomic stability and promoting inclusive growth.

               The project scope was to fund emergency work to maintain critical support to energy, but local
               implementation capacity was inadequate: The project was designed as a small undertaking from the
               outset, with limited components that were even scaled down during restructuring operations to take into
               account the constraints on the ground. The provision of TA reinforced the local capacity and delivered the
               project activities with support of the Bank team's expertise. The project's flexible approach aimed to
               address the country's emergency situation by promoting regional trade through the financing of the 30 kV
               cross-border lines and by funding investments that can stabilize energy supply and attract other
               stakeholders into the sector. Strengthening access to energy was one of the critical activities necessary to
               address bottlenecks hampering country's sustained growth and services.

               The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. While there was a congruence between the PDO and the
               country's priorities and the Bank's reengagement strategy, implementation readiness was an issue.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To increase the availability of electricity supply for existing customers



Rationale
Theory of change

There was no theory of change either in the PAD or in the three restructuring project papers that could
establish the linkage between the project activities and the PDOs supported by the World Bank's financing.
The ICR constructed a result chain (Figure 2), which outlined the mechanism through which project
activities were to result in outputs and outcomes. This review draws from the ICR material to present the
results chain underlying the process of achieving the two project development sub-objectives.

The theory of change toward increasing the availability of electricity supply for existing customers was that the
project was to fund activities aimed at rehabilitating engines, constructing cross-border MV lines, replacing
equipment and ensuring maintenance of plants, and building technical capacity. Expected outputs included
increased electricity supply, expanded electricity imports, and improved expertise. The targeted outcomes
were an enhanced energy access, and a larger number of project beneficiaries. Assumptions underlying the
theory of change were (i) a successful domestic political transition, (ii) a continuous presence of the donor
community that was to provide the needed financial support for a country facing an internal economic crisis,
and (iii) a climate favoring regional cooperation and integration to enable energy imports.

Resources reallocation within and among categories did not affect the above described theory of
change. During the successive restructurings of 2017 and 2019, the first component activities to expand the
electricity generation and transmission capacity were replaced by those supporting the increase of electricity
supply, and both of which remained consistent with the original PDO. Moreover, the cancellation of certain
activities of the components 2 and 3 reduced the scope of the outcome, without changing the original goal.

Outputs

      Three new engines were acquired and installed at Kotu and Brikama;
      Import capacity investments enabled the construction of two cross-border MV lines in Barra and
       Farafenni; and
      Distribution lines were constructed or rehabilitated, partially achieving 62 percent of the target,
       reaching 31 km against a target of 50 km. Delays in the physical investments on the Senegal side of
       the border caused the lower-than-targeted performance.

Outcomes

      The increased availability of electricity for existing customers was achieved through
       restored generation capacity of 21.8 MW against a target of 22MW, and through the purchase of
       21,000 tons of fuel;
      The new cross-border lines enabled (i) electricity import of 6,875 kVA, representing 153% of the
       revised target value of 4,466 kVA, and (ii) the provision of 24/7 access to electricity in villages across

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



       the North Bank, and the target value was nearly achieved, reaching 314 GWh against a target of 317
       GWh;
      The target of the direct project beneficiaries was exceeded by 31 percent, reaching 744,432 against a
       target of 570,000; and
      The target for female beneficiaries was also achieved, reaching 51 percent of total beneficiaries.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the reliability of electricity supply for existing customers

Rationale
Theory of change

The theory of change toward increasing the reliability of electricity supply for existing customers is based on
the project funding activities aimed at procuring and installing prepayment meters and smart meters, building
expertise within the electricity utility, and attending all grievances submitted by the energy customers.
Expected outputs included (i) the number of installed meters, (ii) the number of trained staff and hired
consultants, and (iii) the number of grievances resolved. The above outputs were to lead to the following
outcomes: (i) increased ability to measure electricity consumption and losses, (ii) the reduction of technical
and commercial losses, and (iii) the quality energy supply and continuity to the customers through the
reduction of forced outages and voltage drops. Assumptions identified under the first sub-objective are
applicable in the context of this sub-objective.

Outputs

      23,000 prepayment meters and 300 smart meters were procured and installed, fully achieving the
       indicator target;
      Capacity building target was achieved, including the hiring of a Consultant to restructure the National
       Water and Electric Company Ltd (NAWEC) debt and the training of 10 staff; and
      100 percent of the total grievances received were processed, fully achieving the target.

Outcome

      The increase in generation capacity helped the system to reduce the number of voltage drops and
       the system-wide blackouts. In absence of the availability of classic indicators used to measure the
       frequency or duration of blackouts, T&D losses were used as a proxy for service quality;
      The procurement of prepayment meters enabled NAWEC to shift existing customers from old and
       faulty credit meters, to new calibrated prepayment meters, helping to significantly reduce losses;


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)




                                   The transmission and distribution losses were reduced from a baseline of 25 percent in 2016, to 19
                                    percent in 2019, significantly surpassing the target of 22 percent;
                                   The financial viability of NAWEC improved as a result of reduced technical and commercial losses,
                                    and generation has grown at a rate of 6 percent per annum over the project life, while cash collected
                                    has grown at over 10 percent per annum.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated as Substantial, as most PDO indicators were either achieved or nearly
                            achieved. Toward increasing the availability of electricity supply, achieved results were: (i)
                            restored generation and supply capacity and increased electricity import and (ii) the provision of 24/7 access
                            to electricity in GBA and in villages across the North Bank, and (iii) expanded direct project beneficiaries,
                            including women. Toward increasing the reliability of electricity supply, achieved results were: (i) reduction of
                            the number of voltage drops and wide blackouts, (ii) the shift of existing customers from old and faulty credit
                            meters, to new calibrated prepayment meters, helping to significantly reduce losses, and (iii) the reduction
                            of transmission and distribution losses, and improved financial viability of NAWEC.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The ICR conducted an ex-post update of the economic and financial efficiency of the project (ICR, para 28-32
   and Annex 4) using the same methodology adopted at appraisal stage. The update was based on the actual
   values realized in the three years of implementation, and adjusted for the changes in project activities brought in
   during the three restructuring operations.

   Economic and financial efficiency. Assessment methodology used at appraisal stage was replicated at
   closure. However, the underlying data was updated using the actual values realized in the three years of
   implementation, as well as accounting for the changes in project activities through the restructurings. Given the
   different nature of activities financed through the project – short-term emergency fuel supply, and as well as
   long-term investments - the results of the ex-post economic and financial analysis are presented with and
   without the fuel supply included (ICR, Annex 4).




                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



The project's economic internal rate of return (EIRR) and the net present value (NPV) at project appraisal were
estimated respectively at 23.1 percent, and US$29.4 million. Actual values of the EIRR, and the NPV at
closing were respectively 29.7 percent and US$12.7 million. The EIRR when fuel purchase is excluded came up
to 11.4 percent, a lower achievement, but still above the 6 percent hurdle rate. This lower value reflects the
lower (40-50 percent) utilization rate of the engines financed by the project, which is based on the first 2-3 years
of operations. Financial analysis at project appraisal concluded that the Financial internal rate (FIRR) would be
45.1 percent, with an NPV estimated at US$79.6 million. Actual values at closing were 27.7 percent for the
FIRR, and US$12.0 million for the NPV. The lower level of the closing values arose from the stationary nature of
the tariffs, which did not increase by 5 percent per year as assumed during project appraisal. The ex-post
efficiency analysis demonstrates that the project delivered economically and financially viable activities, despite
a lower utilization rate driven in part by lack of maintenance. The sensitivity analysis shows that the results are
robust even when taking extreme assumptions on willingness-to-pay, utilization rates, and fuel prices.

Operational and administrative efficiency: While the ICR did not report on this subject, there are elements
supporting some performance indicators in the areas of operational efficiency as follows: (i) it is uncommon
to find a Bank's project closing 14 months ahead of the revised closing date and still deliver a satisfactory
outcome. While this is a sign of efficiency, this occurred primarily because a portion of the project activities was
transferred to a recently approved project, and (ii) the three restructurings showed operational flexibility that
contributed to adjusting the project implementation to the on-the-ground realities.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  23.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               29.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was substantial, because of their congruence with the country's priorities, and the
World Bank's strategy in a FCV context, but implementation readiness was an issue. Both the project's efficacy
and efficiency were substantial. Key results toward the first sub-objective included (i) an increased generation
and supply capacity and electricity import, (ii) the provision of 24/7 access to electricity in GBA and in villages
across the North Bank, and (iii) an expanded direct project beneficiaries, including women. Achievements
toward the second objective included (i) the reduction of the number of widespread blackouts, (ii) the significant
reduction of transmission and distribution losses, and (iii) an improved financial viability of NAWEC. Efficiency


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



was substantial at closing based on positive NPVs, EIRRs, and FIRRs. Overall outcome is rated as
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

With respect to the availability of electricity, the key risk is the absence of a robust maintenance
plan. NAWEC’s financial cash flow challenges have led in the past to lower reliability and breakdowns of the
electricity systems. Therefore, it is critical that effective arrangements be developed within NAWEC to
enhance its financial viability and maintenance of the electricity generation, transmission and distribution
infrastructure. The reforms and investment activities scheduled under a follow-on project should strengthen
the NAWEC’s financial position and enable the maintenance of electricity systems and ensure
their sustainability. The cross-border interconnection lines financed by the project are enabling imports from
Senegal, and there are no concerns with regards to the performance on this investment. It is important to
ensure adequate metering on the Gambian side of the border to monitor accurately the quantity of imported
energy.

With respect to improved reliability of electricity supply, achieved outcome relative to the reduction of T&D
losses is expected to be maintained or improved through the new project, which intends to support NAWEC
toward improving service quality and supporting the preparation and implementation of a loss reduction
strategy. The new Gambia Electricity Restoration and Modernization Project (P163568), whose objectives
are to improve: " (i) the operational performance of the Project Implementing Entity (NAWEC); and (ii) the
capacity of the Project Implementing Entity to dispatch variable renewable electricity", was originally
approved in May 2018, and obtained an additional financing in July 2020. Key activities of this ongoing
project aim to expand on project's achieved outcome in the areas of electricity availability and reliability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Issues related to the project quality-at-entry are discussed in the ICR in the para 49-52, and 77-78, and
  key features are summarized below.

  The design of the project was strategically relevant as reflected by the PDO, which had an emergency
  connotation as it aimed "to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply for existing
  customers", indicating that the project was not about modernization, but to rehabilitate the functioning of
  existing systems in the energy sector. The project was typically tailored to match an FCV context, given
  its simplicity and flexibility, which could enable to adjust quickly to the changing country and
  sector context. To ensure the medium and long-term feasibility of the project, the ICR indicated that

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



  technical and economic aspects were addressed at appraisal, but it noted that the financial viability of
  NAWEC and sustainability of reforms were not captured enough, because the FCV context was not
  conducive to embarking on complex reforms and upgrading in the energy sector. Because of its strategic
  pitch, the project prevailed despite subsequent crises and set the stage for much needed investments
  from other donors.

  The results framework and M&E arrangements suffered from the FCV context of the country, which is
  known for unreliable data. For instance, the operational context could not enable the use of a standard
  indicator of electricity reliability consisting in reducing the time of blackouts for existing customers, and a
  proxy indicator was used instead.

  The key risks identified at appraisal included the country's political, technical, and security systems and
  the limited local capacity. Mitigation measures included the simplicity and flexibility of the project design,
  and the search for a coordinated and close collaboration with key stakeholders and partners in the
  country's energy sector, as well as the provision of budget for building a monitoring and evaluation
  framework.

  Overall quality-at-entry was satisfactory, as the project matched an FCV context, whereby technical,
  financial and economic issues were addressed thoroughly, and identified risks were mitigated. Similarly,
  and as a complement to this section, the project team addressed correctly the implementation and M&E
  arrangements and environmental aspects, which will be discussed under Section 10 and 11 below.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Key developments related to the quality of supervision were discussed in the ICR in paragraphs 53-60 and
 79-81, and the issues raised are summarized below.

 Project supervision was monitored closely to factor in the FCV context, with over 25 project support and
 supervision missions in total. Shorter support missions were conducted in between supervision missions to
 monitor project activities and provide strategic advice to use in future deeper sectoral reforms. One of the
 task team leaders was located in neighboring Senegal so as to maintain frequent contact with key local
 stakeholders. Implementation status and results reports (ISRs) were regularly prepared and used by
 Bank's management to provide inputs for accelerating project implementation. The project’s substantial
 efficacy arose in part from the proactivity and the flexibility of the local counterparts and the Bank team’s
 ability to adapt and make the needed changes to support the implementing agency to respond to the
 emergency situation and restore electricity supply. Flexibility from both the Borrower and the Bank
 management enabled the initiation of three different project restructurings, which enabled timely response
 to changing needs on the ground.

 Commitment and leadership from the highest levels of the government enabled the creation of an energy
 task force aimed at lifting obstacles and facilitating successful implementation of project



                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



 activities. Weaknesses experienced included the failure to constitute a steering committee and frequent
 changes in the management of the energy utility.

 Implementation and M&E arrangements reflected the Borrower's weaknesses in the areas of quality of
 human resources and organizational capacity. Staff in the PIU was not dedicated to the project and had no
 procurement experience and no prior experience in the implementation of Bank projects. Moreover, the
 energy utility did not have adequate expertise and experience in the management of environmental and
 social safeguards, which resulted in poor oversight over contractors and non-compliance with some of
 project requirements. However, the project team exerted quality control of data supplied by the
 implementing agencies, and capacity building took place through trainings and workshops, and the hiring of
 an international consultant.

 Overall, quality of supervision was highly satisfactory, due to the flexibility and stability of the Bank team,
 which took advantage of a political change to achieve results in a difficult context.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The coverage of the M&E design in the ICR was sparse. It only touched upon the significant data gaps and
 the low institutional capacity at appraisal which hampered the choice of adequate indicators to monitor the
 progress towards the project's outcomes. Only two main outcome indicators were initially identified to
 monitor progress towards increasing the availability and reliability of electricity. The FCV context during
 project preparation hindered the quality work necessary to ensure the soundness and the
 comprehensiveness of the results framework. For instance, a generic indicator to assess the reliability of
 electricity supply is the reduction in the number of hours during which customers experience blackouts, but
 this was never chosen. The FCV context also led to the prevalence at appraisal of weak institutional
 arrangements for data collection and M&E arrangements.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR provided adequate information on key aspects of the M&E implementation in the paragraphs 62-
  65, and key features developed therein are summarized below:




                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



        Most indicators selected by the team were specific and measurable, and the results framework
         was flexible and adaptable to factor in the adjustments to changes on the ground, which has
         significantly helped the project implementation;
        Performance indicators were revised three times, twice in 2017, and the last time in March 2019
         to reflect the changes in the components and the category reallocation of resources. The project
         team made key changes to PDO indicators, including an indicator capturing electricity generated,
         to include investments to rehabilitate capacity and the purchase of fuel and a new indicator to
         measure fuel import capacity. Added or revised indicators during the various restructurings were
         more ambitious that those used at the outset;
        The project team remained in contact with the representatives of implementing agencies in charge
         of data collection related to indicators, and exerted quality control to ensure that the data was
         collected and treated appropriately. The presence of a task team leader in a neighboring country
         facilitated close coordination with project stakeholders and facilitated coordination in monitoring
         the M&E system; and
        Throughout the period of project implementation, the project team built the capacity of the PIU to
         serve in the management of subsequent projects.




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR coverage of the M&E utilization was very limited. This review draws mainly from the meeting
  with the TTLs, who reported on the M&E utilization as detailed below:

        The project team used the information gathered during frequent support missions to collect data
         and monitor progress towards achieving outcomes and report on key issues through the mission
         aide memoires, ISRs and management letters;
        Real-time exchanges between the country office-based team and the PIU helped to ensure the
         timely identification and resolution of key implementation issues to keep the project on track;
        In the last year of implementation, monthly reports were prepared and shared by the PIU
         combining reporting on this project and the follow-on project, indicating that capacity building
         supporting the M&E system had borne fruit; and
        Because of the continuous adjustment of the results framework to the changes in the project
         components and resources reallocation, shifts in the project results are principally attributable to
         the project and the M&E activities.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The ICR coverage of the safeguards issues in paragraphs 68-73 was comprehensive and is summarized
   below:

   At appraisal, the project was classified as a category B project, implying that the impacts of the planned
   investments were expected to be of low intensity. The triggered safeguards policy was for Environmental
   Assessment (OP 4.01), and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared and
   published. During the August 2017 restructuring, the project expansion led to the inclusion of the
   construction of cross-border lines, enabling the import of electricity from Senegal. Consequently, a new
   ESMP was prepared and published in August 2017, and an Environmental and Social Impact Analysis
   (ESIA) was prepared for each of the two cross-border lines financed by the project.

   In the context of the March 2019 restructuring, the OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement policy was
   triggered to account for the construction activity of the Kanuma-Amdalai distribution line, which was in non-
   compliance with the safeguards requirements. About 100 trees were cut during the construction,
   damaging non-critical infrastructure such as fences. Tree-replanting and compensation elements were
   satisfactorily implemented and a grievance redress mechanism was made operational. Moreover,
   an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) was implemented with 101 out of the 103 Project Affected
   People (PAPs) being compensated. Compensation for the two remaining PAPs has been placed in an
   escrow account to be available for the PAPs for a period of two years. Finally, NAWEC signed a
   Memorandum of Agreement with the Department of Forestry to agree on a systematic approach to replace
   trees impacted through its activities. Capacity building and specific trainings in E&S safeguards was given
   high priority, including the hiring of an international consultant that led to quick resolution of environmental
   and social issues that were identified thereafter.

   An independent environmental audit report highlighted some concerns with regards to occupational health
   and safety (OHS) in the power plants and sludge management at Kotu and Brikama. Audit report
   recommendations are being implemented in the context of the follow-on project. Overall, the project
   successfully complied with requirements of the Operations Safeguards Policies OP4.01 and OP4.12,
   through implementation of environmental and social assessment instruments and capacity building.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR coverage of fiduciary isssues (para 75-76) was concise, but key issues were presented as
   summarized below:

   Financial Management: The technical capacity and experience of implementing agencies (NAWEC and
   PIU) to manage fiduciary responsibilities at appraisal was limited. With regards to financial management,
   the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were timely and satisfactorily prepared, and the accounting system
   was effective. The audit reports were issued with unqualified opinions and recommendations from the
   external auditor were implemented. Significant capacity building in fiduciary aspects was provided to
   the PIU with the support of international consultants.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



   Procurement: During implementation, procurement was downgraded in the ISR to Moderately Satisfactory
   due to the poor quality of bidding documents and improper procedures. The procurement review found in
   some cases that advance payments amounted to 100% whereas the maximum allowance was 30%.
   Capacity building was provided, including the hiring of an international consultant, and in the end the
   procurement challenges did not affect significantly the achievement of project outcomes.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not identify any.



d. Other
   The ICR did not identify any.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                   IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons and recommendations arising from the experience of project
implementation, and the most salient lessons are paraphrased below:

(i) Simplicity in project design and flexibility in implementation are necessary to operate
effectively in an FCV context. The PDO and the project components were simple, and this enabled
the Bank team and the Borrower to integrate emergency developments in the sector and in the
country context, and to build better the needed trust and capacity to pave the way for more
complex operations and reforms in the future.

(ii) Effectiveness in an FCV context requires significant resources and dedication from
the Bank's and Borrower's teams. Exceptionally, the Bank's team was dedicated to this operation,
as there was limited rotation of TTLs despite the FCV context throughout the four-year period of
project implementation. Two senior staff shepherded successively the design and implementation of
the project from the outset until its closure, including increased budget resources for intensive


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)



supervision. Their dedication enabled sustained support to the capacity building and advice to the
implementing agencies, which contributed significantly to achieved outcomes.

(iii) In an FCV context, the Bank's team needs to earmark enough resources to ensure
compliance with key aspects of project implementation (procurement and E&S safeguards
notably). In the context of this project, technical capacity in the areas of procurement and E&S was
generally weak, and implementation could not proceed if these aspects were not handled
correctly. Procurement involved complex procedures and contracts and E&S safeguards had to deal
with sludge management issues and having in place a functional grievance redress mechanism. The
above tasks were addressed through sustained capacity building and training, and the hiring of
adequate international expertise.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and is generally consistent with Bank's guidelines. Key strengths
include (i) the comprehensiveness and the depth in the presentation of the theory of change and the achieved
results, (ii) the internal consistency of the analysis linking the project activities and the achieved outcome,
and (iii) the learned lessons as they reflect the experience of project implementation. The key weakness is that
the operational and administrative efficiency was not discussed adequately.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Gambia Electricity Support Project (P152659)




                                                                            Page 16 of 16
