     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022167

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P123146                                  CR Higher Education

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Costa Rica                               Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81940                               31-Dec-2017                                       194,213,897.33

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Sep-2012                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         200,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     199,975,647.57                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb            Joy Maria Behrens             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, pg 4), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To improve access and quality, to increase investments in innovation and scientific and
           technological development, as well as to upgrade institutional management, all in Costa Rica's
           public higher education system.


                                                                                               Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)



   The target for one of the outcome indicators was revised in a project restructuring for accuracy purposes
   between annual and cumulative values, and to undertake measurement in line with the methodology of the
   Ministry of Science, Innovation and Technology (ICR, p. 10). Therefore, a split evaluation is not applicable.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Institutional Improvement Agreements (Appraisal: US$ 231.8 million; Actual: US$ 251.2 million): This
   component aimed to support four public universities - University of Costa Rica, National University for
   Distance Leaning, Costa Rica Institute of Technology, and National University) in increasing access, quality,
   and relevance of their programs. Grants were provided to each university to finance sub-projects, including
   for the expansion of infrastructure for teaching, learning and research, and the upgrading of faculty
   qualifications. Activities were to focus on priority subjects key to the country's development (such as basic
   sciences and engineering). Activities also included strengthening capacity for strategic long-term planning
   and monitoring and evaluation, including through information systems development. The key instrument for
   support was the Institutional Improvement Agreement (Acuerdo de Mejoramiento Institucional, AMI), which
   would cover a period of five years and include a commitment between the government and each of the
   participating universities, called the Institutional Improvement Plan (Plan de Mejoramiento Institucional,
   PMI) that would present strategic objectives and specific investments to be made, along with indicators and
   targets.

   2. Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Quality Enhancement (Appraisal: US$ 17.3 million; Actual: US$
   23.3 million): This component aimed to promote the development of strategic activities with a system-wide
   scope. Activities included: support to the National System for the Accreditation of Higher Education
   (SINAES) to conduct external evaluations and accreditation of academic programs; training to SINAES staff
   on evaluation and accreditation; and development of a labor market observatory to collect data and
   produce labor market studies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The appraised project cost was US$ 253.3 million. The actual project cost was US$ 274.6 million.

   Financing


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)



         The project was financed by an IBRD Loan of US$200.0 million, which disbursed in its entirety.

   Borrower contribution

         The government and participating universities were expected to contribute US$ 53.3 million in
           counterpart fund. According to the project team, three of the four participating universities
           contributed US$ 30.3 million, and the government provided project support through its financing of
           SINAES and the public universities, as well as for the external audits and external monitoring and
           evaluation committee.

   Dates

         August 2017: The target for the key project indicator on "Amount of resources invested in research
          and development" was revised to reflect the annual amounts rather than the
          cumulative amount. Also, the project closing date was extended from December 2017 to December
          2018, to allow for completion of civil works.
         October 2018: The project closing date was extended from December 2018 to December 2019 to
          allow for completion of activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Costa Rica has been a strong performer in the Latin American region in terms of the economy and social
indicators. It has been successful in attracting technology firms and developing a sustainable tourism
sector; however, investment in research and development - critical to promoting innovation - was only 0.53
percent of GDP, according to a government report in 2011. Accordingly, the project objectives focused on
the higher education system, which is a key sector necessary to spur innovation and research in the
economy. The higher education system is composed of four public universities (which account for 47
percent of total enrollment), one relatively new public university, 50 private universities, and 60 other higher
education non-university institutions.

However, the public universities have had to impose limits on enrollment due to physical infrastructure and
human resource constraints. These limits particularly affect access to tertiary education for poorer
students. According to the PAD (page 2), only 16.7% of the supply of university programs focused on basic
sciences, engineering, and computing; while the percentage of faculty members with postgraduate
education was relatively low, laboratories and equipment were not updated, and the rate of full-time-
equivalent researchers per thousand in the active population was only 0.78. Also, the institutional structure
of the public higher education system, including the traditional financing approach, has not been conducive
to results-based management approaches, thereby limiting effectiveness in strategic planning, quality
assurance, and information provision.

While regional development banks have long supported the higher education sector through loans to
specific institutions, this project represented the first Bank-supported operation in the country's higher
education sector and the first to support the higher education system as a whole. The project was


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CR Higher Education (P123146)



               consistent with the government's National Development Plan for 2011-2014, which prioritized innovation,
               science and technology sectors to becoming a more competitive nation. The Bank's Country
               Partnership Framework for 2016-2020 included an explicit objective to enhance higher education to
               improve skills, highlighting that Costa Rica’s labor market and education system are unable to produce the
               highly skilled labor that is in increasing demand for its high value-added economy and that the project
               represented a "legacy engagement" that will help the Government address these imbalances. Indicators
               included measuring enrollment in priority areas in the four public universities and the number of accredited
               programs.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access in Costa Rica's public higher education system

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was overall sound. The project financed improvement plans at the four universities,
                             which included subprojects for the expansion of physical facilities and equipment to accommodate additional
                             students, as well as scholarships to reduce financial barriers. These activities were likely to contribute to the
                             objective to increase access.

                             Outputs

                                        Provision of financing to the four public universities for improvement plans (US$ 50.0 million to each
                                         institution). The financing was used for construction of additional facilities including classrooms,
                                         laboratories, student common areas, dormitories and cafeterias. The ICR (page 11) noted that the
                                         emphasis on building and equipping laboratories was instrumental in developing a wider variety of
                                         programs in priority areas (such as basic sciences and engineering) and led to increasing student
                                         enrollment in those areas.
                                        Provision of scholarships to indigenous students (250 in 2014, 600 in 2016).

                             Outcomes

                             The following changes in enrollment occurred from 2012 to 2019:

                                        Undergraduate enrollment increased from 88,107 to 106,884 students, of which 54 percent women,
                                         surpassing the target of 102,814.



                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CR Higher Education (P123146)




      Graduate enrollment increased from 6,885 to 7,117, falling short of the target of 7,524. The ICR (page
         12) suggested that this was likely due to increased competition from private universities that offered
         more attractive options for employed students (who represent an important segment of post-graduate
         enrollment) and the dropping of some graduate programs for which there was not sufficient demand.
        First-year students enrolled in undergraduate degrees increased from 21,433 to 24,326, falling short
         of the target of 26,797.
        Undergraduate students enrolled in priority areas increased from 48,270 to 62,956 of which 53
         percent women, surpassing the target of 57,492.
        Students enrolled in graduate programs in priority areas increased from 4,064 to 4,384, of which 57
         percent women, surpassing the target of 4,221.
        The total number of graduates increased from 10,364 to 14,086, surpassing the target of 12,055.
        Three of the four participating universities (UCR, ITCR, UNA) achieved undergraduate enrollment
         targets, while UNED fell short of undergraduate enrollment targets.

Also, the project increased access for indigenous students through implementation of the Multiannual
Indigenous Peoples Plan. Total enrollment of Indigenous students in all four universities increased from 634
students in 2014 to 792 students in 2019.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve quality in Costa Rica's public higher education system

Rationale
The theory of change was overall sound. The project financed improvement plans at the four universities,
which included upgraded facilities and new programs particularly in priority areas (engineering, medicine,
natural sciences) and upgraded qualification of faculty through scholarships for further studies. The project
also supported improvements to the quality assurance system through Sistema Nacional de Acreditación de
la Educación Superior (SINAES).

Outputs

        Provision of financing to the four public universities to upgrade facilities.
        Development of new programs in priority areas, relevant to research and innovation.
        Provision of scholarships to 180 faculty members to pursue postgraduate studies abroad (target: 166).
        External evaluations of project implementation conducted by the CSE (Monitoring and Evaluation
         Committee). in 2015, 2016, and 2019. The evaluations assessed project progress and included a
         survey to measure project impact.



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CR Higher Education (P123146)




      Self-evaluations by undergraduate and graduate institutions, as part of annual planning
         processes. The total number of undergraduate programs that underwent external evaluation increased
         from 64 programs in 2012 to 294 programs in 2019 (target: 160). The total number of graduate
         programs that underwent external evaluation increased from 0 to 19 in 2017 (original
         target: 100; revised target: 20). According to the ICR (page 37), annual targets were revised based on
         the SINAES Institutional Strategic Plan, updated in 2014, which outlined a slower pace of
         implementation of external evaluation for graduate programs, based on more realistic institutional
         capacity and demand by universities .

Outcomes

      The total number of programs accredited by SINAES increased from 47 in 2012 to 140 programs in
         2019, surpassing the target of 85.
        The total number of undergraduate students enrolled in priority areas in the four universities increased
         from 48,270 to 62,956 students, falling short of the target of 57,492 students. The number of graduate
         students in priority areas increase from 4,064 to 4,384 students, falling short of the target of 4,221
         students.
        The number of full-time equivalent (FTE) faculty members in the four public universities holding a
         master’s degree increased from 1,926 in 2012 to 2,880 faculty members in 2019, surpassing the
         target of 2,199. The number of FTE faculty members holding a PhD degree increased from 591 in
         2012 to 1,099 in 2019, surpassing the target of 794 faculty members.
        The number of FTE faculty members carrying out research activities increased from 581 in 2012 to
         715 in 2019, surpassing the target of 692 faculty members.
        The number of published articles in indexed journals increased from 422 in 2012 to 746 in 2019,
         achieving the original target of 789 articles and surpassing the revised target of 587
         articles. According to the ICR (page 35), the baseline and annual (and final) targets were revised due
         to miscalculation of the baseline for UNA, which was determined incorrectly based on the number of
         publications in previous years instead of on the baseline year (2011).
        According to the student survey carried out as part of the CSE’s final evaluation, students reported
         improvements in the quality of courses and the faculty. More than 51 percent of enrolled students
         considered that quality had improved. Almost 60 percent of enrolled students were positive about
         improvements in classrooms and laboratories, and 51 percent were positive about improvements in
         equipment and teaching materials.
        UCR, ITCR, and UNA achieved program accreditation targets, while UNED fell short of program
         accreditation targets



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase investments in innovation and scientific and technological development in Costa Rica's public
higher education system


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CR Higher Education (P123146)




Rationale
The theory of change was overall sound. The project financed upgraded facilities, particularly specialized
laboratories and equipment, to enable increased research and scientific/ technological
development. Upgraded faculty qualifications also contributed to increased capacity to conduct research and
development.

Outputs

      Provision of financing to the four public universities to upgrade facilities, including for specialized
       laboratories and equipment.
      Development of new programs in priority areas, relevant to research and innovation.
      Provision of scholarships to 180 faculty members to pursue postgraduate studies abroad (target: 166).

Outcomes

      The amount invested in research and development (R&D) in the four universities increased from CRC
       31,451 million in 2012 to CRC 82,516 million in 2019, surpassing the revised target of CRC 63,000
       million. According to the ICR (page 31), the original target was inaccurately calculated at appraisal as:
       (a) the values were calculated without using the proper methodology; (b) the values should have
       been calculated as an annual, rather than a cumulative, amount; and (c) the execution timetable
       assumed unrealistic implementation timing.
      The percentage of the four universities’ budget allocated to infrastructure and equipment increased
       from 30.9% in 2012 to 48.5% in 2019. This met the target of 30.2%. According to the project team,
       the baseline figure was high, according to historical standards, and therefore maintaining the
       percentage would have reflected a significant achievement.
      The number of FTE faculty members carrying out research activities increased from 581 in 2012 to
       715 in 2019, surpassing the target of 692.
      The number of published articles in indexed journals increased from 422 articles in 2012 to 746
       articles in 2019, achieving the original target of 789 and surpassing the revised target of 587
       articles. According to the ICR (page 35), the baseline and annual targets had to be revised due to
       miscalculation of the baseline for UNA, which was determined incorrectly based on the number of
       publications in previous years instead of on the baseline year (2011).




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To upgrade institutional management in Costa Rica's public higher education system

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CR Higher Education (P123146)



The theory of change was overall sound. The strategic planning process instituted through the PMIs
contributed to improved management among the four universities and the results-based management
approved improved accountability for results. Support to SINEAS and the accreditation process, and the
labor market and graduate studies, also helped to increase institutional capacity and improve decision
making.

Outputs

      Implementation of 46 subprojects through PMIs, which were operational tools introduced by the
       project, presenting strategic objectives and investments. The PMIs included commitments between
       universities and government for accountability, with self-evaluation and progress reports
       reported. The plans also emphasized strategic long-term planning, including the formulation of
       institutional mission, vision and strategy, and measurement, target setting, accountability, and
       monitoring and evaluation.
      Support to Sistema Nacional de Acreditación de la Educación Superior (SINAES, National System for
       Accreditation of Higher Education) including an increase in the number of professionals trained on
       self-evaluation and external evaluation from 100 in 2012 to 1,107 in 201 (target: 850).
      Development of the Labor Market Observatory (three graduate tracer studies, information on
       employers, graduate profiles) and the Information System of the Public University Higher Education
       (information on all public higher-level education institutions that is readily available to students,
       parents, faculty, and other stakeholders on a web-based information system).

Outcomes

      Yearly publication of self-evaluations by universities on websites, contributing to transparency and
       accountability.
      According to the ICR (page 14), the CSE's final evaluation found that the PMI had been a key,
       effective instrument for the management and implementation of their AMIs, and that through this
       process, the Project had helped strengthen the universities’ institutional capacity for managing the
       investment preparation and implementation process. The results based management approach
       was "a central element in the design of universities' PMIs and AMIs and supports a feedback loop into
       their annual investment plans based on implementation progress" (ICR, page 11).
      Capacity of SINAES was strengthened, as evidenced by the increased number of trained
       professionals and an assessment conducted as part of its accreditation process (which presented
       recommendations on streamlining its procedures, making accreditation more accessible and relevant
       to universities and promoting greater efficiency). According to the ICR (pages 14-15), the
       implementation of the recommendations was expected to reduce costs to SINAES and fees to
       universities, and accreditation processing time.
      The student survey carried out as part of CSE’s final evaluation found that, based on available
       sources and instruments, new first year students made more informed decisions with respect to which
       major and university they select to attend, consulted those aspects that they considered relevant for
       decision making (e.g., scholarships, financing, quality and location, etc.) and valued the use of these
       resources more than already enrolled students.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CR Higher Education (P123146)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased access and quality, overall, along with
                            increased innovation and institutional management. However, there were moderate shortcomings in
                            achievement of increased access and quality, as one of the four public universities receiving financing for
                            improvement plans fell short of targets for both access and quality. There were also shortcomings in
                            increasing access to graduate programs, although access to undergraduate programs surpassed targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic benefits of the project were expected to be attained through increased productivity of individuals
   (graduates from the universities) leading to their higher earnings. The increased productivity would be
   measured by the earnings differential between (i) students who complete tertiary education vs. those with only a
   high school diploma; (ii) students who gain skills in a priority area with better earnings potential vs. those in a
   non-priority area; and (iii) students who receive an improved quality of education at the four participating
   universities vs. those who do not. The costs are calculated as project investment costs (both Bank financing
   and counterpart contribution), the additional recurrent costs due to increased enrollment, and the costs of
   infrastructure and maintenance.

   The analysis at appraisal (PAD, Annex 6) estimated internal rate of return at 13%, using the above estimates.

   The analysis at completion (ICR, Annex 5) used the same framework although with more conservative
   assumptions in the graduate employment rate and proportion of tertiary graduates benefitting from the
   project. Using a discount rate of 5%, the estimated internal rate of return was 16% with a net present value of
   US$ 1,139 million, which compared favorably with the appraisal estimate. Also, the analysis at completion
   did not include potential gains in other areas such as benefits from research and development, positive
   externalities such as increase in salaries for all workers, and social benefits such as higher life expectancy and
   lower crime rate.

   There was evidence of implementation efficiency as the project financed more square footage of construction
   than appraised, but with the same amount of resources. Comparing the cost of construction per square meter,
   the project's average cost was US$ 1,366 while the government's average cost was US$ 1,581.




                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CR Higher Education (P123146)



The Loan disbursed in its entirety and delivered all expected project outputs; however, there were delays which
affected project efficiency, including a one year delay in effectiveness, procurement delays, delays in audit
reports, and an aggregate two year extension of the project period.

Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable value for money, but with moderate shortcomings in the
efficiency of implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  13.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               16.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High (due to strong alignment with country conditions, country and Bank strategies), Efficacy
is rated Substantial (with moderate shortcomings in achievement of the objectives to increase access and
quality for one of the four participating universities and for graduate programs) and Efficiency is rated
Substantial (due to favorable value for money, but with moderate shortcomings in the efficiency of
implementation).


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (page 11) reported that the public universities have internalized a number of the processes used in
the project, including results-based management, safeguards procedures, and investment
planning. Regarding the subprojects, each institution also prepared sustainability plans including
maintenance. Therefore, outputs implemented by the project are likely to be sustained. However, while
public sources of funding for public universities is guaranteed, the government's fiscal situation will likely be
constrained in the near future, exacerbated by the global pandemic.


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project drew upon the existing strong commitment of the government and the participating
  institutions. This commitment was sustained throughout the project period despite three Presidential
  administration changes. The project design ensured alignment of the university subprojects and
  improvement plans with the project objectives, by structuring the improvement plans along the same four
  strategic axes of the project's objectives and results framework. This clear alignment also facilitated
  monitoring, as indicators were similarly consistent. Institutionally, the project was designed utilizing the
  existing financing structure for higher education, and the project coordination units at each university
  were structured alike to enable consistency in institutional approach and project implementation support
  by the Bank team The key operational tools at the implementing agency level - the PMI and AMI - were
  detailed and well-prepared during appraisal, and the participating universities appointed institution-
  specific Coordinators in a timely manner. The results framework was adequate, building upon
  measurable indicators that could be updated in a timely manner to inform project progress, although
  there were moderate shortcomings in the choice of indicators and baseline figures that subsequently
  required revision. Also, as noted in the ICR (page 10), the implementation timetable was unrealistic.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Mid-Term Review was well-utilized to apply lessons learned thus far, focusing on results and
 recommendations for moving forward. Although there were numerous procurement delays and procedural
 issues that led to implementation delays, due to complex procurement (highly specialized inputs) and
 environmental matters (discovery of cultural artifacts), these were largely unrelated to Bank team
 performance. For example, implementation delays arose from the significant ex-ante role of the central
 government in procurement matters, as the numerous complaints from contractors regarding award
 decisions were required, by law, to be reviewed by the government. The Bank team worked proactively to
 resolve issues in a timely manner, as reported in the ICR (page 26): the Bank team brought it in specialized
 assistance when needed (organized a mission with the participation of a specialist in medical physics-
 cyclotron to ensure the proper specification of technical specifications), worked with universities to reach
 out to other participating government agencies to facilitate processes, and arranged critical support from
 the fiduciary and safeguard specialists. Bank support was "results-focused, just in time, and well recorded
 in project documentation."

 Overall Bank performance is rated Satisfactory, although one of the sub-ratings (Quality-at-Entry) was
 Moderately Satisfactory. The ICR makes the case that implementation issues were effectively resolved at
 the time needed and had a minimal impact on the final project outcome.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was adequate, with measurable outcomes and indicators for each of the project
 objectives. As higher education institutions typically do not assess student academic outcomes, the quality
 of programs was measured through accreditation and faculty qualifications. However, there were
 some shortcomings in the original results framework, including the target value for the key outcome
 indicator on amount of R&D investment (methodology inconsistent with Ministry of Science Innovation and
 Technology, cumulative instead of annual amount), and an incorrect baseline value for the intermediate
 indicator on the number of publications. The monitoring process, to ensure accurate and timely monitoring,
 was clearly integrated into the project design through the PMIs. A dedicated M&E Committee was
 established to provide three evaluations during the course of the project - at the end of year one, mid-term,
 and final.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project coordination unit provided timely monitoring reports, compiled from data from each of the
  participating institutions. Revisions were made to the results framework during the August 2017 project
  restructuring. The dedicated M&E Committee conducted the three planned evaluations, which provided
  inputs to the mid term review and the ICR, as well as a fourth final evaluation in light of the extended
  project period. This final evaluation included online surveys targeted to students in programs that
  benefited from subprojects financed by the Project. The survey differentiated responses by first year
  students enrolled in 2018 and 2019 and regular students enrolled between 2014 and 2016. It also
  gathered responses from the broader university communities through focus group discussions and
  meetings with the universities’ key actors. According to the ICR (page 23), these evaluations were
  comprehensive and informative, and they provided an additional external assessment of project progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 23), the project monitoring data were used to inform each institution's annual
  plans and the external evaluations informed project reviews, including the Mid-Term Review. Also, the
  universities’ retrospective evaluation of implementation and achievements resulting from the preparation
  of their completion reports contributed to plans for sustainability of project investments.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category "B" project due to potential environmental impact of the
   subproject civil works. The project triggered the safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).

   Site-specific environmental management plans (EMPs) were prepared for each of the civil works
   subprojects, with implementation reported in the ICR (page 24) as Satisfactory. The borrower
   also prepared a Socio-Cultural Assessment (SCA) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).
   During initial implementation of the SCA, several Indigenous stakeholders requested that instead of
   requiring multiple IPPs, one for each subproject, the Project help develop one single Five-Year and Inter-
   University Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). The Bank team agreed to this request, although this meant the
   IPP with its respective activities, indicators, budget and timeline would not be ready by the time of approval
   given the time needed for its preparation, consultation and approval. Bank management agreed to proceed
   with processing and loan signature, with a loan condition that the final Multiannual IPP would be completed
   by November 13, 2013 and adopted by the four participating universities. As reported in the ICR (page 24),
   this IPP was considered an excellent document and its implementation was considered Highly Satisfactory
   throughout the project period, as each university carried out many successful culturally-appropriate activities
   and initiatives within Indigenous territories and within universities to improve access, retention and cultural
   relevance of higher education for Indigenous peoples. The universities have all institutionalized the IPP as
   a continuing approach towards reaching out to Indigenous communities and youth.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management performance was overall satisfactory, although there
   were shortcomings related to reporting requirements, as audit reports were often submitted to the Bank
   with delay. Audits were unqualified throughout implementation, except on two occasions (December 31,
   2014 and December 31, 2017); however, the project team confirmed that the issues were resolved by
   project closing. The final audit was expected to be submitted by June 30, 2020. Interim financial
   reports were submitted on time throughout implementation and always considered acceptable.

   Procurement: Procurement capacity of the project coordination unit was strong overall. There were,
   however, several procurement issues that arose due to procedural matters. Upon receiving complaints
   from contractors regarding award decisions, the government was required, by law, to review the
   procurement decisions, which led to significant delays. Also, additional clearance was required by the
   government for all contracts involving civil works. Two of UNED’s civil works biddings were relaunched due
   to ineligible offers, and two of UNA’s contracts that were under construction were rebid after the contractor


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CR Higher Education (P123146)



   abandoned the constructions. Also, the procurement of the UCR’s cyclotron subproject involved highly
   specialized procurement for both civil works and of the cyclotron itself.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Linkages with private sector: As reported in the ICR (page 18), some subprojects led to
   increased engagement with the private sector. UNA created a major in the field of supply and logistics,
   which resulted in the establishment of alliances with chambers of commerce related to the logistics sector
   and international commerce and logistics companies. UCR purchased a cyclotron, a sophisticated piece of
   medical equipment that is used for cancer treatment, which led to a pending agreement with the Costa
   Rican Social Security Institute for its use in patients’ treatments.

   Equity in access to higher education: As reported in the ICR (page 18), by increasing the availability of
   universities’ programs in their regional branches, and increased number of places in dormitories, students
   from less prosperous areas had greater access to higher education. The number of new first year students
   in regional campuses increased from 12,060 in 2016, to 13,206 in 2017, and then fell slightly to 12,818 in
   2018 (the ICR does not report the proportion of eligible students that now had access to higher
   education). Also, through implementation of the IPP, the project had a significant impact on equity in
   public higher education by increasing first year enrollment and enrollments of Indigenous students.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               Quality-at-Entry is rated
                                                                               Moderately Satisfactory (due to
                                                                               shortcomings including
Bank Performance               Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                               unrealistic implementation
                                                                               timetable) and Supervision is
                                                                               rated Highly Satisfactory.
                                                                               There were shortcomings in
Quality of M&E                 High                  Substantial               M&E design (original results
                                                                               framework).
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CR Higher Education (P123146)




Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 27-28):

        In the context of strong Borrower capacity, the Bank can add further value through
         introducing new approaches and addressing cross-cutting implementation issues. In the
         case of this project, the Borrower demonstrated high commitment and strong implementation
         capacity, therefore, the Bank was able to focus its support on introducing the results-based
         management approach and ensuring its success and sustainability. Also, the Bank was able
         to focus its support on coordination of cross-agency matters such as procurement involving
         multiple agencies.
        The institutional improvement plan approach is an effective tool for achieving results while
         allowing flexibility for differing "means" to a common "end". In the case of this project, given
         the variety of higher education institutions participating with differing visions and missions,
         subprojects varied greatly among institutions with each addressing challenges specific to
         each institution. However, the consistency in institutional structures helped facilitate
         achievement of the overall project objectives.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-organized and results-oriented. The theory of change was clear, both for individual
implementation agencies (public universities, SINAES) and for the overall project. The Efficacy section was
marked by evidence of strong quality, including highly detailed outputs reported in the Annex. The Efficiency
section was also notable for addressing multiple aspects of project efficiency.

The ICR was concise and adhered to guidelines, although some of the candor in the identified shortcomings
were not reflected in the project ratings (i.e. "Highly Satisfactory" rating is defined as no shortcomings). Lessons
were adequate, although more specific lessons drawn from this experience working in the higher education
sector and in the science and innovation sector would have been a valuable opportunity for learning and
informing future Bank operations.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CR Higher Education (P123146)




                                                                  Page 16 of 16
