     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022364

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P128968                                    BR Marine Protected Areas Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18151                                   31-Oct-2019                                            18,200,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Sep-2014                                31-Mar-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               18,200,000.00                                  18,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                18,200,000.00                                  18,200,000.00

 Actual                                            18,200,000.00                                  18,200,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl              John R. Eriksson              Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 15) and the Financing Agreement of September 26,
   2014 (p. 7) the objective of the project was “a) to support the expansion of globally significant, representative
   and effective Marine and Coastal Protected Areas (MCPA) system in Brazil, and b) to identify mechanisms for
   its financial sustainability.”

   The Global Environmental Objective (GEO) was identical to the Project Development Objective (PDO).


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Creation and consolidation of Marine and Coastal Protected Areas (MCPAs)
   (appraisal estimate US$12.29 million, actual US$7.72 million): This component was to finance the
   increase in area and the strengthening of the management of marine and coastal areas that were under
   formal protection and creation of MCPAs, by, inter alia: i) identifying and establishing new marine Protected
   Areas (PAs) and related seasonal or permanent no-take fishing zones in some of the MCPAs and ii( to
   consolidate existing MCPAs.

   Component 2: Identification and design of financial mechanisms to support Marine and Coastal
   Protected Areas (appraisal estimate US$2.5 million, actual US$1.68 million): This component was to
   finance the identification and design of, at least, two potential financing mechanisms for the MCPAs to
   ensure their long term financial sustainability.

   Component 3: Monitoring and evaluation (appraisal estimate US$2.5 million, actual US$0.28 million):
   This component was to finance: i) the development and implementation of an integrated M&E system to
   track key marine and coastal environmental and biodiversity indicators in Marine and Coastal PAs
   supported by the Project as well as of other marine and coastal PAs; and ii) an assessment of marine
   biodiversity conservation status and conservation requirements of the MCPA system.

   Component 4 - Project coordination and management (appraisal estimate US$0.91 million, actual
   US$0.38 million): This component was to finance i) establishing efficient day-to-day management and
   supervision of the project by supporting the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and the Project Implementation
   Unit (PIU), in discharging their functions and responsibilities (including support for Project audits) and
   developing and implementing a communication strategy for the Project; ii) ensuring Project coordination by
   supporting the establishment and functioning of the Project Operational Committee (POC), the Project
   Council (PC), and ad hoc Technical Working Groups; and iii) developing and implementing M&E systems to
   manage effectiveness of MCPAs and the MCPA system, including their long term financial sustainability.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$117.86 million. Actual cost was US$18.2 million due
   Brazil’s entry into a deep recession and an exchange rate devaluation.

   Financing: The total project cost was financed by the GEF through a Bank administered Trust Fund of
   US$18.2 million, which completely disbursed.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$99.66 million, of which $39.26 million was
   materialized. The Bank team stated (December 21, 2020) that while PETROBRAS (Petroleo Brasileiros – a
   public-private company) provided substantial co-financing (approximately US$10.5 million) the total
   expected amount was impacted by an exchange rate devaluation and Brazil’s entry into a deep recession.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

         On August 23, 2017 the project was restructured to align grant proceeds with the new Bank
          procurement guidelines of June 1, 2016.
         On August 5, 2019 the project was restructured to: i) reallocate grant proceeds between
          disbursement categories and ii) change the closing date from October 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020 to
          allow for finalizing the setup of the Marine Fund, including asset management, M&E, and to oversee
          its administration.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 12) Brazil has an extensive coastline that measures over 9,000 km2 and hosts 18
percent of national population (43 million people). The Brazilian coast has a large variety of environments
and wildlife and is one of the longest continuous stretches of mangrove ecosystems in the world, which are
important for aquatic nursery sites, biological filters and carbon sinks. However, these environments have
been subject to intense human and economic pressure.

Slow growth, persistent inflation, structural bottlenecks, and domestic as well as global uncertainties
continue to overshadow the economic outlook for Brazil. Efforts to increase the coverage of Brazil’s network
of Marine and Coastal PAs (MCPA) contribute to the protection of global public goods (marine and coastal
ecosystems). Also, they protect stocks and so support the productivity of Brazil fisheries, which, at the time
of appraisal, provided approximately 800,000 jobs, involving about four million people directly and
indirectly. Economic activities in the coastal zone account for roughly 70 percent of the Brazilian Gross
Domestic Product (GDP), but the coastal zone is one of the most environmentally threatened regions in the
country. Despite the vastness of Brazil´s coastal zone, only 1.57 percent of it was protected within the
MCPA network (Rede de Unidades de Conservação Marinhas e Costeiras – UCMC) at the time of project
appraisal.

In order to address biodiversity issues, in 2000 the government established the National System of
Protected Areas (PAs) (SNUC), which established rules for the PAs management, provided mechanisms for
property ownership and provided a framework for coordination between federal, state, and municipal levels
and the private sector. Also, in 2003 the government established the National Committee on Biodiversity
(CONABIO). According to the ICR (p. 10) the decree is composed of 12 articles, rules on the National
Program on Biological Diversity (PRONABIO) and on the National Commission on Biodiversity. PRONABIO
aims to orient the elaboration and the implementation of the National Policy on Biodiversity, promoting the
implementation of the commitments undertaken by Brazil with regards to the Convention on Biological
Diversity and defining the actions implementing the principles and guidelines of the National Policy on



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



               Biodiversity. Furthermore, the government also implemented more recently biodiversity policies such as the
               2010 National Goals for Biodiversity and the 2012-2015 National Coastal Management Plan.

               The objective of the project supported the Bank’s current Country Partnership Framework (FY18-23), which
               emphasizes the need to continue to support management of natural resources in a sustainable
               way, combining conservation with promotion of local and regional economic development. In addition, the
               project was in line with the 2016 Strategic Country Diagnostic, which discusses the need for efficient use of
               land to achieve economic and environmental goals. At the same time the Strategic Country Diagnostic
               stressed the need to conserve valuable biomes and protect important resources. Finally, the project was
               also aligned with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) priorities such as the conservation of globally
               unique biodiversity and its sustainable use while maintaining biodiversity conservation and sustainable use
               of productive landscapes, seascapes, and sectors.

               Overall, the objective of the project was aligned with key development problems and country priorities. Also,
               the objective was realistic given the available resources. Therefore, the relevance of objective was rated
               High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the expansion of globally significant, representative and effective Marine and Coastal Protected
                             Areas (MCPA) system in Brazil:

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as creating new
                             MCPAs, consolidating selected marine and coastal PAs, developing and implementing an integrated M&E
                             system to track key marine and coastal environmental and biodiversity indicators, and assessing marine
                             biodiversity conservation status and conservation requirements of the MCPA system were to result in outputs
                             such as availability of maps of priority areas, MCPA classification system, and marine biodiversity monitoring
                             systems. These outputs were to result in the project’s outcomes of marine areas being under biodiversity
                             protection, and supporting the expansion of a globally significant, representative and effective MCPA system
                             in Brazil.

                             The project made the following assumptions (ICR p. 6): i) successful collaboration between the various
                             stakeholders and government ministries etc.; ii) timely provision of co-financing from the government; iii)
                             continued political will for environmental and marine protection and accompanying positive macroeconomic
                             conditions. These assumptions were made for both objectives.


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



Outputs:

      A Marine Biodiversity Monitoring System was developed and is under implementation in 19 out of 30
         project sites, not achieving the target of being implemented in all project sites. According to the Bank
         team (December 21, 2020) this involved development of a strategy along with integration of existing
         data into SISBio (a biotechnology solutions provider of integrated resource services for water quality
         management, including treatments for wastewater and bulk-water). By project end, 28 percent of
         marine and coastal species had been reevaluated and action plans for 80 percent of threatened
         species were reviewed/developed.
        Managerial effectiveness monitoring systems were adopted and implemented in all project sites,
         achieving the target of being implemented in all 30 PAs supported by the project.
        An evaluation of the conservation status of 257 marine species along with the elaboration, evaluation,
         and monitoring of National Conservation Plans for marine threatened species was conducted. No
         target was provided for this and the two following outputs.
        A national monitoring strategy, several workshops and meetings for the design of the program, and a
         training course for multipliers of the Monitora program were developed.
        Local Management Plans (PLGs) were prepared for the Resex Canavieiras, Cassuruba, and
         Corumbau extractive reserves. The PLGs fused on self-monitoring concerning endangered fishing
         species such as Guaiamum and Budioes.
        12 PA Management Plans were prepared or updated and are under implementation, not achieving the
         target of 16 Protected Area Management Plans.
        21 PAs were supported by the project with management councils instituted by holding periodic
         meetings. A total of 7,325 participants (of which 41 percent were female) joined these meetings,
         surpassing the target of 480 participants.

Outcomes:

      1,525,282 hectares (representing 17 MCPA were brought under enhanced biodiversity protection),
       surpassing the target of 930,000 hectares.
      The size of marine areas brought under biodiversity protection increased from 5.5 hectares in 2013 to
       96.4 hectares in 2020, surpassing the target of 17.5 hectares. Throughout project implementation
       eight new PAs were created and one PA was expanded.
      According to the ICR (p. 11) an analysis of the Sistema de Analise e Monitoramento da Gestao
       (SAMGe)/Management System for Analysis and Monitoring showed an increased access to inputs
       (human, financial, and material resources), better alignment in the management of critical processes,
       and greater impacts of permitted uses (including research, monitoring, and public use).The ICR did
       not provide any quantitative evidence for “increased access” and “greater impacts”.

The project made significant achievements in several areas such as areas being brought under biodiversity
protection while there were shortcomings in implementing a Marine Biodiversity Monitoring System as well as
preparing PA Management Plans



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)




                  OBJECTIVE 2
                  Objective
                  To identify mechanisms for its financial sustainability:

                  Rationale
                  Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as supporting the
                  development of necessary public policies, and costing and financial modeling for PA management were to
                  result in outputs such technical studies being conducted and the Marine Fund being created. These outputs
                  were to result in the outcome of identifying mechanisms for financial sustainability.

                  Outputs:

                        Four technical studies were completed, achieving the target of four studies. The studies included: i)
                         Systematization of Payment by Experience in Environmental Services (PES) in the marine and coastal
                         area; ii) mapping of sources with current potential for funding MCPAs; iii) study of financial demand for
                         the Blue Initiative; and iv) elaboration of a project platform proposal for financing the MCPA
                         system, which later served as the basis for the elaboration of the Marine Fund.
                        A study to identify the financial demand for the Blue Initiative was developed. A tool for detailing the
                         specific costs of Coastal and Marine PAs were still being developed, not achieving the target of an
                         MCPA classification system being defined and costed.
                        A management system (including fiduciary systems) was put in place and was operational and
                         producing satisfactory annual and quarterly reports, achieving the target (ICR p. 30).

                  Outcomes:

                  Four mechanisms to support the long-term sustainability of MCPAs designed and ready for implementation
                  were identified, surpassing the target of two mechanisms. These mechanisms included: i) federal
                  environmental compensation; ii) an agreement between IBAMA and Petrobras for co-financing approx.
                  US$10.5 million; iii) development of a platform of financing under the New Blue Initiative; and iv) development
                  of the Marine Fund with financing in the amount US$8.5 million, which (according to the ICR p. 12) will
                  support the management of MCPAs, monitoring of research centers, and integration actions with
                  communities.

                  The project’s achievement of the second objective was Substantial since activities such as the establishment
                  of the Marine Fund can ensure the flow of financing to support and promote sustainable management of
                  MCPAs after project closing.




                  Rating
                  Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           The achievement of both objectives was Substantial given that the project surpassed the targets of all PDO
           indicators and made critical achievements in expanding the MCPA system and their financial sustainability.



           Overall Efficacy Rating
           Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency:

The PAD (p. 19) did not conduct a traditional economic analysis and only stated that the $18.2 million GEF
investment would leverage an additional US$90 million from other partners over the same period (which did not
materialize). The ICR (p. 13) conducted a cost-benefit analysis based on costs and benefits calculated for
Component 1. For components 2,3, and 4 a qualitative analysis was conducted because the activities did not
focus on increasing the areas of Marine and Coastal Protected Areas but on creating financing mechanisms for
the conservation of the areas, monitoring, and project management.

The cost-benefit analysis made the following assumptions: i) the clearing of mangrove in protected areas would
be ten percent lower than in unprotected areas; ii) a 15-year period to assess the economic feasibility of the
project, alongside a five year project sensitivity assessment; and iii) alternative discount rates of 6 percent and 9
percent were applied. The analysis calculated at a discount rate of 6 percent a Net Present Value (NPV) of
US$19.05 million, a benefit-cost ratio of 17.96 (upper-bound) and at a discount rate of 9 percent a NPV of
US$14.9 million and a benefit cost ratio of 17.64 (upper-bound). The results of this analysis indicate that the first
Component of this project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational Efficiency:

According to the ICR (p. 17) the federal government’s transition during project implementation resulted in delays
and weakened capacity of the PCU. The government’s commitment deteriorated in 2016 resulting in the
approval of the reduction of federal PAs in the Amazon and Atlantic Forest regions (the first such cut since
1998). Also, the Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), the Ministry of Mines and
Energy (MME) and other government entities lacked coordination in terms of moving the biodiversity protection
agenda forward. However, the project did not experience any significant implementation delays. The project’s
implementation period was extended by five months from October 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020 to allow for
finalizing the setup of the Marine Fund, including asset management, M&E, and to oversee its administration.

The economic analysis showed that the project was a worthwhile investment and since the project did not
experience any significant operational inefficiencies, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment the Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework
(FY18-23). Efficacy and Efficiency were Substantial. Taking everything together, the project’s outcome rating is
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/ownership:

According to the ICR (p. 17) the federal government’s transition during project implementation resulted in
delays and weakened capacity of the PCU. The government’s commitment deteriorated in 2016 resulting in
the approval of the reduction of federal PAs in the Amazon and Atlantic Forest regions (the first such cut
since 1998). Also, the Chico Mendes Institute for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio), the Ministry of Mines
and Energy (MME) and other government entities lacked coordination in terms of moving the biodiversity
protection agenda forward. However, in 2020 a new presidential decree to create two new MPAs in the
exclusive economic zones was passed indicating government commitment. Continued political will and
commitment will be critical for ensuring the success of expanded MCPAs.

Partnership: According to the ICR (p. 22) the project was able to engage local communities and ensure
local ownership resulting in local communities playing a crucial role in protecting PA against environmental
incidents. Also, the project was able to build partnerships. For example, the collaboration between MME and
Petrobras resulted in Petrobras providing financing for the project. Also, the partnership developed between
the Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of the Environment allowed for a better enforcement of the rules of




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



PAs and no-take areas. These ongoing partnerships will have a positive impact on the sustainability of
project outcomes.

Financing: The continuous implementation of the conservation finance mechanism will require financing to
ensure its sustainability. According to the ICR (p. 21) ownership by significant partners will be critical for the
benefits of development finance being sustainable. A follow-on project by the Bank (“Sustaining Healthy
Coastal and Marine Ecosystems Project”; financing amount US$15.7 million) is currently being prepared and
will complement the activities of this project. The follow-on project aims to strengthen the management of
the MCPA system and the enabling conditions for the blue economy in Brazil.

Technical capacity: According to the ICR (p. 14) the project was able to build capacity in various institutions
and used existing systems such as FUNBIO and the Grievance Redress Mechanism. Also, the project
contributed to the alignment and involvement of research and conservation centers such as integrating the
National Center for Research and Conservation of Socio-biodiversity Associated with Traditional Peoples
and Communities – CNPT). Furthermore, the project supported the implementation of various national tools
such as the rollout of the initial modules of the SALVE system, which integrates the architecture of
information systems in biodiversity and supports the evaluation of Brazilian fauna. These measures could
positively impact the sustainability of project outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 20) the project took lessons learned from the Amazon Region Protected Areas
  (ARPA) into account. According to the Bank team (December 23, 2020) the project adopted lessons in
  terms of financing strategies and sustainability, governance of the fund, and operating rules of the fund.

  The Bank team identified relevant risks such as moderate risks of social conflicts regarding the creation
  of new PAs due to perceived potential economic losses, and poor past experiences with land tenure
  regularization or resettlement. To mitigate these risks, the Bank conducted consultations on traditional
  communities’ issues, loss of access, and the complete environmental assessment, as well as prepared a
  Process Framework (PF) and an Indigenous Peoples Plan. In order to ensure strong stakeholder
  participation, the project was to utilize a highly participatory approach that was to emphasize consensus
  and community participation in MCPA management. Also, the project design included a sub-component
  for stakeholder engagement. The ICR (p. 20) stated that the project team selected an experienced
  fiduciary partner (FUNBIO) and outlined the governance structure and implementation arrangements for
  the project.

  The design of the project’s Results Framework and M&E approach was sound (see section 9a for more
  details).

  Overall, the shortcomings in project identification and preparation were minor resulting in a Satisfactory
  Quality at Entry rating.




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project benefitted from the continuity of the same Task Team Leader and several team members
 preparing and implementing the project. According to the ICR (p. 17) the Bank team prepared detailed and
 complete Implementation and Supervision Reports and Aide-Memoires, which detailed implementation
 issues and how they were to be addressed.


 The Bank team restructured the project twice to align grant proceeds with the new Bank procurement
 guidelines and to reallocate grant proceeds between disbursement categories and change the closing date.

 The project did not encounter any financial management, procurement or safeguard issues (see section 10
 for more details).

 Bank supervision did not encounter any implementation bottlenecks and benefited from continuity of the
 same Task Team Leader and several team members. Therefore, the quality of supervision rating is
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change was sound and reflected in the results framework. The objective of the
 project was clearly specified. The indicators encompassed all outcomes of the project’s objective and were
 adequate to capture the components’ contributions to achieving the PDO. The majority of indicators
 included in the results framework had a target and when appropriate also a baseline.

 However, several indicators tried to measure several things at once such as the intermediate outcome
 indicator “marine biodiversity monitoring system developed and under implementation in project sites” and
 “protected area management plans a) prepared or updated, and b) under implementation” making an
 evaluation challenging.

 According to the PAD (p. 18) an M&E unit within the PCU in MMA was to be established. Progress was to
 be tracked against the indicators outlined in the results framework and the actions agreed in the project’s

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



 Annual Operation Plans (Planos Operativos Anuais – POA) agreed annually with the Project Operational
 Committee (POC) and partners. Quarterly financial and bi-annual progress and M&E reports were to be
 submitted to the Bank.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank team stated (December 21, 2020) that after the first supervision mission all stakeholders were
  included in the process to update the baseline aiming to make it as accurate as possible. Also, two
  additional indicators were added.

  However, during the Mid-Term Review in August 2018 it turned out that the targets of two of the PDO
  indicators and one intermediate outcome indicator were already surpassed. The ICR stated that this was
  due to conservative estimates of targets during project design, which were based on evidence
  from similar projects, and good collaboration between all implementing partners. Furthermore, the ICR (p.
  19) stated that the indicators closely and accurately measured achievement of project outcomes.

  According to the Bank team (December 21, 2020) all indicators were systematically measured and
  reported. Also, the data was found to be of good quality and the reporting was usually complete and
  frequent. Furthermore, the M&E functions were likely to be sustained after project closure. A newly
  prepared similar Bank-funded project was to build on these functions.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 19) the achievement of all three PDO indicator targets at the time of the Mid-
  Term Review may have had an effect on the second restructuring. The Bank team stated (December 21,
  2020) that low disbursements and currency devaluation allowed the project to establish the Marine
  Fund, which contributed further to achieving the project objectives.

  The sections on the quality of M&E design and implementation were Substantial although the section on
  M&E utilization could have been expanded. Taking everything together, the project's M&E quality rating
  is Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the following Bank safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical
   Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). According




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



  to the ICR (p. 20) the project complied with all safeguards. Also, the project had a Grievance Redress
  Mechanism (GRM), which only filed three cases and dealt with them appropriately.

  According to the Bank team (December 21, 2020) the project did not experience any negative and social
  impacts from the project. Instead, the project supported the cleaning up the major 2019 oil spill along the
  coast of Brazil.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 20) the project submitted regular and detailed financial reports with the majority of
  subprojects being submitted in a timely manner. Also, the Bank team submitted detailed Financial
  Management Implementation Support and Supervision reports on a regular basis. All audits conducted by
  the external auditor had unqualified opinions and were accepted by the Bank. The ICR stated that the
  project’s financial compliance was satisfactory throughout project implementation. Furthermore, the project
  complied with the Bank’s financial covenants. According to the Bank team (December 21, 2020) the project
  did not encounter any financial management staff issues and benefitted from the Brazilian Biodiversity
  Fund (FUNBIO), an experienced fiduciary partner.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 20) the project consisted of many small procurement activities, which took place in
  rural areas and had to be conducted by people who were not familiar with formal or in-depth procurement
  processes. In order to ensure smooth project procurement, the project streamlined processes and
  developed reactive and tailored solutions to any procurement challenges. For example, the project
  developed measures such as local procurement solutions to allow managers to receive competitive
  quotations, which allowed for a faster procurement process. Also, project staff developed a procurement
  marketplace mechanism and developed framework agreements with vendors to accelerate the
  procurement process. In addition, according to the Bank team (December 21, 2020) during the first project
  restructuring the project adopted the revised 2016 World Bank Procurement Guidelines, which facilitated
  the procurement processes and allowed for increased engagement with the communities.

  According to the ICR (p. 20) procurement was Satisfactory throughout project implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other
   ---


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial        Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 21-23) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        Including key stakeholders from as early as project conceptualization can have a
         positive impact on ownership and involvement. In this project, the Bank team
         collaborated with the science department at Petrobras from the beginning onwards. The
         collaboration also included Petrobras providing key data and eventually led to Petrobras
         supporting the project financially.
        Engaging local communities increases longer-term sustainability of project outcomes.
         In this project, in each PA management councils were formed, which developed their own
         regulations. Also, those PAs, which organized large meetings where relevant stakeholders
         were able to comment, achieved better results and stronger commitment as demonstrated in
         the defense of the PAs against environmental incidents.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and included a cost-benefit
analysis of the first and most costly component of the project. Also, the ICR is concise. However, the ICR
provided limited information on critical areas such as procurement, financial management, and M&E
implementation. Also, the lessons learned included were not sufficiently broad to be applicable to other
projects. The ICR is rated Substantial but with caveats.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)




                                                                           Page 14 of 14
