     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022275

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P115566                                   IN: POWERGRID V

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77870                                30-Jun-2015                                      1,000,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Sep-2009                               31-May-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        1,000,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                         1,000,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                     1,000,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Loan Agreement (p.5) dated October 13, 2009, and the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p.4) dated August 25, 2009, the project objective was “to strengthen the transmission system in order
   to increase reliable power exchange between the regions and States of India.”




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



   The formulation of the project objective in Annex 3: Results Framework and Monitoring of the PAD (p.29) was
   slightly different: “To strengthen India’s electricity transmission system in order to increase reliable power
   exchange between regions and states.”

   Note 1: The World Bank (the Bank) has supported the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited’s
   (POWERGRID—the central transmission utility) emergence as one of the world's largest transmission utilities
   through the Power System Development Projects (PSDP) series, of which this project is the fifth. The Bank
   financing for the PSDP series has amounted to US$3.2 billion since 1993 and included intensive capacity-
   building support during POWERGRID's formative years. The Bank has financed following POWERGRID
   projects, with the loan amounts indicated:

           First PSDP for US$350 million (closed in December 2000)
           Second PSDP for US$450 million (closed in June 2006)
           Third PSDP for US$400 million (closed in July 2011)
           Fourth PSDP for U$1,000 million (closed in July 2014)
           Fifth PSDP for US$1,000 million (closed in May 2019)

   Note 2: In this review, a split rating has not been carried out because, according to the Bank guidance, if the
   scope of a project expands, which was the case in this project at the first restructuring (see section 2.e
   Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates below), this supports a decision not
   to apply a split rating and instead to assess the entire project based on the revised outcomes and outcome
   targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-May-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of one component:

   A. Transmission Component. (Appraisal cost: US$1,562 million including US$200 million for physical and
   price contingencies; actual cost: US$2,158 million)

   The component consisted of the construction of five transmission schemes—765 kilovolt (kV) and 400 kV
   transmission lines and large substations:

        a. System strengthening in the Western Region (WR) for Sasan Ultra Mega Power Plant*

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



      b. System strengthening in the Northern Region (NR) for Sasan and Mundra Ultra Mega Power Plants
      c. System strengthening in the WR for Mundra Ultra Mega Power Plant
      d. System strengthening in the Southern Region (SR) and WR for Krishnapatnam Ultra Mega Power
         Plant
      e. Transmission system for the South-West Interconnection.

  * An ultra mega power plant is a large coal-fired thermal power plant that employs super critical technology
  to achieve high fuel efficiency with a capacity of approximately 4,000 megawatt (MW) (PAD, footnote 9,
  p.5).

  Revised Components

  At the first restructuring in May 2013, the first transmission scheme—system strengthening in the Western
  region for Sasan Ultra Mega Power Plant—was moved to the Fourth PSDP to utilize the funds available in
  that project under an additional financing. The fifth transmission scheme— transmission system for the
  South-West Interconnection—was cancelled because the system was found to be redundant. In place of
  these two schemes, two schemes were moved from the Fourth PSDP and four new schemes were added
  resulting in an increase in the number of schemes from five to nine. The nine schemes, after the
  restructuring, were follows:

  System strengthening in the NR for Sasan and Mundra Ultra Mega Power Plants (original)

      a.   System strengthening in the WR for Mundra Ultra Mega Power Plant (original)
      b.   System strengthening in the SR and WR for Krishnapatnam Ultra Mega Power Plant (original)
      c.   Southern Region System Strengthening XVII (SRSS 17) (from the Fourth PSDP)
      d.   Northern Region System Strengthening Scheme XXIV (NRSS 24) (from the Fourth PSDP)
      e.   Northern Region System Strengthening Scheme XXV (NRSS 25) (new)
      f.   Northern Region System Strengthening Scheme XXVI (NRSS 26) (new)
      g.   Eastern Region System Strengthening V (ERSS V) (new)
      h.   Upgradation of ±800kV 3,000 MW High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Bipole* between Champa
           and Kurukshetra to 6,000 MW (called “Champa-Kurukshetra Bipole”)

  * A bipolar link consists of two conductors with opposite charges of negative and positive, respectively,
  compared to the earth. Such bipolar links are commonly used in HVDC systems.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$1,562 million including US$200 million
  for physical and price contingencies. In May 2019, the project closed with a total cost of US$2,158 million.
  The Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR, p.41) gives three reasons for the significant
  increase in project costs: (i) the dropping of one scheme; (ii) the swapping of another scheme with two from
  the Fourth PSDP Additional Financing; and (iii) the addition of five new schemes (See Revised Components
  above).




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



   Financing: At appraisal, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan was
   estimated at US$1,000 million. By project closing in May 2019, the project had disbursed all of the IBRD
   loan.

   Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the POWERGRID’s contribution was estimated at US$562 million. At
   project closing, the POWERGRID’s actual contribution was US$1,158 million because of the increase in
   project scope.

   Restructurings: There were two project restructurings:

         First Restructuring (Level 2 – May 23, 2014): Loans in the amount of US$433 million were saved
          because of the depreciation of the Indian rupee against the US dollar, the cancellation of one of the
          five original schemes, lower prices than those estimated at the appraisal as a result of competitive
          bidding, and the regulatory requirements binding POWERGRID to maintain a debt-equity ratio of
          70:30 for all the schemes financed by the utility (ICR, p.11). To utilize these savings, the project was
          structured to shift schemes between the Fourth and Fifth PSDPs and add new schemes (see
          Revised Components above). The project closing date was extended by 23 months from June 30,
          2015 to May 31, 2017 to allow time for the completion of the new schemes added in this
          restructuring. At the time of the restructuring, it was expected that the original three components
          would have been completed by the original closing date (Restructuring Paper, Report No:
          RES13840, p.6). Because of the project closing date extension, the end target values of the
          indicators, which monitored the system-wide increase in transmission capacity and power exchange
          across regions, were increased.
         Second Restructuring (Level 2 – May 23, 2017): The project closing date was extended by
          another 24 months from May 31, 2017 to May 31, 2019 to allow time for the completion of the four
          schemes that were delayed because of right-of-way (ROW) issues. The four schemes were the
          following: (a) System strengthening in WR for Mundra UMPP (original scheme); (b) NRSS 24; (c)
          ERSS V; and (d) Champa-Kurukshetra Bipole. As was the case in the first restructuring, the end
          target values of indicators were also increased in this restructuring.

   Dates: The project was approved on September 22, 2009. The Loan Agreement was signed on October 13,
   2009, and the loan became effective on January 8, 2010. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in October
   2013. The original closing date was June 30, 2015. In the first and second restructurings, the closing date
   was extended by a total of 47 months, for the reasons cited above, and the project closed on May 31, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was highly relevant to the country context. Given that the project activities consisted of
the construction of major high-voltage transmission lines to strengthen the national transmission system,
the project objective to increase reliable power exchange among the regions and states of India was
outcome-oriented. It was appropriately pitched for the development status of India where demand for
electricity had been growing rapidly in parallel to economic growth. The capacity in the country, which was
strengthened by the earlier projects in the Power Sector Development Projects (PSDP) series that resulted
in the emergence of POWERGRID as an effective transmission company, was sufficient to expect the

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



               achievement of the objectives. The project objective was also aligned with the priorities set in the
               government’s National Electricity Plan for Transmission—the continued development of the national grid for
               providing adequate infrastructure for inter-state transmission of power and facilitation of the underutilized
               generation capacity to generate electricity for transmission from surplus regions to deficit regions (Official
               Gazette, January 15, 2019, p.245).

               The project objective is assessed as highly aligned with the Bank’s current strategy as defined in the
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for India, FY18-FY22. Although the current CPF does not directly
               refer to the Fifth PSDP’s specific objectives, the achievement of the long-term objectives of the PSDP
               series, which was implemented over an almost three-decade period, is already embedded in the Bank’s
               strategy as it shifted over time to address new issues in the power sector. The Bank supported
               POWERGRID in transforming the utility into a well-functioning major transmission company and
               establishing an interconnected national transmission grid operating on a single frequency (CPF, p.84). By
               2017, the target set in the previous Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India, FY13-FY17, i.e., 75,000
               gigawatt hours (GWh) of power exchange under the Fourth and Fifth PSDPs, was exceeded by more than
               14,000 GWh at 89,052 GWh (CPF, p.112). Therefore, the focus of the Bank’s current strategy in energy,
               under “Objective 1.4: Increase access to sustainable energy”, expanded from strengthening the
               transmission network to also supporting the distribution companies to increase access to reliable power,
               scaling up renewable energy generation, and promoting energy efficiency (CPF, pp.52-53).

               The Bank has been a development partner for India in the establishment of its transmission network since
               early 1990s. The Bank has in-depth knowledge of the sector in India and extensive expertise in such
               projects. The last three PSDP projects had the same objective, with some difference in formulation. These
               successive projects were designed to support the POWERGRID’s investment program. The objective was
               sufficiently challenging.

               Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated High as the Bank’s strategy expanded from its focus on
               strengthening the transmission network, which was achieved under the PSDP series, toward more broadly
               increasing access to reliable energy.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the transmission system in order to increase reliable power exchange between the regions and
                             States of India.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



Theory of Change

The project inputs—IBRD loans and counterpart funds—were sufficient to implement the project activities
consisting of the construction of high-voltage transmission lines and related large substations. The project
activities were expected to result in four major transmission schemes in the Western, Southern and Northern
Regions and one scheme connecting the Southern and Western Regions. (The project did not include any
scheme in the Northeastern Region.) The expected intermediate outcomes were increased transmission
capacity both in terms of achieving targeted mega volt amperes (MVA) and circuit kilometers (ckm) to enable
the evacuation of power from three privately owned ultra mega power plants (UMPPs), thus strengthening the
national grid system. The project’s expected outcomes were an increase in reliable power exchange between
the regions and a decrease in the power deficit in the northern load centers through the facilitation of power
flow from the generation plants in the eastern part of the country to these load centers. However, the
indicators were designed to measure these outputs and outcomes at the system level. According to the
information provided by the project team (email dated December 18, 2020), due to the nature of such
transmission systems with multiple connection points and the flow of electricity through the least resistance
path, it was not possible to measure the impact of the project’s outputs on transmission capacity and power
exchange increases at the scheme level. The results framework did not originally include any indicator to
measure the improvement in the reliability of power exchange, because, as the project team commented, the
initial focus of the PSDP series was to connect five separate electricity regions with each other to allow flow of
surplus energy to deficit regions, and the results framework and the indicators were kept consistent for the
comparison of projects. (The project team also commented that as regional grids were integrated, reliability
was measured by the availability of the transmission system and number of trippings per line attributable to
POWERGRID. These were measured as additional indicators.) The project’s theory of change was built on
the critical assumption that there would be sufficient power supply from power producers. Overall, the causal
pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, but the outcomes achieved could not be isolated and
directly attributed to the project’s intervention due to the difficulty in separately measuring the project’s impact
on a highly interconnected transmission system. The first project restructuring in May 2014 resulted in an
increase in the project’s scope without any material effect on the theory of change.

Outputs

Eight of the nine transmission schemes were commissioned before project closing. The list of transmission
lines, loop-in loop-outs (LILO) and substations financed by the project are given below:

a. System strengthening in the Northern Region for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs

        Agra – Sikar 400 kV line
        Sikar – Jaipur 400 kV line
        Sikar – Ratangarh 400 kV line
        Nathpa Jhakri – Abdullapur 400 kV LILO at Panchkula
        Sikar – Ratangarh 220 kV line LILO at Sikar Substation
        Sikar Substation 400/220 kV 2x315 MVA (new)
        Panchkula Substation 400/220 kV 2x315 MVA (new)
        Agra Substation 765/400 kV (extension)
        Ratangarh Substation 400/220 kV (extension)
        Jaipur Substation 400/220 kV (extension)


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



b. System strengthening in the Southern and Western Regions for Krishnapatnam UMPP

       Raichur – Sholapur 765 kV line
       Scholapur – Pune 765 kV line
       Parli – Pune 400 kV line LILO at Pune Substation
       Pune – Aurangabad 400 kV line LILIO at Pune Substation
       Raichur – Gooty 400 kV line LILO at Raichur Substation
       Raichur Substation 765/400 kV 7x500 MVA (new)
       Sholapur Substation 765/400 kV 7x500 MVA (new)
       Kurnool Substation 765/400 kV 7x500 MVA (extension)
       Gooty Substation 400/2200 kV 2x63 MVA reactive (extension)

c. Southern Region System Strengthening XVII (SRSS 17) (from Fourth PSDP)

       Kudgi – Kolhapur 765 kV line
       Kudgi – Narendra 400 kV line
       Kolhapur – Mapusa 400 kV line LILO at Kolhapur Substation.
       Kolhapur Substation 765/400 kV(new)
       Narendra Substation 765/400 kV 1xMVW reactive (extension)
       Kolhapur Substations 400/220 kV 1x125 MVA reactive (extension)

d. Northern Region System Strengthening Scheme XXIV (NRSS 24) (from Fourth PSDP)

     Dehradun – Abdullapur 400 kV line

e. Northern Region System Strengthening Scheme XXV (NRSS 25) (new)

     Jaipur – Bhiwani 765 kV line
     Bhiwani – Hissar 400 kV line
     Moga – Bhiwadi 400 kV line LILO at Hissar

f. Northern Region System Strengthening Scheme XXVI (NRSS 26) (new)

     Meerut – Moga 765 kV line

g. Eastern Region System Strengthening V (ERSS V) (new)

       Rajarhat – Purnea 400 kV line
       Rajarhat – Purnea 400 kV line LILO at Gokarna
       Rajarhat – Purnea 400 kV line LILO at Farakka
       Subhasgram – Jeerat 400 kV line LILO at Rajarhat

h. Champa-Kurukshetra Bipole

     Champa – Kurukshetra Bipole ±800 kV upgrading from 3000 MW to 6000 MW.

                                                                                            Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)




      Champa Pooling Station 765/400 MVA (new)

One scheme, i.e., System Strengthening in Western Region for Mundra UMPP, could not be commissioned
before project closure. The original target commissioning date of this scheme was September 2012. The
construction of the Wardha – Aurangabad 400 kV line under this scheme was delayed because of right-of-
way (ROW) issues. The design of the line was later upgraded to 1,200 kV. The lack of skilled workers to
install a transmission line at 1,200 kV, the highest voltage in the world, was another reason for delay. The
COVID-19 outbreak further slowed the construction activities. According to the information provided by the
project team, the commissioning of this scheme is expected in March 2021.

By March 2019, POWERGRID had increased the length of the transmission lines to 153,218 ckm against the
revised target of 150,000 ckm. The baseline value at appraisal was 79,552 ckm. This indicator was designed
to measure the achievement at the system level. The total length of the 765 kV and 400 kV transmission lines
financed under this project was 4,100 ckm. There was no target set to compare the project’s contribution to
the increase in the length of transmission lines, because project activities were designed as schemes rather
than construction of certain length of transmission lines.

Similarly, the construction or upgrading of substations increased the POWERGRID’s system-wide
transmission capacity to 366,097 MVA against the target of 320,000 MVA. The baseline at appraisal was
79,522 MVA. The project’s contribution was 8,000 MVA, for which there was no target set at appraisal.

Outcomes

The increase in the transmission capacity resulted in an increase in the amount of electricity exchanged
among the regions. At project closing 181,744 GWh of electricity was exchanged between the regions against
the revised target value of 150,000 GWh. The baseline value at appraisal was 46,027 GWh. As mentioned in
the theory of change section above, due to the nature of interconnected transmission systems and the flow of
electricity, the achievements were measured at the system level.

The project team followed two additional indicators to measure the availability and the reliability of the
transmission system. The availability of the system fluctuated between 99.7 percent and 99.92 percent
between 2011 and 2019, which is a very high availability rate. The number of trippings per line attributable to
POWERGRID dropped from 1.27 in 2011 to 0.46 in 2019 (Aide Memoire of the Implementation Support
Mission held in August-September 2018, p.20 and additional information provided by the project team in their
email dated December 18, 2020). Both achievements show that POWERGRID’s operational performance
improved as a result of the transmission scheme investments, which were supported by the Bank under the
PSDP series. All these achievements resulted in a sharp decrease in average peak deficit from 11.9 percent
in 2008/09 to 0.8 percent in 2018/19 and average energy deficit from 11 percent to 0.6 percent in the same
period (ICR, footnote 2, p.2).

With the Bank’s almost three-decade long support, POWERGRID extended and connected the intra-region
transmission network in the country and increased reliable power exchange between regions resulting in a
sharp decrease in the average peak deficit and energy deficit. This project contributed to further
strengthening of the transmission system in the country and achieved all its outcome targets. Therefore, the
efficacy of the achievement of the project objective is rated high.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Eight of nine schemes have been commissioned and the ninth scheme is expected to be commissioned in
                            early 2021. The project achieved all the outcome targets measured at the system level. Overall, the efficacy
                            of the achievement of the project objective is rated High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted separately for each five original schemes. The economic
   benefit of the schemes was estimated by calculating the reduction in system losses to be achieved after the
   completion of the schemes. A better proxy to calculate the economic benefit could have been the measurement
   of incremental power supply through the strengthened system, but, as explained in the PAD (p.65), since other
   factors, other than transmission, such as sub-transmission lines and distribution networks, affect the increase in
   incremental power supply, the economic benefits from this increase could not be attributed to the project’s
   intervention in transmission network. Therefore, estimated reduction in system losses was an appropriate proxy
   for calculating the economic benefits of the project. It was estimated that the project would reduce system losses
   by 526 MW that was equivalent to an energy saving of 8,699 GWh per year (PAD, p.66) To quantify the
   economic benefits of the estimated system loss reductions, the economic price of electricity was derived using
   the opportunity cost of thermal energy saved. In the base case scenario, it was assumed that the schemes
   would be completed as scheduled without any cost escalation and the foreign exchange rate would vary in
   accordance with the Bank’s projections. Based on these assumptions, an economic rate of return (ERR) was
   calculated for each scheme that varied between 16.3 percent and 24.4 percent. These ERRs were higher than
   the hurdle rate of 12 percent that was specified in the official memorandum of the India Country Director on the
   Exchange Rates and Price Contingencies for Project Analysis dated June 29, 2007 (PAD, p.65). In the
   sensitivity analysis, when cost escalation of 10 percent, foreign exchange variation of 10 percent and
   implementation delay of two years were considered together, the ERRs were still above the hurdle rate ranging
   from 12.1 percent to 17.7 percent. Net present values were not calculated at appraisal.

   When the number of transmission schemes increased from five to nine at the first restructuring, ERRs were
   calculated, using the same methodology, for the six schemes added to the project (one original scheme was
   cancelled and one original scheme was moved to the Fourth PSDP; hence, the number of schemes increased to
   nine after the restructuring - see Revised Components in section 2.d Components). The ERRs for the new
   schemes ranged from 13.2 percent to 25.7 percent in the base scenario, higher than the hurdle rate of 12

                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 22
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



percent. In the worst-case scenario, which was defined as cost escalation by 20 percent, delay of two years,
foreign exchange rate lower by 10 percent, the ERRs varied between 9.53 percent and 17.8 percent.

At project closing, the economic analysis, using the same methodology at appraisal and project restructuring,
resulted in lower ERRs. The range for the ERRs was from 8.09 percent to 15.06 percent. Of the nine schemes,
only two had ERRs higher than the hurdle rate of 12 percent. The main reason for lower ERRs are listed as
substantial delays in the commissioning of the schemes—five schemes were delayed by between three and
eight years—and cost escalations ranging from 9 percent to 58 percent (ICR, pp.43-44).

    Economic Rates of Return (ERRs) for Each Scheme (ERR at appraisal or at restructuring; ERR at
closing)

    1. WR for Sasan UMPP:ERR at appraisal was 21.10 percent; ERR was not available at closing because
         this scheme was moved to Fourth PSDP at the restructuring.
    2. WR for Mundra UMPP: ERR decreased from 19.50 percent to 8.09 percent due to delays totaling eight
         years and 34 percent cost escalation. Commissioning in March 2021.
    3. NR for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs: ERR decreased from 16.30 percent to 9.36 percent due to delays of
         four years and six months and 15 percent cost escalation.
    4. SR and WR for Krishnapatnam UMPP: ERR decreased slightly from 16.40 percent to 15.06 percent.
         These ERRs are comparable. There was a delay of one year and six months, but actual cost was 20
         percent lower than the estimated cost.
    5.   South-West Interconnector: ERR at appraisal was 21.10 percent; ERR was not available at closing
         because this scheme was found to be redundant and cancelled at the restructuring.
    6.   SRSS 17: ERR decreased from 18.85 percent to 13.86 percent. There was a delay of seven months, but
         actual cost was 11 percent lower than the estimated cost.
    7.   NRSS 24: ERR decreased from 25.67 percent to 8.84 percent due to delays of three years and four
         months and 58 percent cost escalation.
    8.   NRSS 25: ERR decreased from 13.20 percent to 8.38 percent due to delays of seven months and 24
         percent cost escalation.
    9.   NRSS 26: ERR decreased from 13.33 percent to 9.86 percent. There was a delay of two months and
         cost escalation was nine percent.
   10.   ERSS V: ERR decreased from 14.66 percent to 8.82 percent due to delays of four years and 35 percent
         cost escalation.
   11.   Champa-Kurukshetra Bipole: ERR decreased from 20.97 percent to 11.26 percent due to delays of two
         years and ten months despite a cost reduction of 19 percent.

The ERRs calculated at project closure for the schemes financed-under this project were also lower than the
ERRs calculated for the schemes financed under the Third and Fourth PSDPs. In the Third PSDP, the ERRs
ranged from 12.09 percent to 23.85, all being higher than the hurdle rate of 12 percent (ICR of Third PSDP,
p.37). In the Fourth PSDP, only one scheme, i.e., the Eastern Region System Strengthening 1, had an ERR of
10.86 percent that was under the hurdle rate of 12 percent. The ERRs calculated for other schemes financed
under the Fourth PSDP were above 12 percent and the highest was 24 percent (ICR of Fourth PSDP, p.64).
Compared to the previous two PSDPs, the Fifth PSDP had significantly lower ERRs.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, two alternative indices, i.e., Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) and Internal Rate of Return on
Equity (RoE), were considered for financial analysis of the schemes. Since the cost of POWERGIRD’s debt was

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 22
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



a pass through in tariff, the financial performance of the schemes would be unaffected by the cost of debt.
Therefore, RoE, which is benchmarked against the cost of equity for POWERGRID, was used as a proxy for the
financial appraisal of the schemes (PAD, p.68).

The financial analysis was conducted based on the additional revenue that would be earned by POWERGRID
as a result of the strengthening of the system by the schemes to be financed under the project. The tariff
structure at the time of appraisal was based on the cost-plus basis and the tariff determined in April 2009 that
was to be valid for the following five years was used in the RoE calculations. The calculations for the original five
schemes resulted in RoEs ranging from 20.1 percent to 22.5 percent at the base case scenarios. These RoEs
were higher than the cost of equity of 15.50 percent for POWERGRID.

At the first restructuring, same methodology was used to calculate the RoEs for the additional six schemes. The
RoEs ranged from 15.68 percent to 20.90 percent, which were also higher than the hurdle rate of 15.50 percent.

At project closure, the RoEs were mostly lower than the RoEs calculated at appraisal or the project restructuring
because of significant delays in commissioning of the schemes and cost escalations. The RoEs at project
closure varied between 10.16 percent and 21.22 percent. Of the nine schemes, five had RoEs lower than the
hurdle rate of 15.5 percent.

    Returns on Equity (RoEs) for Each Scheme (RoE at appraisal or at restructuring; RoE at closing)

    1. WR for Sasan UMPP: RoE at appraisal was 20.80 percent; RoE was not available at closing because
         this scheme was moved to Fourth PSDP at the restructuring.
    2.   WR for Mundra UMPP: RoE decreased from 21.50 percent to 10.16 percent due to delays totaling eight
         years and 34 percent cost escalation. Commissioning in March 2021.
    3.   NR for Sasan and Mundra UMPPs: RoE decreased from 22.50 percent to 11.16 percent due to delays of
         four years and six months and 15 percent cost escalation.
    4.   SR and WR for Krishnapatnam UMPP: RoE decreased slightly from 20.20 percent to 17.94 percent.
         These RoEs are comparable. There was a delay of one year and six months, but actual cost was 20
         percent lower than the estimated cost.
    5.   South-West Interconnector: RoE at appraisal was 21.90 percent; RoE was not available at closing
         because this scheme was found to be redundant and cancelled at the restructuring.
    6.   SRSS 17: RoE slightly increased from 19.53 percent to 21.22 percent. There was a delay of seven
         months, but actual cost was 11 percent lower than the estimated cost.
    7.   NRSS 24: RoE decreased from 15.68 percent to 14.58 percent. These RoEs are comparable despite a
         delay of three years and four months and 58 percent cost escalation.
    8.   NRSS 25: RoE decreased from 20.90 percent to 15.40 percent due to delays of seven months and 24
         percent cost escalation.
    9.   NRSS 26: RoE decreased from 19.25 percent to 16.73 percent. There was a delay of two months and
         cost escalation was nine percent.
   10.   ERSS V: RoE decreased from 18.36 percent to 10.72 percent due to delays of four years and 35 percent
         cost escalation.
   11.   Champa-Kurukshetra Bipole: RoE slightly decreased from 16.46 percent to 15.49 percent. These are
         comparable RoEs. There was a delay of two years and ten months, but actual cost was 19 percent lower
         than the estimated cost.

The RoEs calculated at project closure for the schemes financed-under this project were also lower than the
RoEs calculated for the schemes financed under the Third and Fourth PSDPs. In the Third PSDP, the RoEs

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



varied between 15.76 percent to 25.96, all being higher than the hurdle rate of 15.5 percent (ICR of Third PSDP,
p.45). In the Fourth PSDP, two schemes, i.e., the Eastern Region System Strengthening 1 and Western Region
System Strengthening 2, had RoEs of 14.02 percent and 15.38 percent, respectively, that were under the hurdle
rate of 15.5 percent. The RoEs calculated for other four schemes financed under the Fourth PSDP were above
15.5 percent and the highest was 29.08 percent (ICR of Fourth PSDP, p.72). Compared to the previous two
PSDPs, the Fifth PSDP had significantly lower RoEs.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project implementation was adversely impacted by the right-of-way and forest clearance issues. According
to the information provided by the project team, landowners were compensated by 85 percent of the land value
under the transmission towers and 15 percent under the transmission lines starting from 2015 following the
issuance of the guidelines by the Ministry of Power to address ROW issues. Despite these compensations,
ROW issues continued to delay the construction works. Some landowners were completely against the
installation of transmission lines over their lands believing that those lines were harmful to childbirth and caused
radioactive harm on humans (ICR, p.32). Some other landowners were not satisfied with the compensation
amount. Such ROW issues delayed the commissioning of most of the schemes by more than couple of years
(see Table 1 or Table 2 for the duration of delays in commissioning of the transmission lines). Delays in forest
clearance also adversely affected project implementation. For example, for the NRSS 25 scheme the forest
clearance was approved 15 months after the submission of the proposal (ICR, p.45). The adverse impact of
these issues on project efficiency were adequately captured under economic and financial analyses that
resulted in lower ERRs and RoEs.

Overall, because of the major delays and the significant decrease in the ERRs and RoEs of the schemes
compared to both the estimates at appraisal and project restructuring and those of the Third and Fourth PSDPs,
the efficiency of this project is rated Modest.

Note: The highest ERR at project closing, in a range of ERRs for the schemes, is entered below with its
corresponding ERR at appraisal.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  25.67
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               8.84
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



6. Outcome

The relevance of the project objectives is rated high. The project achieved all the outcome targets measured at
the system level. The efficacy of the achievement of the project objective is rated high. The efficiency of the
project is rated modest because of the major implementation delays and the economic rates of return (ERRs)
and returns on equity (ROEs) that were calculated for economic analysis and financial analysis, respectively,
were substantially lower than the estimates at appraisal and the project restructuring, and most of them were
lower than their respective hurdle rates of 12 percent and 15.5 percent. The ERRs and RoEs were also lower
than those calculated for the Third and Fourth PSDPs at their closure. Overall, the outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory, in line with the OPCS and IEG guidelines for deriving outcome ratings [Bank Guidance, Appendix
H. Deriving the Overall Outcome Rating, p.38).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The technical and operational risk is low. POWERGRID is an operationally well-established global scale
utility. It has highly sufficient technical capacity to operate and maintain high voltage transmission lines.
POWERGRID also leads the transmission sector with 800 kV transmission lines and is about to complete the
first 1,200 kV transmission line under this project. POWERGRID has been able to maintain a system
availability rate of at least 99.7 percent since 2011. The operational structure has been strengthened through
Integrated Project Management and Control Systems. If the transmission network investments do not
continue to match the increase in electricity demand, this might result in an overloading of the transmission
system, but given the past performance of POWERGRID in expanding the transmission network and entry of
the private companies in the transmission sector, this is unlikely to happen.

The institutional risk is negligible. POWERGRID has continuously improved its corporate management
system. Its institutional structure has been strengthened through Integrated Project Management and Control
Systems, and Enterprise Resource Planning to improve corporate governance and financial accountability
(ICR, p.20). POWERGRID has been listed on the Indian Stock Exchange since 2007; therefore, it is subject
to certain reporting obligations ensuring transparency in its management. The utility has a high institutional
capacity and shares its expertise through international consulting and construction service for transmission
projects in other countries (ICR, p.6).

The financial risk is low, but the utility may face some short-term cash flow problems because of the
COVID pandemic. The current cost-plus tariff regime ensures sufficient revenue generation for
POWERGRID. The tariff regime is designed based on the availability of the transmission system; therefore,
POWERGIRD’s revenues are not affected by any decrease in the electricity consumption. However, the
utility may face some cash flow problems because of non-payment by off-taking state utilities that face a
decrease in their revenues because of a drop in electricity demand during the pandemic. Overall, the utility is
financially highly viable: its debt-equity ratio has been always less than 80:20, and the self-financing ratio has
been greater than 20 percent (ICR, p.18).




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goal of developing India’s national transmission system to transfer power more
  reliably from generation centers to high load centers was of high strategic priority. The project’s approach
  was straightforward, i.e., construction of power transmission schemes consisting of high voltage
  transmission lines and substations. The technical aspects of the project were sound. Project
  implementation plans were prepared in advance with detailed description of the investment subprojects
  (ICR, p.27). As a repeater project under the programmatic engagement to develop the power system in
  the country, the project benefited from the already existing implementation arrangements and fiduciary
  arrangements. As a well-established transmission utility, POWERGRID had sufficient institutional
  capacity to implement the project. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements of the previous
  projects were continued in this project, too, supported by additional indicators, such as trippings and
  system availability, to measure the reliability of the system. The overall risk assessment was satisfactory,
  but the risk of implementation delays stemming from the right-of-way (ROW) issues was not identified at
  appraisal, although ROW issues had been reported in the project appraisal documents and ICRs of the
  Third and Fourth PSDPs. Additionally, the social and environmental safeguards risk was not adequately
  identified. This risk was rated low at appraisal because it was noted in the project appraisal document
  that POWERGRID had been satisfactorily applying its Environmental and Social Policy and Procedures
  (ESPP) in all its investment projects (PAD, p.11).

  Overall, because of the shortcomings in the identification of ROW risk and the environmental safeguard
  risk, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory rather than highly satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were 14 supervision missions, some including site visits, during the ten-year project implementation
 period. The Bank’s local office staff had regular contacts with POWERGRID and other relevant
 governmental entities, such as the Ministry of Power and the Ministry of Finance. The performance
 reporting in the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoirs prepared after each
 supervision mission was candid and of high quality. However, some ISRs were prepared based on desk
 reviews. Such ISRs provided updated information about investments’ progress, but other sections of the
 reports were mostly repetition of the previous ISRs. The project team’s supervision of the fiduciary aspects
 of the project was adequate. Some project-financed materials were diverted to non-Bank project sites, but
 these diversions were not reported in the financial statements. The project team took necessary measures
 to ensure POWERGRID’s compliance with the Bank’s fiduciary requirements (for details see section 10.
 Other Issues, b. Fiduciary Compliance, Financial Management below). The project team was also proactive
 in facilitating project implementation by resolving technical design and procurement related issues. Such
 delays were mostly because of the use of advanced technologies, such as 765 kV transmission lines, that

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



 required lengthy but necessary talks with potential international vendors (for details see section 10. Other
 Issues, b. Fiduciary Compliance, Procurement below).

 The right-of-way issues adversely affected project implementation. This was a complex issue, the solution
 of which required the involvement of the federal government and state governments. According to the
 additional information provided by the project team in their note dated March 3, 2021, the project team
 followed up these issues at multiple administrative levels, and these efforts resulted in the issuance of an
 opinion by the Attorney General of India (the primary lawyer in the federal government) that allowed
 POWERGRID to process the ROW compensations. The project team’s involvement in the ROW issues
 was also instrumental in the adoption of the compensation guidelines but implementation of those
 guidelines was not uniform across states, which was beyond the control of the project team. Investments
 were delayed for multiple years because of these ROW issues (for details see 10. Other Issues, a.
 Safeguards, Involuntary Resettlements below). Additionally, the project was not compliant with the Bank’s
 requirements in ensuring adequate accommodation for workers at labor camps during project
 implementation (for details see 10. Other Issues, a. Safeguards, Environmental Assessment below).
 According to the additional information provided by the project team, beginning with the supervision
 mission in September 2013, some shortcomings were observed in selected project sites, and the project
 team supported POWERGRID to bring the conditions at the labor camps in accordance with the Bank’s
 safeguard policy requirements. The support was through ensuring regular inspection of the implementation
 of contractual obligations at project sites, preparation of an action plan to improve the conditions in the
 labor camps and holding sanitization and health related workshops at camps. However, it needs to be
 noted that despite almost a decade of Bank supervision, POWERGRID submitted the action plan in
 January 2018, about one year before project closing, after which the conditions in labor camps started to
 improve (Aide Memoire, September 2018 p.5).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change of the project was sound; the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid
 and direct based on the critical assumption that there would be sufficient power supply. The formulation of
 the project objective to increase reliable power exchange between the regions and states of India was
 straightforward, but the meaning of “reliable” was not clear, nor was it captured by the results framework.
 Because of the nature of transmission systems with multiple connection points and the flow of electricity
 through the least resistance path, indicators were designed to measure the achievements at the system
 level as had been the case in previous PSDPs. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, and
 time bound. Baselines and targets were available for all indicators. POWERGRID had sufficient technical
 capacity and expertise to implement M&E.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)




b. M&E Implementation
  The project benefited from the M&E arrangements of previous PSDPs. POWERGRID implemented M&E
  satisfactorily. The indicators were adequately measured, and the achievements were reported as
  planned. POWERGRID utilized its integrated project control and management system to collect real-time
  data on implementation progress and increases in transmission and transformation capacities. The
  National Load Dispatch Center measured the growth in power exchanges among regions and states.
  Progress in investment activities was reported in quarterly financial monitoring reports. Intermediate-
  outcome and outcome indicators were reported annually. Following the Mid-Term Review in September
  2013, POWERGRID started to measure the availability of the transmission system and the number of
  trippings per line attributable to POWERGRID to capture the improvements in the reliability aspect of the
  project objective. POWERGRID has a well-established M&E system and these functions and processes
  are highly likely to be sustained in the future.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to various stakeholders regularly, such as the Ministry of Power and
  Ministry of Finance. M&E findings were used to adjust project implementation through two restructurings
  and to increase the scope of work. The M&E data supported the outcomes achieved at the system level.
  The discussion was not restricted to the application of inputs or achievement of outputs. The M&E data
  showed that POWERGRID was successful in establishing an interconnected transmission network
  facilitating the flow of power from generation centers to load centers that resulted in a sharp decrease in
  power deficits. This achievement supported the shift in the focus of the Bank’s strategy in the power
  sector from transmission to distribution, renewable energy, and energy efficiency (see section 3.
  Relevance of Objectives).



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an environment Category A under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
   because of its large geographical spread including forest areas. Additionally, the project triggered five
   safeguard policies: Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36).

   At appraisal, the Bank established the equivalence and acceptability of the POWERGRID’s Environment
   and Social Policy and Procedures (ESPP) revised according to the findings of the Bank’s Safeguard
   Diagnostic Review (SDR) for use as a country borrower system with reference to five out of six applicable
   safeguard policies of the Bank (for equivalence analysis see PAD, pp.75-76). The Indigenous Peoples
   (OP/BP 4.10) safeguard policy was excluded because it was not covered by the ESPP. The five safeguard

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



policies were piloted under the Use of Borrower Systems (OP 4.00) policy of the Bank (PAD, p. 73). Both
the SDR and the revised ESPP were disclosed at the Bank’s Infoshop and POWERGRID’s website in June
2009 (PAD, p.18).

At appraisal, it was assessed that POWERGRID had sufficient capacity to implement the ESPP. The
Environment and Social Management Department (ESMD) was headed by an executive director and
included a general manager and seven environment and social specialists. In its nine regional offices,
POWERGRID had separate units for managing social and environmental activities in coordination with the
ESMD at the utility’s head office (PAD pp.16-17). However, there were serious shortcomings during project
implementation in POWERGRID's enforcing of safeguards policies in the labor camps (see Environmental
Assessment below).

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): POWERGRID prepared Final Environment Assessment
Reports (FEARs) for eight schemes out of nine. There were a few months of delay in the submission of the
FEARs for NRSS 24, NRSS 26 and the Southern and Western Regions for Krishnapatnam UMPP scheme
in 2015 because of the heavy workload of the ESMD. Initially, the Champa-Kurukshetra Bipole was
exempted from the preparation of a FEAR since there was no Bank-financed transmission line in this
scheme (Aide Memoire, May 2014, p.39). But a FEAR was prepared in 2017 after the completion of the
transmission line financed by POWERGRID. All FEARs were disclosed on POWERGRID’s website.

The poor labor camp conditions at project sites was a persistent issue during project implementation.
Certain gaps were regularly observed in the accommodation and other facilities for workers against the
environment management plan requirements defined in the FEARs. The issues related to camp sites
consisted of insufficient lighting facilities, lack of beds and fans, lack of separate kitchen, inadequate
number of toilets, absence of bath areas and insufficient drinking water facilities. The Bank’s project team
raised this issue at every supervision mission. POWERGRID agreed to prepare an action plan to improve
the conditions at labor camps and submit it to the Bank before March 2017. Following the delayed
submission of the Action Plan in January 2018, the conditions in the labor camps visited by the Bank’s
project team were observed to have improved, such as in the Kurukshetra Substation camp site (Aide
Memoire, September 2018, p.5).

Contrary to the poor conditions at labor camps, the conditions at work sites were observed to have been
better. Safety awareness programs were implemented. At the sites the Bank’s project team visited workers
were wearing safety equipment, such as helmets and other proper gear. In order to further improve the work
site conditions, POWERGIRD continued with its safety awareness activities and increased its supervision of
the contractors by ESMD and regional offices. Despite these efforts,14 workers lost their lives during project
implementation (Aide Memoire, May 2019, p.6).

The project team confirmed that the project was in overall compliance with the Environmental Assessment
safeguard policy at project closing, but the evidence is insufficient whether each of the construction sites
had been in compliance with this safeguards policy during project implementation.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): POWERGRID utilized tools such as remote sensing and global positioning
system for the selection of the optimum routes for the transmission lines. As a result, protected areas,
important wetlands, important bird and biodiversity areas, and elephant corridors were mostly avoided (ICR,
p.25). For example, the lines for the Agra-Sikar line were re-aligned to avoid the Sariska Tiger reserve




                                                                                                Page 17 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



(Project team’s email dated December 18, 2020). The project team confirmed that the project was compliant
with this safeguard policy.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The ICR did not provide information about this safeguards policy. The
project team confirmed that the project avoided tribal land and did not have any impact on indigenous
peoples.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The ICR did not provide information about this safeguards
policy. The project team confirmed that the project did not have any impact on physical cultural resources.

Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12): Resettlement Action Plans were prepared for substations that
required acquisition of private land. The land acquisition for those substations were completed on a “willing-
buyer, willing-seller” basis. There was no involuntary land acquisition for the project. To decrease the
amount of land to be acquired, POWERGIRD utilized new technologies such as gas-filled substations that
required less land than the conventional air-filled substations (ICR, p.23). However, in some cases, there
were significant delays in land acquisition; for example, the land acquisition for the Pune Substation took
around 32 months (ICR, p.45). The lands of 444 households were acquired for the construction of
substations. This had a temporary adverse impact on the households because of the period between the
acquisition of the lands and the extension of compensation and rehabilitation assistance (ISR No:16, p.6).
By 2017, all land acquisition had been completed, and compensations had been made to the landowners
(ISR No:17, p.5).

On the other hand, the project faced serious right-of-way (ROW) issues that delayed the completion of
some schemes by at least three years (ICR, Annex 7, pp.53-59). During the course of the PSDP series,
ROW issues had gradually become a more serious issue for the implementation of project activities. On
October 15, 2015, the Ministry of Power issued guidelines for states to compensate landowners for ROW
amounting to 85 percent of the value of the land under the transmission line towers and 15 percent for land
falling under the transmission lines. (Before the issuance of these guidelines compensation to landowners
for ROW was not compulsory.) Yet, some states were slow in endorsing and issuing a government order for
the implementation of the guidelines. In other states that endorsed the guidelines there were delays in
payments to landowners (ISR No:16, p.6). ROW issues continued through to project closing and beyond.
The 400 kV Wardha-Aurangabad line (upgradable to 1,200 kV) was still facing ROW issues at the time of
the writing of the ICR; some lines, such as the 400 kV Sikar-Jaipur line, could only be constructed under
police protection against obstruction by villagers (ICR, p.54). To reduce the ROW requirement per MW of
power transfer, POWERGRID implemented measures such as “adoption of higher voltage levels (for
instance, high-voltage direct current in place of high-voltage alternating current), specially designed towers,
synchronization of high-voltage direct current bipoles, and new technologies” (ICR, pp.22-23). The Bank’s
project team commented that as land became more valuable, especially in the urban and peri-urban areas,
ROW issues would likely continue to be a major issue for the implementation of transmission projects, for
which underground lines, although more expensive, could be considered as a solution.

Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Since transmission lines were considered as linear projects, such as roads and
optical fiber lines that require narrow, long strips of land, the requirement to obtain no-objection for forest
clearance from every gram panchayats—the smallest administrative unit in India—was waived in 2013
under the Forest Rights Act. However, some project activities still faced forest clearance issues, such as the
construction of 55 towers out of 247 for the Dehradun-Abdullapur transmission line that were delayed
because of the involvement of three states (Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and Haryana) in the issuance of
forest clearance permissions (Aide Memoire, May 2013, p.12). All schemes were issued necessary


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



  permissions to clear forest if needed but in some cases, such as NRSS 24 and NRSS 25, significant delays
  adversely affected project implementation (ICR, p.45). The impact of the project on forests was minimized
  through avoidance of such areas when the routes of the transmission lines were designed. For example, 45
  hectares of forest area was avoided when the Scholapur-Pune line was realigned (Aide Memoire, July
  2015, p.11). No project activity that required forest clearance started before the issuance of the permission
  to clear the forest. The project was compliant with the Forests safeguard policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  POWERGRID had sufficient institutional capacity for financial management. The project benefited from the
  financial management arrangements established in previous PSDP projects. Financial management was
  further strengthened by the use of enterprise resource planning (ERP) aimed at improving POWERGRID’s
  corporate governance and financial accountability (ICR, p.20). Financial monitoring reports were submitted
  to the Bank quarterly. The utility complied with the financial covenant targets for debt-equity ratio (less than
  80:20), the self-financing ratio (minimum 20 percent) and payment of arrears (three months of billing)
  throughout project implementation between 2009 and 2019 (ICR, p.18). The project team confirmed that
  there were no issues with counterpart funding or flow of funds. Independent audit reports were also
  submitted on time, but those reports were qualified between 2013 and 2015. Some materials purchased
  under the project were diverted to non-Bank financed sites and these diversions were not disclosed in the
  financial statements (Project team’s email dated December 18, 2020). There were two reasons for this so-
  called “loaning of material between sites”: (a) delays in project activities in the Bank-financed sites because
  of right-of-way issues; and (b) the POWERGRID’s internal auditor’s recommendation that the utility should
  reduce the US$1.8 billion work in progress to avoid ordered material lying in stores not being utilized or left
  to corrode. POWERGRID provided written assurances to the Bank that diverted material would be
  replenished as soon as possible and if they were not replenished, the money used to purchase those
  materials would be refunded to the Bank. Additionally, new requirements were added to the external audit
  reports detailing the name of the scheme, and the description, quantity, value, and movement of the
  materials. The materials were returned to Bank-financed sites by 2015. Lastly, the project team confirmed
  that all project funds were accounted for at project closing.

  Procurement

  POWERGRID has sufficient institutional capacity to implement procurement in accordance with the Bank’s
  requirements. POWERGRID used standard bidding documents for various package categories prepared in
  consultation with the Bank under the PSDP series incorporating package-specific changes as needed
  (ICR, p.33). There were some minor delays in procurement. The contract for the new Kolhapur substation
  had to be rebid after the notice of award was issued because of a disagreement on the scope of work. The
  contract was awarded with one-year delay (ICR, p.44). Introduction of new technologies, such as the 765
  kV transmission system that was new to the country, necessitated bid submission deadline extensions
  after factoring in the observations of the vendors that were established outside of the country. The
  procurement documents were revised to encourage such vendors to establish their operation and
  maintenance facilities in the country (Project team email dated December 18, 2020). Procurement was



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



   completed by July 2015. The entire loan proceeds were committed and later disbursed in accordance with
   the Bank guidelines (Aide Memoire, July 2015, p.20).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Relevance of objectives is rated
                                                                              high. The efficacy of the
                                                                              achievement of the project
                                                                              objective is rated high. Because
                                                                              of the right-of-way and forest
                                                                              clearance issues, completion of
                                                                              schemes was significantly
                                                                              delayed that resulted in
                                                                              economic rates of returns for
Outcome                       Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   most of the schemes being
                                                                              lower than the hurdle rate of 12
                                                                              percent. Therefore, the
                                                                              efficiency of the project is rated
                                                                              modest. Overall, the outcome
                                                                              rating is moderately satisfactory
                                                                              in line with OPCS guidelines for
                                                                              rating overall project outcome
                                                                              based on these three sub-
                                                                              ratings.
                                                                              The ICR rated quality at entry
                                                                              highly satisfactory and quality of
                                                                              supervision satisfactory that
                                                                              should have resulted in a
Bank Performance              Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              satisfactory rating for Bank
                                                                              performance according to the
                                                                              Bank guidance, but this rating
                                                                              was erroneously entered as
                                                                              highly satisfactory to the system.


                                                                                                Page 20 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



                                                                               This review rates quality at entry
                                                                               satisfactory, not highly
                                                                               satisfactory, because of
                                                                               shortcomings in identifying risks
                                                                               related to right-of-way issues
                                                                               and environmental safeguards,
                                                                               and the quality of supervision as
                                                                               satisfactory. Overall, the Bank
                                                                               performance is rated
                                                                               satisfactory.
Quality of M&E                 High                  High

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn two lessons.

Right-of-way (ROW) issues need to be identified and addressed significantly before
implementation start-up in order to avoid delays that lower the project’s economic efficiency
and create financial risks, both of which deter the achievement of the project objective.
Almost all schemes financed under the project faced serious ROW issues causing lengthy
implementation delays. ROW issues had already started during the implementation of Third PSDP.
After the adoption of government guidelines in 2015 that made ROW payments compulsory to
landlords, there were some improvements in project implementation, but ROW issues continued
beyond project closing because of delays in states’ adoption of these guidelines in their respective
jurisdictions or in processing payments. Delays caused by ROW issues resulted in economic rates
of return that were lower than the hurdle rate of 12 percent for most of the schemes.

When Borrower systems are used, Borrowers need to ensure adequate enforcement of its
own safeguard policies and procedures in a manner that also achieves compliance with the
requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policies. In this project, the Bank piloted the Use of
Borrower Systems for environmental and social policies. POWERGRID’s Environmental and Social
Policy and Procedures were found to be acceptable by the Bank, but evidence shows that
enforcement of these policies to ensure adequate accommodation facilities and labor practices for
workers was not satisfactory. The camps did not have sufficient beds for workers, some camps
lacked adequate water source or number of restrooms, some did not have separate kitchens and
bath areas did not exist.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE




                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: POWERGRID V (P115566)



  Please Explain
  The Bank has supported POWERGRID through five projects under the PSDP series since 1993. An
  assessment of this programmatic engagement should provide invaluable information about the development
  impact of the Bank’s long-term engagement in the power transmission sector that could be used in designing
  similar interventions in other countries or regions.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. The narrative loosely supports the ratings and there
are some gaps. For example, the narrative in the efficiency section does not support a substantial rating, and it
is more descriptive rather than evaluative. The report covers a wide range of issues including POWERGRID’s
activities and achievement are not directly related to the project, such as the utility’s corporate social
responsibility activities or its first public offering of its shares in the local stock exchange. Such additional non-
project related information made the assessment of the project difficult. The ICR does not adequately report
how activities informed outcomes which in turn is linked to the impact of the project’s intervention, except Annex
7 Detailed Description of the Schemes. This annex provides more information about the outputs and issues the
project was faced with than does the main text. The ICR is internally consistent but there are shortcomings in
following the Bank guidance. The relevance of objectives is not assessed based on the Bank strategy that was
current at the time of project closure. The ICR does not report the revisions to the project component.
Operational and administrative efficiency of the project is not adequately assessed. The ICR does not report the
key issues that affected project implementation, such as right-of-way issues and delays in procurement
because of the application of new technologies. The safeguards and fiduciary sections of the report are weak.
The ICR does not report the issues at labor camps and diversion of project-financed material to non-Bank
project sites although the supervision mission reports and aide memoires include detailed information about
what these issues were and how they were solved. The financial management section does not provide
information about the financial covenants; they are mentioned in the Efficiency section. The lessons do not
respond to specific experiences and findings of the project but provides an overview of the PSDP series.
Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                       Page 22 of 22
