     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0022284

1. Project Data



 Project ID                            Project Name
 P133592                               ET-Local Govt Dev Project II

 Country                               Practice Area(Lead)                          Additional Financing
 Ethiopia                              Urban, Resilience and Land                   P161436


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)                      Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54350                             31-Dec-2019                                               347,436,379.27

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 02-May-2014                           31-Dec-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            380,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             380,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         347,436,379.27                                               0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Alexandra Christina         Victoria Alexeeva                IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Horst



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 39),
   the Program Development Objective (PDO) was "to assist the recipient in enhancing the institutional
   performance of participating urban local governments (ULGs) in developing and sustaining urban
   infrastructure services."
   This Program for Results (PforR) program was the second phase of the Urban Local Government
   Development Program (ULGDP Phase II). The first phase of the ULGDP was a US$416 million investment
   project that financed grants for infrastructure investments in Addis Ababa and 18 urban local governments
   (ULGs) and capacity building grants for both these ULGs and the national Ministry of Urban Development

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



   Housing and Construction (MUDHC) (ICR, paragraph 7). This Phase II PforR supported 26 new ULGs
   bringing to 44 the ULGs assisted under the program. Ethiopia has 85 ULGs (PAD, paragraph 5). Phase II
   program activities would build the capacity of one federal agency, 4 regional entities, and 44 ULGs,
   supported by a team of experts (ICR, paragraph 17).
   Outcomes were expressed as improved scores in three Results Areas: (1) Institutional
   Performance; (2) Infrastructure and Maintenance; and (3) Capacity Building. Participating ULGs received two
   sets of scores in their Annual Performance Assessments (APAs). First, for indicators associated with
   institutional performance and second, with achieving infrastructure service targets. The APAs were carried
   out by an independent consultant (ICR, footnote 5, paragraphs 72,79, and Annexes 6 and 7).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No


c. Components
   Components were classified according to two results areas:
   1. Institutional performance at the federal, regional, and local levels. (US$57.0 million at appraisal,
   US$60.1 million actual) would support capacity building at the regional level (US$30 million at appraisal,
   US$11.7 million actual) and at the federal level through support to the Ministry of Urban Development,
   Housing, and Construction (MUDHC) (US$27 million at appraisal, US$48.4 million actual). This component
   would finance federal and regional mobile teams who would assist government agencies at the federal,
   regional, and local levels to enhance their capacity in the areas of participatory urban planning, budgeting,
   revenue generation, financial, infrastructure asset, and contract management, procurement, environmental
   and social safeguards, audit, ethics, fraud and corruption, and monitoring and evaluation, among others. In
   addition, this component would finance participation in training, seminars, conferences, and study tours to
   enhance human resources in information technology and accounting systems, among others (PAD, Table
   7 and ICR, Annex 8). According to the Task Team, resources were shifted to those activities that
   supported Disbursement Linked Indicators that were over performing. Four Disbursement Linked Indicators
   (DLIs 4-7) supported this results area to improved institutional performance of regional entities to enhance
   the capacity of participating ULGs while another two (DLIs 8-9) reflected support for the federal level to
   enhance the capacity of both the regions and participant ULGs.
   2. Investments in urban infrastructure and services. (US$323.0 million at appraisal, US$287.3 million
   actual) supported the delivery of infrastructure, such as urban roads, drainage, sanitation services, public
   parks, street lighting; its maintenance, while supporting job creation. These investments demonstrated
   value for money and were based on the respective capital investment plans (CIPs) and annual action plans
   (AAPs) of participating Urban Local Governments (ULGs). DLI 3 supported this results area (ICR, Figure
   1).




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



   Program Cost: The total project cost was US$380 million. The credit disbursed a total of US$347.4
   million. According to the Task Team, exchange rate losses accounted for the US$32.6 million difference.
   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) fully funded this program under the
   PforR financing instrument for US$380 million.
   Borrower Contribution: The borrower committed and disbursed a total contribution of US$176 million.
   Commitment was equal to 31.7 percent of overall program cost at appraisal and 33.6 percent at closing.
   Dates: The project was approved on May 2, 2014 and became effective on July 11, 2014. A Mid Term
   Review was conducted on July 11, 2017. The project closed on December 31, 2019, as planned. No
   restructurings took place.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Alignment with Urban Development Strategy. Ethiopia experienced rapid urbanization in the past two
  decades (Ethiopia Urbanization Review, World Bank Group and Cities Alliance, paragraph 3). Ethiopia’s
  urban population has more than doubled from 7.3 million in 1994 to an estimated 16.7 million in 2014
  (Central Statistical Agency, Population and Housing Census (2007) and Population Projection of Ethiopia for
  All Regions at Woreda Level (Woreda describes the district level, the third level of administrative division of
  regional state in Ethiopia) from 2014 – 2017 (2013). With the annual rate of urbanization projected to
  average 5.4 percent over the coming decade, 30 percent of Ethiopians were anticipated to live in urban
  areas by 2028, tripling its urban population by 2034 (World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
  Ethiopia 2018-2022 (2017), page 25). The government recognized these urban areas as key contributors to
  the country's growth. However, institutional systems and urban infrastructure did not match the pace of
  urbanization. Urban local governments (ULGs) faced challenges in planning and budgeting, fiduciary
  systems, staff recruitment, complaint mechanisms, own resource mobilization, land management,
  maintaining transparency in accountability. In 2005, Ethiopia issued its first Urban Development Policy Note.
  This was followed by the second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and a Growth and Transformation Plan
  for 2010-2015. Both plans, acknowledging urban development contribution to the country's growth,
  highlighted addressing capacity gaps to optimize this contribution.
  The PDO was relevant and directly contributed to the government's urban development objectives presented
  in its Second Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP II, 2015-2020) and the Ethiopian Cities Sustainable
  Prosperity Goal (2015-2025). These plans defined ways to expand the quality and financing of urban
  infrastructure and strengthen urban governance. The PDO was also relevant to mobilizing citizen
  participation to achieve development outcomes.
  The PDO was also relevant to three focus areas of the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
  for Ethiopia (FY18-FY22). These included productivity and private sector development for structural
  transformation, building resilience and inclusiveness, and supporting accountability and fighting
  corruption. This program's support to urban infrastructure and institutional performance addressed 8 of the
  15 economic and social development objectives of the CPF.
  World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience. The World Bank has supported the government's
  efforts in decentralization and urban policy since 2000. The Capacity Building for Decentralized Service

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



       Delivery project in 2003, the Public Sector Capacity Building Program in 2004, and the Urban Local
       Government Development Program (ULGDP) Phase I in 2008. The ULGDP Phase II followed the first phase,
       but this time under a PforR financing mechanism.
       Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR Instrument. The PDO was outcome oriented, designed to build
       on the results of the preceding Urban Local Government Development Project (ULGDP) Phase I. Phase I
       focused on building the capacity of 19 ULGs (including the capital Addis Ababa) to deliver infrastructure
       services and support the capacity needs of the federal Ministry of Urban Development, Housing, and
       Construction (MUDHC) to support these ULGs As a result, Phase II focused capacity building needs not just
       at two but at all three levels of government, 44 local, 4 regional, and one federal agency. The country's
       capacity in technical, fiduciary, environmental and social systems were assessed to inform the scope,
       targets, and results area of the program. The PDO was pitched at the level that recognized the development
       needs of the government at the local, regional, and federal levels. The program would build capacity at the
       federal, regional, and local levels of government. A team of experts supported implementation at the federal
       and four regional levels. The PforR instrument was adequate as it framed systematic incentive mechanisms
       to trigger results-based financing, avoiding duplication of efforts while scaling up the government program.
       By using existing federal, regional, and local government systems in public financial management, social and
       environmental management, and procurement systems allowed concerted efforts to strengthen and
       integrate these. The instrument facilitated the adoption of a direct, incentive-driven approach to achieve the
       PDO (ICR, paragraph 10). For example, if cities received scores on their APA higher than target, they would
       receive an accelerated amount of 20 percent in addition to their regular allocation (ICR, paragraph 92). The
       three Results Area, (1) Institutional Performance; (2) Infrastructure and Maintenance; and (3) Capacity
       Building addressed the country's capacity in meeting the challenges of rapid urbanization.
       In summary, the relevance of objective is rated substantial based on the program components and its
       objective synchronized to address the development problems posed by the country's plans and the World
       Bank's response to these needs as embodied in the current CPF. The PDO expressed in this second phase,
       with a focus on enhancing capacity of all levels of government to support urban ULGs provide a good
       foundation to reach the rest of the ULGs. The existing capacity of the country at all levels, local, regional, and
       federal, were appropriately addressed in the formulation of the PDO. The PforR instrument had the
       appropriate mechanisms that used incentives to trigger disbursements and achieve the PDO.



       Rating
       Substantial
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To enhance the institutional performance of participating urban local governments (ULGs) in developing and
     sustaining urban infrastructure services.



                                                                                                           Page 4 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)




Rationale
Theory of Change: A theory of change (TOC) was re-constructed during the completion of the ICR.
The participating ULGs were provided fiscal incentives and technical support to build their capacity and
enhance institutional performance to improve the provision of infrastructure investments and related service
delivery. At the same time, regional entities were assisted in the conduct of their respective mandates to
deliver support and further enhance the institutional performance of the ULGs under their jurisdiction. The
regional entities assisted ULGs in compliance with the requirements for financial audit, environmental and
social safeguards, procurement, and own-source revenue mobilization. In addition, the federal entity
implementing the program also provided support in capacity building planning and budgeting to both lower
level government entities, i.e., the region and the local governments, to boost local government performance.
These capacity inputs allowed the local governments to arrive at outputs such as mobilizing own source
revenues and increase their investments in infrastructure for their constituents. These sub-projects were
expected to contribute to creating jobs, including those using labor-intensive techniques,
and increase incomes. These inputs and outputs would further enhance the ULGs institutional performance
measured through scores in the Annual Performance Assessment (APA). Two critical assumptions marked
this TOC: the first related to the timely conduct of the APAs, funds were transferred on time, in a transparent
and predictable manner. The second referred to the infrastructure investments, that there were no corrupt
practices experienced during the contracting process, that there was no misuse of funds, and that local
contractors had sufficient capacity to carry out the works (ICR, Figure 1). During implementation, the
Regional Procurement Agency would conduct periodic audits of ULG procurement to improve the
transparency of the process. The regions carrying out these audits would strengthen the accountability and
oversight systems. A key related assumption was the adequacy of the technical design of the contracted
works, which would affect the quality of completed investments. The results area of enhanced institutional
capacity of ULGs as an outcome of this objective was reflected in DLI 2 in direct support of ULGs, DLIs 4-7
in support of the actions of regional entities, and DLIs 8 and 9 in support of the actions of the federal agency
to enhance the institutional capacity of both the region and ULGs. DLI 3 supported the results area covering
infrastructure and maintenance.
OUTPUTS
The following targets were exceeded:

  • 25 participating ULGs were found to have clean or unqualified audits (baseline 0, original target 22). DLI
  5 was associated with this output.
  • The project benefited a total of 4,400,000 direct beneficiaries, 50 percent of whom were female,
  meeting targets. These beneficiaries, equivalent to the number of residents in the participating ULGs, were
  provided access to all-season roads within a 500-meter range (original target 4,300,000)
  • 42 participating ULGs executed at least 80 percent of their operations and maintenance (O&M) budget
  (baseline 0, original target 40)
  • 1,299 km of urban cobblestone roads were built or rehabilitated (baseline 0, original target 730 km)
  • 796 km of urban gravel roads were built or rehabilitated (baseline 0, original target 135 km)
  • 9,683 hectares of land were serviced for industry, micro and small enterprises, and housing (baseline 0,
  original target 1,820 hectares)


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



  •   284 hectares of public parks and greenery were constructed (baseline 0, original target 55 hectares)

The following targets were achieved or partly achieved:

  • All 44 participating ULGs had timely audits conducted as planned (baseline 5, original target 44).
  • 34 participating ULGs achieved an increase in own sourced municipal revenue of at least 10 percent
  over the previous year (baseline 0, original target 38, target substantially achieved). Own-source revenues
  came from business taxes, municipal rent, charges and fees resulting from a revenue plan. Own source
  revenue increased from 2.5 billion ETB (Ethiopian local currency) in FY 2016 to 5.1 billion ETB by FY
  2019, based on the government ICR (ICR, footnote 7).
  • All 44 ULGs completed their annual procurement plans (original target 44).
  • At the federal level, MUDHC utilized 63 percent of the budget presented in their annual capacity building
  plans (baseline 0, original target 95 percent)
  • 657,494 jobs were created during construction of the roads, of which 45 percent were female (according
  to the Task Team, there was no original target). This figure was broken down into 485,209 temporary
  jobs created, of which 45 percent were female and another 172,285 permanent jobs, of which 43 percent
  were female.
  • 43 of 44 ULGs had up to date structural plans, with regular land inventories to guide investments.


The following targets were not achieved:

  • The Dire Dawa Millennium Park was not completed but was temporarily occupied by Internally Displaced
  Persons (IDP) who escaped conflict and instability from neighboring regions. According to the ICR, the
  authorities would prepare a resettlement plan for the remaining IDP, sheltering in the Dire Dawa
  Millennium Park to provide safety and basic services while awaiting resettlement in Somalia, and restore
  the use of the park to the its original purpose (ICR, Annex 5).
  • The Dire Dawa slaughterhouse was not completed at closing. Obtaining foreign currency for importation
  of materials for the structure was delayed.
  • No sanitary landfills were completed (baseline 0, original target 13); only design and related studies for
  the new landfills were completed. According to the ICR and as confirmed by the Task Team, during
  implementation, the government and the Bank discouraged further planning or implementation of landfills
  since similar facilities pursued under the previous ULGDP project were not used properly and were
  instead turned into dump sites (ICR, paragraph 52). The government added that the previously completed
  landfills were not operational due to a lack of trained manpower and ULGs inability to import plant and
  machinery to operate them (ICR, Annex 4, paragraph 6). The targets remained in the results framework.

OUTCOMES

  •   Institutional Performance




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



     •  Across all cities, average score reached 91.34 percent (original target 80 percent, target exceeded).
      This achievement was associated with meeting DLI 2 where ULGs have strengthened their institutional
      performance (see DLI 2 for areas assessed and scored).
      • The average score in the APA for achieving urban infrastructure and service targets by participating
      ULGs reached 93.13 percent (original target 80 percent, target exceeded)
      • 43 ULGs had up-to-date structural plans and regular land inventories (target 44, target substantially
      achieved). The conduct of land inventories helped determine revenue potential to assist in mobilizing
      own source revenues.
•   Capacity Building:
      • At the regional level, 10 percent of the regions implemented at least 80 percent of their budgets
      presented in their respective annual capacity building plans (baseline 0, original target 4 percent, target
      exceeded). According to Annex 7 of the ICR, all four regions executed the capacity building plans and
      obtained full allocations. This output was associated with DLI 4, where regional government capacity
      building and support teams were in place and support to urban service delivery was undertaken.
      Achievement was determined on the basis of executing regional governments capacity building plans,
      with four regional support teams in place and fully staffed by 8 team members each. Regional
      Procurement Agency audited ULG procurement to enhance transparency in procurement.
      • 43 ULGs had up-to-date structural plans and regular land inventories (target 44). The conduct of land
      inventories helped determine revenue potential to assist in mobilizing own source revenues.
      • At the local level, 37 of the participating ULGs implemented at least 80 percent of the budget
      presented in their respective annual capacity building plans (baseline 0, original target 40, target
      exceeded)
•   Improved Livelihoods of Communities
      • Infrastructure investments such as roads and bridges, micro and small enterprises, bus shades or
      terminals (as clarified by the Task Team in the February 3, 2021 email to IEG) and slaughterhouses
      led to improved livelihoods in the communities served through better connectivity, enhanced road
      safety, created jobs, enhanced incomes, improved road safety. Cities allocated appropriate land for
      infrastructure investments since ULGs regularly updated land inventories. Data in beneficiary
      assessments also pointed to an appreciation in land value by as much as 24.7 percent during the
      implementation period (ICR, footnote 8). The investments also improved flood protection, sanitation,
      and contributed to positive environmental impacts, such as control of erosion. However, in some
      cases, ULGs were reported to have completed infrastructure investments of poor quality because of
      not having engaged professional design and supervision consultants (ICR, paragraph 111), even as
      the ULGs themselves achieved minimum requirements and complied with the agreed program action
      plan (see Section 11 for Lessons).
      • The targets for the infrastructure investments were all exceeded, but the original targets were set at a
      low level. According to the Task Team, the 26 new participant ULGs lacked baseline data and based
      targets on Phase I experience. Infrastructure services were reported as improved. For example, 52.9
      percent of respondents to the beneficiary assessment confirmed that cobblestones
      improved connectivity, reduced road accidents, reduced travel times, and led to job creation and


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



        business opportunities. However, performance of the infrastructure services delivered was not
        supported by data collected as part of the results framework. The assessment of ULG performance in
        this results area focused mostly on apex institutions and not on the users.
   •   Enhanced Infrastructure Operations and Maintenance
        • Operations and Maintenance (O&M) expenditures increased in more cities, from 36 cities in FY 2015
        to 38 cities in FY 2019 with annual increase in O&M expenditures. O&M expenditure increase during
        the five-year program by 35 percent, from 195 million ETB in FY 2015 to 753 million ETB in FY 2019.
        Five cities in FY 2015 increased to 39 cities in FY 2019 budgeted at least 10 percent of their Capital
        Investment Plan toward O&M. However, not all completed infrastructure investments such as
        slaughterhouses and markets were put into operation because of absent business plans and
        associated O&M arrangements (ICR, paragraph 111) (see Section 11, Lessons below).
   •   Citizen Engagement in Infrastructure Planning
        • As part of minimum conditions, community members were involved in identifying, prioritizing, and
        selecting infrastructure projects. According to the Borrower's ICR, 16 cities of the 44 ULGs who
        participated in the beneficiary assessment noted that community members witnessed the handover
        of completed infrastructure projects (ICR, paragraph 36). In addition, participants indicated that as a
        result of increased business opportunities and jobs, their households were food secure, they were able
        to pay for their utilities, had accumulated household assets, and had saved and invested in business.
        The assessment also reported that 75.6 percent of respondents invested their income generated from
        the project, 76.2 percent acquired household assets and 71.4 percent said they were better positioned
        to pay their children's educational fees. The ICR did not provide data to support these outcomes.

 In summary, the efficacy of the project in achieving this objective expressed as outcomes of the results area
 is rated substantial. Participant ULGs exceeded the target APA score of 80, on average. More importantly,
 ULGs reported an increase in mobilizing own source revenues, demonstrated transparency by disseminating
 information about annual budgets, approved projects, expenditures, audited accounts, and procurement.
 These actions improved institutional performance by fostering transparency and
 facilitating accountability. Participant ULGs exceeded the targets for most of its infrastructure investments.
 Beneficiary assessments were carried out in 16 of the 44 cities after closing and some of the results were
 reported (ICR, footnote 6). Outcomes expressed as expanded connectivity of residents, increase in road
 safety, jobs created and resulting enhanced incomes were reportedly discovered as part of the beneficiary
 assessments. A shortcoming is that no further supporting outcome data was provided. Achievements of
 targets under this objective also led to improved flood protection and raised the standard of living of the
 beneficiary communities. However, no supporting data was provided for user level benefits. The
 performance indicators signifying the achievement of targets under DLI 3 were mostly focused on apex
 institutions and did not report end users assessment (ICR, Annex 7). Targets under sanitary landfill were
 unmet and two other works in Dire Dawa were not completed at closing. Yet, according to the Task Team,
 these works remained in the follow-on program.


 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)




 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 ---
PHREVISEDTBL



      5. Efficiency

               ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


      a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
        and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                    Rate Available?   Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                             0
             Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                             Not Applicable
                                                                                             0
             ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                             Not Applicable

      * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


      6. Outcome

      The relevance of objective is rated substantial based on its direct contribution to government policies and the
      World Bank's program in Ethiopia. The efficacy of the project to achieve the objective is substantial because
      most target indicators were exceeded or achieved with noted shortcomings in a couple of output
      targets. Overall, the outcome of the project is rated satisfactory.


      a.             Outcome Rating
                     Satisfactory


      7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                            Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)




  • Infrastructure Sustainability Risk. The Bank team raised concerns on the quality of some completed sub-
  projects. This problem was not widespread. To mitigate this risk, concerned ULG were advised to undertake
  two corrective measures. One was to hire credible supervision consultants to ensure good quality of completed
  assets. Two was to implement adequate operations and maintenance (O&M) plans to make these investments
  sustainable. Some completed sub-projects lacked O&M plans to be fully operational. To mitigate the decline of
  these assets into disuse, ULGs need to be enjoined to apply sound investment principles such as market
  analysis, business planning, and O&M measures. Evidence of the use of these business practices
  may encourage the private sector to participate in running these ULG assets.

  • Increased influx of refugees fleeing conflict and insecurity in neighboring countries: Some areas, such
  as the Dire Dawa Millennium Park, temporarily housed about 150 internally displaced persons (IDPs) who fled
  the Somali conflict. To mitigate the risk of transforming the park to a permanent refugee camp, MUDHC would
  ask the Dire Dawa and Jijiga authorities to (i) prepare a resettlement plan for the displaced persons; (ii) provide
  for their safety and basic services during the transition; and (iii) revert to the park's original use.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of this ULGDP Phase II was informed by the challenges experienced by the preceding Phase
  I operation. This included the lesson from social accountability, the continued use of the performance-
  based disbursements, and use of the existing federal, regional, and urban local government systems,
  while strengthening these where needed (PAD, paragraphs 36-38). These systems included public
  financial management, social and environmental systems management, and procurement management.
  Design incorporated a structured approach to build capacity at the federal, regional, and local
  government levels. For example, Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) 4-7 served as incentives
  for regional entities to adequately support participating ULGs performance in the areas of timely financial
  audits, urban service delivery, environmental and social safeguards compliance, and resource
  mobilization. However, risks associated with infrastructure investments in sanitary landfills
  investments only noted the need to strengthen environmental safeguards (PAD, paragraph 108). At the
  start of this program, both the federal agency and the Bank discouraged ULGs from planning or
  implementing these landfills due to the problems experienced under the first ULGDP (but not cited in the
  PAD) such as similar facilities not used properly and were turned into dump sites (ICR, paragraph 52)
  or ULGs unable to import the plant and machinery to operate them, shortage of trained manpower (ICR,
  Annex 4). Cities complied and did not include them in their Capital Investments Plans (CIPs) under this
  program, but the indicator and targets remained in the Results Framework. In addition, risks associated
  with the timely conduct of the APAs were not mitigated since initial procurement delays resulted in initial
  delays in some sub-project infrastructure investment implementation.



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



  The PforR financing mechanism was appropriate, as it allowed the use of incentives to achieve results.
  Cities were allocated funds based on achieving target performance scores. As an additional incentive,
  ULGs exceeding performance targets were awarded another 20 percent on top of their allocation based
  on population. As another incentive, beyond the initial assessments, annual assessments of meeting
  Minimum Access Conditions meant that cities had adequate staff and basic systems in place to manage
  the program. At preparation, technical, fiduciary systems, and environmental and social systems, as well
  as risks were adequately assessed. Mitigating measures were identified and included in the Program
  Action Plan (PAP). M&E focal persons were installed at each of the three levels of government. Capacity
  building was supported as part of the incentive mechanism design, as part of meeting minimum access
  conditions assuring sufficient staff throughout the five-year implementation period.
  Implementation arrangements during Phase I differed in Phase II particularly since instead of two levels
  of government, all three levels were involved in the Phase II program - local, regional and federal levels.
  However, some designs from Phase I were retained in Phase II (PAD, paragraph 36). These included
  using independent annual performance assessments to measure performance and results; a
  predetermined list of eligible infrastructure investments to choose from; program funds not usable for
  investments with significant negative environmental impacts or could result in resettling more than 200
  people. Phase II consolidated achievements under Phase I and expanded lessons from social
  accountability. This meant promoting participatory budgeting, transparency in financial transactions and
  publishing local budgets (PAD, paragraph 37). In addition, Phase II design considered the key challenges
  identified under Phase I and introduced changes such as 18 ULGs supported under Phase I would
  receive funding under DLIs 1, 2 and 3 from year one while the new 26 ULGs would receive funding under
  DLI 1 in year one, and DLIs 2 and 3 starting in year two to give these new ULGs a period to catch up with
  their performance. In addition, ULGs would receive disbursement according to their APA scores. New
  targets and results were also added to assessing performance due to new policies and growing
  administrative sophistication of cities (PAD, paragraph 38).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Task Team Leader and most task team members were based in Addis Ababa. This allowed the Task
  Team to work closely with the Bank's Country Management Unit and counterpart entities. The Bank team
  conducted 13 supervision mission over the 5-year implementation period. The team met regularly with
  officials to assess progress during field visits of all 44 ULGs (ICR, paragraph 97). In some cases,
  insecurity and restricted travel to some areas did not allow the task team to address implementation
  challenges. Some infrastructure investments took longer to complete or once completed, some could not
  be operational due to a lack of business or O&M plans (ICR, paragraph 76). The team reviewed program
  progress through independently prepared Quality Assurance Reviews of the Annual Performance
  Assessments of ULGs. These reviews assessed ULG readiness, verification protocols, methods of
  performance assessments of consultants. The fiduciary, safeguards, and technical teams offered timely
  technical support. The Bank team reviewed results of assessments, monitored disbursements, and
  tracked compliance with the fiduciary and environmental and social systems. The Bank team prepared a
  follow-on PforR-financed Urban Institutional and Infrastructure Development Program (UIIDP or

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



  P163452) to advance the gains under this program and continue to work with ULGs and MUDHC. The
  government confirmed in its comments on the ICR that UIDP adopted the challenges met during
  implementations as lessons and were addressed in its design (ICR, Annex 4, PAD for P163452,
  paragraphs 53 - 57, Annexes 1 and 5). However, it was unclear if the issue surrounding the operational
  needs of the completed slaughterhouses were adequately addressed.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  M&E was designed following the system established under the precedent ULGDP Phase 1 to track
  progress of implementation and use feedback from stakeholders to achieve outcomes at the federal,
  regional, and ULG levels. The results framework was sound and reflected a logical causal chain.
  Capacity building inputs strengthened the participating ULGs to identify and deliver infrastructure
  services to its residents. These outputs, once independently verified, triggered disbursements. Program
  interventions directly contributed to the outcomes. While the objective was stated simply and offered
  that enhanced local capacity would deliver improved infrastructure investments, indicators covered the
  PDO outcomes at the apex institutional level but did not include performance indicators regarding
  infrastructure services delivered. There were no indicators to assess the quality, reliability, or
  affordability of the services delivered. There was a lack of data to support consumer assessment of
  improved services. Beneficiary assessments after project closing captured some of these indicators but
  were not systematically captured under the M&E system. Disbursements were linked to intermediate
  outcome indicators that contributed to achieving the PDO level outcomes. The indicators were specific,
  time bound, and relevant. They were measurable and achievable.



b. M&E Implementation
  The federal agency MUDHC implemented the M&E system as designed. Each level of government, federal,
  regional and ULG, assigned an M&E focal person who contributed to the quarterly, semi-annual, and annual
  M&E program reports prepared by MUDHC. Implementation started with initial delays, but timeliness of
  reporting and quality of reports improved over time. An independent consultant assessed ULG performance
  every year against minimum conditions and in meeting institutional capacity targets. However, initial delays in
  the annual performance assessment caused a significant delay in planning and budgeting processes and, by

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



  extension, delayed some infrastructure sub-project implementation. The Ministry of Urban Development and
  Construction (MUDC) was required to contract a firm by end August each year as corrective measure (ICR,
  paragraph 72). By year three, value for money audits were added to the annual ULG performance
  assessments. Mobile teams provided capacity building support and contributed to ensuring data recording
  and collection to aid in evaluation. Toward program completion, some ULGs, such as Jigiga, Dire Dawa, and
  Harar, experienced instability and staff turnover, which affected timely data collection and reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E outputs were used to trigger program disbursement verifications. The Bank and the implementing
  agency also used these assessments to identify capacity needs and prioritize field visits. In addition, the
  reports provided ULGs with incentives to improve their own performance, evident in improvement in scores
  as implementation progressed. However, initial delays in the conduct of APAs, delayed the implementation of
  some infrastructure sub-projects. There was a lack of use in indicators as evidence of consumer satisfaction
  with improved services delivered by ULGs.
  In summary, design generated M&E products measured effectively the progress toward achieving its
  objective. Participant ULGs used the M&E products to improve their own performance and informed the
  implementing agency where capacity gaps needed to be filled. However, there was a minor shortcoming in
  the lack of indicators to show outcomes under the infrastructure investments and thus, they were not tracked
  as a result. M&E is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  At appraisal, the program was assigned OP/BP 9.00. Elements of this policy guided Bank implementation
  and support and assessed the government systems and their capacity to plan and implement effective
  measures for environmental and social risk management. The Bank team conducted an Environmental and
  Social Systems Assessment (ESSA). They confirmed that the government had adequate legal framework for
  environment and social management of the urban sector. The assessment identified risks and mitigating
  measures (PAD, paragraph 108). Environmental and social audits identified outstanding safeguards risks at
  the ULG level that required strengthening. These areas included institutional arrangements; a well-
  defined environment and social management system at the city level; sector specific technical guidance and
  capacity building needs; and human and financial resource constraints (PAD, paragraph 104 following).
  Training addressed uneven implementation of assessments, quality of environmental and social audit
  reports, and follow up of audit findings. No major outstanding environmental safeguards issues were
  reported. Compliance with environmental and social safeguards was rated satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 85).
  During implementation, specialists were deployed to ULGs. Environment and social impacts were
  considered in screening sub-projects. Regulatory agencies reviewed and cleared environmental and social

                                                                                                Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



  safeguards screening reports, environmental and social management plans, and partial Environmental and
  Social Impact Assessments. The Task Team clarified that all partial Environmental Management Plans
  (EMPs) and partial Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared and implemented before, during, and
  after the project implementation.
  Grievance redress mechanisms were in place and were reported to have been widely used. The complaint
  handling system, including Fraud and Anti-Corruption system was embedded in the program and formed part
  of the minimum conditions that ULGs fulfill each year. The system had a legal base, permanent structure
  with at least one person in each structure (to be clarified by the Task Team if this meant level of government)
  to handle complaints related to fraud and corruption, procurement, grievance related to environment and
  social impact; recording complaints received and follow-up measures to be taken; and consolidated report on
  the complaint cases and resolution. More than 100 complaint cases were reported biannually. Few were
  related to fraud and corruption. The ULGs, regions and the court system resolved all of the complaints (ICR,
  paragraph 34).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: Under the PforR financing instrument, the program relied on the country’s public
  financial management (PFM) system for budgeting, accounting, internal control systems, and reporting.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 87), financial management was adequately implemented. The program
  submitted all required semi-annual and annual financial reports and value for money audits. Twenty-five
  ULGs received unqualified (no issues) opinions from external auditors. The Offices of Regional Auditor
  Generals conducted annual audit reviews of ULGs under their jurisdictions. There were no audit backlogs
  during implementation. However, the ICR reported that the status of corrective measures against the findings
  in the value for money audit reports (for the period July 2017 to July 2018) were not yet submitted at project
  closing (tbc by Task Team).
  Procurement: Procurement capacity was strengthened at the local, regional, and federal levels. Each ULG
  prepared annual procurement plans. Implementation reports of uneven quality and detail showed planned
  and actual status of these plans (ICR, paragraph 89). A sampling of the contracts showed compliance with
  standards or regional legal requirements. Ethiopian law required procurement audits and these audits were
  included in the first two years of the program. Thereafter, the Regional Public Procurement Agencies
  (RPPAs) built their oversight capacities by conducting annual Independent Procurement Audits (IPAs).
  However, contract implementation delays and high staff turnover were evidence of weakened capacity in
  some regional and ULG procurement agencies. Reports were delayed, of poor quality, or its preparation
  exceeded budgets (ICR, paragraph 89). Regions issued ad-hoc directives to create jobs among the youth by
  hiring small and micro enterprises (SMEs) for cobblestone road construction contracts. However, the
  practice of preferring SMEs raised issues of competitiveness, fairness, and poor quality of completed works.
  There was no standardized mechanism on registering SMEs, baselines, or incentives. Procurement
  practices varied across regions.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
      ---


d. Other
      ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

 The ULGDP II PforR aimed to build capacity and help strengthen a government's resolve to use urban
development as a building block to economic growth. The ICR offered nine lessons that were considered in the
follow-on PforR Urban Infrastructure and Investment Development Program and that task teams may consider
for similar future operations. Some of these are presented below with slight modifications.

  • Effective decentralization that strengthens local governments require a long term commitment and
  partnership. This program benefited from a series of urban operations. The government used lessons from
  these operations to pursue decentralization by strengthening institutional capacities of cities.
  • Incorporating an incentive to exceed performance targets provides participating local
  governments an avenue to own investment results. In this program, ULGs, who exceeded performance
  targets were rewarded with 20 percent more resources to their regular population-based allocation.
  Performance grants accounted for 35 to 85 percent of their local capital budgets. Additional resources meant
  more local infrastructure investments. The government synchronized its commitment to use all levels of
  government, from federal, to regional, to local governments, to achieve this goal.
  • The different levels of government have different ways to address local government capacity gaps.
  In this program, implementation discovered that federal support may be timed differently or require a different
  set of technical skills (e.g., conduct of Annual Performance Assessments) from capacity support provided by
  regional entities (e.g., value for money audits). This lesson informed the follow-on PforR program to include
  an Investment Project Financing window for targeted institutional capacity building.
  • Strengthening indicators by including professional design elements may help ensure the quality
  of infrastructure investments. In this program, some ULGs did not engage professional design or
  supervision consultants for their projects and ran the risk of poor quality of completed works. DLIs were


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



  achieved without these aspects of contracted works. Mechanisms to address capacity gaps that reduces the
  risk of poorly executed works may be needed. One way this risk was mitigated in this project was the conduct
  of value for money audits of completed projects. But ex ante mechanisms through clear elements of
  indicators may prove useful too.
  • Having viable business plans and O&M arrangements of infrastructure early on increases the
  chances of operationalizing completed infrastructure. In this program, some infrastructure such as
  abattoirs and markets did not have business plans or O&M arrangements prior to completion. Such plans
  may identify potential private sector participation in investing in revenue generating economic infrastructure
  and could identify challenges posed by import restrictions or availability of trained manpower to run the
  completed infrastructure investments.
  • Adopting an independent monitoring and evaluation (M&E) function increases accountability and
  transparency of government sponsored programs. In this program, an independent consultant conducted
  the ULG performance assessments using consistent indicators monitored under the M&E system to trigger
  disbursements. Predictable periodic reporting helped establish accountability. Achieving targets facilitated
  transparency. Challenges faced in monitoring and achieving indicators in public financial management, for
  example, informed the additional performance indicators adopted under the follow-on PforR program.
  A strong M&E system using independent performance verification increases transparency and fosters
  accountability in delivering services at all levels of government.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR followed the guidelines and provided a concise yet detailed overview of the program. The quality of
the analysis showed sufficient interrogation of the evidence, offering candid assessments behind initial
delays in planning and budgeting and in implementing some infrastructure sub-projects (less than 100
percent disbursement against DLI 9, for example, and providing reasons why some completed infrastructure
investments were not fully operational). Important points were summarized, such as the outcomes
associated with the achievements of ULGs in meeting minimum access conditions. The report highlighted
the link between the activities focused at all levels of government, from federal, to regional, to local and how
these components improved ULG performance. The report was internally consistent, pointing to the lessons
throughout the report, not only under the section of Lessons Learned that would prove useful in improving the
design and implementation of the follow-on PforR program. The report substantiated the evidence with well
described annexes, including methods used described in Annex 6. The Borrower's comments in Annex 4
asserted that the works not completed at closing would likely be completed in the near term. The only
drawback was in the lack of detail with regard to beneficiary assessments to support user level performance
of services delivered, although some results were cited in reporting outcomes of the infrastructure


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET-Local Govt Dev Project II (P133592)



investments and citizen participation. An annex of the summary results of the beneficiary assessment
conducted after closing could have strengthened program outcomes.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                Page 17 of 17
