     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022189

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148809                                    NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                  Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18703                                   30-Dec-2019                                         33,830,640.38

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Feb-2015                                30-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            33,900,000.00                                   33,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             33,830,640.38                                   33,830,640.38

 Actual                                         33,830,640.38                                   33,830,640.38




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson               J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Grant Agreement (GA, 2015), for this Nicaragua
   Caribbean Coast Food Security Project, was "to enhance food and nutritional security in selected
   communities of the Caribbean Coast of the Recipient."

   For purposes of assessing the extent which the PDO was achieved in Section 4, this review will parse the
   PDO into two objectives, namely:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



   Objective 1: to enhance food security in selected communities of Caribbean Coast of the Recipient;

   Objective 2: to enhance nutritional security in selected communities of Caribbean Coast of the Recipient.

   According to the internationally recognized definition of food security, it means “access to sufficient food for an
   active and healthy life”. Nutritional security means access to food that meets dietary needs. The project’s
   results framework lacked performance indicators to measure progress toward “food security” and/or
   “nutritional security”. Rather, the results framework focused on the extent to which farmers used improved
   technologies and increased their productivity. These latter measures were the basis for food and nutritional
   security indicators for this project funded under the aegis of the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
   (GAFSP).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Innovation Development Plans for Strengthening Natural and Non-Natural Resource-
   Based Productive and Marketing Capacity (Original allocation: US$31.85 million; Actual: US$33.49
   million). This component aimed to boost the productive and marketing capacities of targeted farmers and
   rural enterprises by financing the participatory design and implementation (by formal and informal groups) of
   Innovation Development Plans (IDPs). There were 5 supporting and complementary subcomponents: 1.1:
   communication campaigns; 1.2: training; 1.3: various types of assessments; 1.4: strengthening
   organizational and business capacities of targeted producer groups, and fostering smallholder linkages to
   the market; 1.5: provision of technical assistance for food sanitary and related services. The component
   also provided financing to cover IDP investments for natural and non-natural resource-based activities. Four
   types of IDPs were supported: (a) family agriculture; (b) artisanal fisheries; (c) agricultural/agro-industrial
   ventures; and (d) non-agricultural microenterprises (ICR, para. 15, and Annex 6);

   Component 2: Strengthening service provision for sustainable production, food security, and
   nutrition (Original allocation: US$6.42 million; Actual: US$4.84 million). This component financed the
   strengthening of sector capacity to provide services to IDP beneficiaries in two areas/subcomponents: 2.1:
   technology generation/validation and transfer to improve productivity and quality of agricultural production
   by enhancing the institutional capacity of the Nicaraguan Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA); and
   2.2: nutritional education and communication, and nutrition-smart agriculture activities and food handling
   practices, targeting key subgroups (e.g., pregnant and breastfeeding women and children under five years
   old) (ICR, para. 16);

   Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (Original allocation: US$3.73 million;
   Actual: US$5.47 million). This component funded project management capacity and project-related activities
   of the implementing Ministry (MEFCCA), including: 3.1: incremental and operating costs; 3.2: essential
   equipment and goods; 3.3: comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system; 3.4: environmental and social
   safeguards, 3.5: financial management and procurement project-related activities.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



   Revised Allocations Among Components: While the components were not formally revised, there were
   several modest changes in the allocation of funds among components, including: (i) increase of funds
   under component 1, to finance operational costs supporting IDP implementation; (ii) decreased funds
   under component 2, which were transferred to component 3; and (iii) increased funds under component 3.
   The PDO and outcome targets were not revised.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   (i) Project Costs: The total project cost at approval was US$42.0 million. The actual cost at project closing
   was US$43.68 million. The small difference (+4%) was due to: the increased contribution by beneficiaries
   (+ $1.58 million), attributed to their interest in securing Innovation Development Plan (IDP) support; and a
   small increase in Borrower counterpart contribution ($0.1 million).

   (ii) Financing: At approval, the GAFSP grant (TF-18703) was US$33.9 million, with a Government
   counterpart financing commitment of US$5.8 million and a local beneficiary commitment of US$2.3 million,
   totaling US$42.0 million. By the end of the project, total financing was US$43.68 million, due to an
   increased contribution of US$1.58 million from local beneficiaries;

   (iii) Borrower/Recipient Contribution: At approval, the Borrower counterpart contribution was supposed
   to have been US$5.84 million, with a final contribution of US$5.94 million.

   (iv) Dates: The project was approved on February 20, 2015, became effective on February 23, 2015. A
   mid-term review was carried out in September 2018. The original and actual closing dates were the
   same: December 30, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were to "to enhance food and nutritional security in selected communities of the
Caribbean Coast of the Recipient." The emphasis on “selected communities” with these needs included
indigenous, afro-descendants and Mestizo communities within the Caribbean Coast (ICR, para. 6, Annex 6,
Table 2). The two sub-objectives (food security and nutritional security) were complementary, and their
supporting components demonstrated high relevance to the basic needs of farmers and consumers, by
addressing strategic elements of the Government's national and sectoral/thematic policies and
strategies. These two sub-objectives also supported the implementation of the Bank's country strategies for
Nicaragua over two periods (Country Partnership Framework/CPF for FY13-17, and the on-going CPF,
FY18 - FY22). This relevance is evidenced in several key Government and Bank documents, including the
following (see PAD, Annex 6; ICR, paras. 6 and 25):

(a) Government National Food and Nutritional Security Policy (2009): This policy outlines the challenges
and objectives, targets and operational strategies to address both food and nutritional security in an
integrated manner, supported by targeting strategies in terms of priority geographical areas and vulnerable
groups. In this project, the vulnerable groups were defined in the PAD as including "male and female small-


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



               and medium-size producers (at least 20 percent are women), male and female rural laborers, young adults,
               and artisanal fishers with no or limited assets and equipment";

               (b) Government National Plan for Human Development/NPHD (for 2 separate periods: 2012 - 2016 and
               2018 - 2021): The PDO had strong linkages to the NPHD, which emphasized the importance of access to
               safe and nutritious food for poor families (2012-2016); and Strategy No. 6 (2018-2021) regarding integral
               development of the Caribbean Coast; with Strategy No. 10: strengthening family, community and
               cooperative economies, including food and nutritional security, as part of the broader productive sector
               strategy; and with the component Caribbean Coast Development Strategy

               (c) Government National Policy for Mitigation and Adaptation to Climate Change (2019): This policy
               consolidates the key elements for addressing climate change, including geographical and thematic
               priority areas and strategic interventions (building on previous guiding documents, considered during
               project design);

               (d) The Bank's previous CPF (FY13-17) and the on-going CPF (FY18-22) that pay special attention to
               various themes which are addressed by the project, including: (i) raising incomes by sustainably improving
               agricultural productivity, competitiveness and diversification (CPF, FY13-17, para. 79); (ii) disadvantaged
               groups and lagging territories within Nicaragua which have not participated fully in the benefits of growth;
               prioritizes interventions which target vulnerable population groups (e.g., youth, women, subsistence
               farmers, indigenous and Afro-descendent communities, with a special focus on rural areas in the Caribbean
               and Central regions; (iii) current CPF Pillar 1: investing in human capital, especially with respect to
               disadvantaged groups; (iii) objective 4: improved business productivity and financial inclusion and rural
               small and medium enterprises and female entrepreneurs; (iv) increasing agricultural/livestock productivity
               among targeted beneficiaries in the Caribbean and Dry Corridor regions.

               While the overall thrust of the project’s objective is clear and highly relevant to the Government and Bank
               development strategies, there were two elements that weakened the full relevance and clarity of the
               objectives in the ICR. They were: (a) the ICR used various definitions of and assumptions for achieving
               food and nutrition security, which undermined the clarity of the objectives; and (b) there was were no
               metrics in the project’s results framework to indicate the expected level of enhanced food security and
               an inadequate dietary diversity score (DDS) to measure nutrition security which undermined the objectives'
               relevance; The project design was based on the assumption that increased food production by the target
               population would lead to improved food and nutrition security but how much food production would satisfy
               that objective was also unclear. Accordingly, the relevance of objectives is rated “substantial” rather than
               "high".


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To enhance food security in selected communities of Carribean Coast of the Recipient.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): While the project's design included a results framework (RF), the PAD did not
develop a ToC because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR reconstructed a ToC
that was consistent with the GAFSP project's "premise that agricultural practices, technology, education and
communication will lead to increased productivity of nutrition smart crops and products, which will in turn lead
to improvement in food security and nutritional status of beneficiaries" (paras. 9 - 11, and illustrated in Figure
1). However, the ToC does not explain how the two broad and inter-related objectives of food and nutrition
security would be achieved. The project supported the generation and dissemination of improved and
appropriate technologies relevant to various innovation development plans (IDPs) funded by the
project, intended to increase crop and livestock productivity, coupled with improved dissemination
strategy/activities to help ensure expanded adoption of the improved technologies by the targeted farmers
(including women-headed households), enabled by improved institutional coordination and technology
delivery systems. As stated above, an important implicit project design assumption in the ToC was that
increased food production through higher productivity would contribute directly to improved food and nutrition
security of producer and consumer households. However, the literature on food security concludes clearly
that people attain food security when they have access to food, which can be achieved through increased
own food production, higher incomes, and trade or barter. The text of the ICR, though not the ToC,
acknowledges that increased supply of food does not automatically mean expanded access to food (paras. 9
and 11), while nevertheless also stating that the "project objectives of enhanced food and nutritional security
were fully achieved and directly attributable to the activities supported by the project." The ICR goes on to
state in the same paragraph that "The selected communities of the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua now have
improved access to food with improved nutritional value" (para. 39).

Evidence on outputs and outcomes towards the achievement of Objective 1 is found in the ICR, paras. 26 -
35, and Annexes 1, 6 and 8.

Outputs:

(1) Producers' organizations strengthened: Innovative Development Plans (IDPs) created 54 "solidarity
groups", which contributed to more effective and sustainable IDPs;

(2) Network of community promoters was fostered, which contributed to enhanced IDP implementation;

(3) Fostering and improving processes of value addition for the different types of IDPs;

(4) Increased availability of certified seeds and genetic material, and "IDP support for agricultural/agro-
industrial ventures strengthened the quality and volume of seeds produced along with their appropriate
treatment, storage solutions and marketing. This greatly benefited the two Technological Development
Centers (TDC) managed by INTA" (ICR, para 38),

Outcomes:




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



(1) Number of beneficiaries (or Innovation Development Plan/IDP target beneficiaries) who have adopted an
improved agricultural technology promoted by the project: target: 8,000; actual: 10,675; +33%;

(2) Number of female IDP clients who have adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the
project: target: 1,600; actual: 5,188; +224%;

(3) Average percentage increase in agricultural/livestock productivity among all direct IDP
beneficiaries: target: 10%; actual: 78%; +680%;

(4) Number of families who implemented IDPs: target 14,000; actual: 14,286; +2%; families implementing
IDPs led by women: target 2,800; actual: 6,994; +149%;

(5) Percentage increase of production volume (agricultural products and fisheries): target: 15; actual: 123;
+720%;

(6) Percentage increase in market access (through establishing product marketing partnerships/agreements):
target: 40; actual: 71; +77%; ditto, by women-headed households: target: 40; actual: 71; +77%;

(7) Percentage of volume of farm produce under improved post-harvest management: target: 30; actual: 66;
+120%;

(8) Diversified Production as Percentage of Traditional/Subsistence Production: target: 15; actual: 45.5;
+203%;

(9) Improved technologies adopted by and applied to artisanal fishery IDPs, which contributed to increased
fish catches and marketable surpluses.

The ICR correctly defined food security as “having access to sufficient quantity of food” (ICR, para 26), but
the results of this project provide mostly evidence that the quantity food produced in the Caribbean Coastal
region had increased. There is no explicit evidence in the ICR that this project enabled consumers in the
Caribbean Coastal target communities (mostly poor small-scale famers, and many landless with food deficits)
through own production and/or trade, to achieve enhanced food security, namely: to have “access to a
sufficient quantity of food”. Based on this definition of food security (also endorsed in paragraph 9 in the
ICR), this project did not fully achieve Objective 1, despite having achieved substantially
increased productivity and production of food crops, which the GAFSP approach asserts would lead to
improvement in food security.

In an exchange with IEG during preparation of this ICRR the Bank's task team provided considerable
evidence of increases in food and agricultural production, arguing that these increases translated into
increased availability of food for subsistence farmers and other target groups. However, neither the ICR
nor the project task team responses provided any clear evidence of enhanced food security among
beneficiaries at project closure. There was, moreover, no explicit indicator defined in the PAD or during
implementation to measure food security, and the project's M&E system made no attempt to assess
enhancements in food security among the diverse beneficiaries, some of whom were landless laborers and
highly dependent on wage income for achieving their food security.

Recognizing the ICR’s own definition of food security as "having access to sufficient quantity of food" (para 9),
this review acknowledges that the core formal indicator measuring the enhancement of food security by the

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



project was based on the GAFSP proposition that increased food production will improve food
security. Based on credible evidence in the ICR that agricultural productivity and food production in the
Caribbean Coast area increased substantially due to this project, this review has therefore rated the efficacy
with which the project achieved Objective 1 as substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the as yet
unverified impact of increased food production on enhancing food security.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance nutritional security in selected communities of Carribean Coast of the Recipient.

Rationale
Theory of Change: As stated above, the ICR presented one integrated ToC to cover both objectives. The
ToC shows how prioritized activities, which were driven by the 4 types of Innovation Development Plans
(IDPs), together with improved support services, generated strategic outputs, which in turn, generated the
outcomes that contributed to enhanced nutritional security in the targeted communities and for beneficiary
farm households. The TOC does not, however, present a precise pathway on how nutritional security
(defined in paragraph 26 of the ICR as “having access to food
that meets dietary needs”) for the different types of project beneficiary families would be achieved, except
through "nutrition sensitive production practices". The achievement of nutritional security was to be
measured by increases in the dietary diversity score (DDS) and the observations that IDPs adopted nutrition
sensitive agricultural production practices and nutrition-related training (ICR, para. 37).

Supporting evidence for the achievement of Objective 2 is found in the ICR, paras. 26 -38, Annexes 1, 6 and
8. The following shows the most relevant indicators of improved nutrition in terms of outputs and outcomes:

Outputs

These are the same as for Objective 1

Outcomes

(1) The percentage increase in dietary diversity score (DDS) for women and children of direct beneficiary
families: target: 80; actual: 91; +13.7%. Combined technologies leading to increased productivity,
diversification and nutrition quality of food produced, together with improved technical assistance which
devoted explicit attention to promoting improved nutrition in food production and consumption practices at the
household level, contributed to the improved DDS. However, the DDS is only a partial outcome indicator of
improved nutritional security, namely "food that meets dietary needs" (ICR, para 26). A comprehensive
indicator of nutritional security would also have the same access requirements as food security (namely
access to foods with high nutritional value), as well as education on dietary needs.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



                            (2) Percentage of diversified production (involving increased varieties of high nutritional value in crops
                            varieties, Annex 6): target: 15; actual: 45; +200%.

                            (3) Percentage of volume of farm produce under improved post-harvest management (whereby results were
                            reported by the Bank project team to have promoted enhanced nutrition security at household level): target:
                            30; actual: 66; +120%;

                            (4) Percentage of IDPs adopting nutrition sensitive practices: target: 50; actual: 100; +100%; (in terms of
                            selection of crops and food preparation)

                            Overall there is some indirect evidence of the enabling conditions for “enhanced nutrition security”, even
                            though the extent of the enhancement probably varied considerably between households because of the wide
                            income distribution in the population in the poor coastal project areas. This variability was not assessed in the
                            ICR or in the Impact Evaluation Study. The indicators mentioned above involve relevant aspects of nutrition
                            measures, but their robustness and depth are weak in terms of providing precise measures of “enhanced
                            nutrition security”.

                            On the basis of the weak evidence in the ICR on whether the project enhanced the dietary needs of
                            beneficiaries, this review concludes that the extent to which Objective 2 (enhanced nutrition security) was
                            achieved is modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated substantial, but with moderate shortcomings, based on the following
                            factors: Enhanced food security was substantially achieved with moderate shortcomings, and enhanced
                            nutritional security was only modestly achieved, A summary of the justification for these ratings follows.

                            (a) Enhanced Food Security. This review concluded that the GAFSP assertion that increased production of
                            nutrition-smart crops and products will in turn lead to improvement in “food security” was not tenable since the
                            objective of enhanced food security is based on adequate access to food and not based on increased
                            production of food. Nevertheless, increases in agricultural productivity and corresponding higher food outputs
                            and outcomes were arguably attributable to the activities supported by the project, and over time,
                            they could contribute to enhanced food security. As shown above, most of the targets of the GAFSP
                            performance/outcome indicators for both objectives where exceeded; 13 of the 13 outcome indicators
                            involving both objectives exceeded their end-targets. Nevertheless, based on the ICR’s own definition of food
                            security as "having access to sufficient quantity of food" (para 9), but acknowledging that the core indicator
                            measuring the enhancement of food security by the project was based on the GAFSP proposition that
                            increased production will achieve food security, this review rated the efficacy with which the project achieved



                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



  Objective 1 as "substantial with moderate shortcomings" because of the as yet unverified impact of increased
  food production on enhancing food security.

  (b) Enhanced Nutritional Security. There is evidence in the ICR (Annex 4) that the targeted food producers
  (the main beneficiary population sub-groups) in the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua increased their food
  production productivity and diversification of agricultural production, with improved market outlets, and
  incomes were estimated to have increased. It was presumed that these producers increased their access to
  food with improved nutritional value. There is evidence in the ICR that the dietary diversity score (DDS) for
  women and children of direct beneficiary families in the project area improved by almost 14%, but the DDS is
  not an adequate indicator of nutritional security since it only measures the balance among food
  groups. Although, there is some evidence of nutritional improvement in communities, in general the evidence
  that nutritional security was enhanced is weak. This review has therefore rated the efficacy with which
  Objective 2 was achieved as "modest".




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project performance and results demonstrated an efficiency rating of substantial, based on various
evidenced-based elements and tools applied. The detailed assessment presented in the ICR shows that the
project achieved and surpassed its financial and economic rate of return targets, together with demonstrating
other positive measures of efficiency. This evidence of the economic and financial analysis (EFA), which
followed a similar methodology used at appraisal, together with other efficiency indicators, is summarized below
(based on the ICR, paras. 40- 45, Annexes 4 & 8, which drew on the results of the 4 impact evaluation studies).

(1) Economic Rate of Return: The Economic Rate of Return (ERR) at appraisal was estimated to be 17%; at
project closing, the ICR estimated an ERR of 22.6% (para. 40);

(2) Increased Farm Incomes and Employment Levels: Based on representative farm models, using data from
farms in the project’s target area, family incomes were expected to grow between 1.5 and 6 times, with
significant increases in family employment, by enhancing farm activities and reducing farmers' dependence on
lower paying and erratic off-farm employment. Similar farm models were used for the ICR, which drew on the
findings from the impact evaluation studies, to illustrate the benefits to the 11,713 beneficiary farmers. The
results showed increases in net family income per year of two to six-fold (from an average of $320 to $1,300 per
year), and increases in farm employment. Similarly, the fishery models, representing 1,500 direct beneficiaries,
showed three-fold income increases. Other models were used in the ICR to illustrate increases in agro-
industrial IDPs, showing financial rates of return exceeding 100%, and ERRs of 8-34% (paras. 41 – 42);




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



(3) Increased Value of Production, Employment and Returns to Labor: the total value of production generated
by the project beneficiaries grew about 3.8 times, family labor increased by 73%, and the average return per day
of work increased by 32.5% (ICR, para. 43);

(4) Sensitivity Analysis: The ICR demonstrated a robust sensitivity to changes in farmer adoption rates, drops in
percentage of farmers not sustaining their benefits, and decreases in farmgate product prices (e.g., if market
prices agricultural products were to drop by 15%, the overall ERR would not decline to below 10%); and

(5) Other efficiency performance measures: The ICR concluded that project design and implementation
arrangements were adequate and flexible, and implementation performance was efficient, as reflected in the
performance of procurement, staff continuity, no cost overruns, good disbursement performance and no need to
extend the project closing date.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    95.00
 Appraisal                                                 17.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    95.00
 ICR Estimate                                              22.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on the project's "substantial" relevance, "substantial" efficacy with moderate shortcomings and
"substantial" efficiency, this review concludes that there were moderate shortcomings in the achievement of its
objectives. Therefore, the project’s overall outcome is rated "Moderately Satisfactory".

The rationales for the ratings of the three core elements mentioned above are as follows:

(1) Substantial relevance of the PDO. This was based on the strong alignment of the PDO (enhanced of food
and nutritional security) with the Government's national development and sectoral/thematic policies and
strategies, and with the Bank's country partnership strategies (over 2 periods), including the targeting of low
income communities and farmers located in the Caribbean Coast areas. As noted in Section 3 of this review,
the relevance of objectives was undermined by the lack of an indicator of enhanced food security despite an
accurate recognition of its meaning in the ICR, and the weak indicator measuring enhanced nutrition security,
while recognizing the expected contribution of increased food production productivity to the project's
beneficiaries


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



(2) Substantial overall efficacy with moderate shortcomings. The GAFSP project development indicator for
increased food productivity and production, as well as several other performance indicators, were clearly
achieved On the other hand there was no evidence that increased food production had achieved the expected
enhanced food security among the project beneficiaries. The achievement of food security was therefore rated
substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the as yet unverified expected impact of increased food
production on the enhanced food security of beneficiaries. The achievement of enhanced nutritional security
was rated modest because of the weak measures to assess whether enhanced nutrition had been achieved or
could be expected to be achieved among the beneficiaries. Hence, this review has rated overall efficacy was
rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.

(3) Substantial efficiency This rating was based on the positive estimated economic and financial outcomes
for farmers, and the overall efficient implementation performance of the project.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is moderate risk to sustaining the outcomes and contribution to the project’s eventual impacts. The
ICR presents a candid assessment of the risks, together with the specific and verifiable mitigation
measures, as summarized below (paras. 78 and 79).

(1) Risk of beneficiaries not sustaining their improved production/food and nutrition security practices: The
project included design and implementation mitigation measures, to be implemented by a well-established
Government ministry/MEFCCA, including: (a) strengthening of the community-based promoters' network
(which also are promoting other community development initiatives, hence, part of an integrated approach);
(b) organizational and technical strengthening of the beneficiaries, including their producer
cooperatives/associations; (c) promotion of the beneficiaries' alliance with private sector stakeholders, along
the value chain, although limited in scope and depth, due to the subsistence dominance of the economy and
the limited role of private sector in value chain development in the Caribbean Coast; (d) improving post-
harvest practices, thereby creating added incentives to expand and sustain the changes; (e) actively
promoting coordination among the various institutions that support producers in the Caribbean Coast through
various multi-sectoral programs/projects/mechanisms (e.g., including the National System of Production,
Consumption and Commerce/SPCC; and MEFCCA); (f) strengthening various sector institutions supporting
agricultural development in the Caribbean Coast region; (g) improving technological packages (e.g., seeds
and vegetative materials) suited and adapted to the agro-climatic conditions of the Coast; and (h) providing
improved sanitary and phytosanitary services to farmers in the Coast;

(2) Risk of an absence of or weak continued technical and financial support: Through MEFCCA and other
relevant public sector agencies (at central and regional levels), there are various parallel and additional
initiatives which are institutionalized, most also extending beyond the project life, which are expected to help
consolidate, expand and sustain the project benefits, including: (a) strengthening and restructuring of
beneficiary producer and marketing entities; (b) additional targeted financial and technical assistance to IDP-
supported agro-industrial ventures and microenterprises, to ensure they meet competitive business
standards and that they can access finance to expand and sustain their operations; (c) continued provision of
appropriate agricultural technologies (by INTA and other entities), including: provision of extension and

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



phytosanitary services; access to existing seed banks; research and innovation farms, germplasm
banks; capacity building on nutrition, targeting women; and strengthening key entities located in the
Caribbean coast. The sustainability of the above support is vital to sustained improvements in food and
nutrition security of a very poor target population.

At the same time, the IEG's interview with the Bank's project team and their response revealed some degree
of uncertainty regarding the project's sustainability, especially with respect to clear plans to expand the role
of the private sector.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was built on successful experiences and lessons from previous World Bank-supported
  investments in the Caribbean Coast, particularly the series of projects supporting agricultural technology
  and land administration. The project was expected to establish synergies with other World Bank
  operations, including (PAD, para. 10): Improving Community and Family Health Care Services Project;
  Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project; Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project;
  and the Rural Telecom Project.

  The project’s quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory by this review, based on the following
  evidence (ICR, para. 75): (i) the Bank's project team played a key role in formulating the GAFSP
  proposal, which was strongly aligned with the country's strategic priorities (both Government’s national
  and agrarian sector strategies and the Bank's CFP), through the design of a relevant and timely
  operation, with strong targeting of vulnerable communities located in 15 municipalities in the Caribbean
  Coast; (ii) Project design to achieving the PDO objectives focused on enhancing food and nutrition
  security through an integrated approach, leveraged by the innovation development plans (IDP) support,
  which also created incentives for the participants to take a central role. Also, the integrated approach
  included explicit and coherent outcomes, outputs and activities which helped generate the and contribute
  to specific and verifiable results/outcomes involving food and nutritional security, although limited in the
  measurement and achievement of efficacy of improved access to food, with respect to achieving
  objective 1 (see above); (iii) Project design devised appropriate and sound institutional arrangements
  and roles, given the challenging environment, and weak capacities; however, the explicit project
  measures to strengthen institutional capacities in the Caribbean Coast to help sustain improved services
  for improved food and nutritional security were implicit (e.g., Bank’s task team provided verbal
  communication to IEG evaluator about strengthening various local services entities); (iv) Bank technical
  inputs and preparation processes were adequate and timely, with technical support by experienced team
  members, also familiar with country conditions, including key role of the country office; (v) environmental
  and social aspects/safeguards were adequately assessed, including an active role of indigenous
  community leaders, and the preparation of a quality Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF),
  which guided the preparation of 33 IPPs during implementation; (vi) the gender aspects, including the
  project's strategy for ensuring women received adequate IDP support and an active role in the IDP
  process and activities, were a key feature of project design; (vii) Assessment of risks, together with
  appropriate and sound mitigation measures, were sound and proven to be relevant.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



  Notwithstanding the above positive design features, the readiness to implement the project was uneven.
  The most notable shortfall was the delay in establishing functional financial management procedures and
  arrangements; these were completed during year 2, after the Bank provided financial support to
  MEFCCA and its 3 regional offices. Another shortcoming at entry was the lack of an explanation of why
  the food security objective would be achieved if the project focused on productivity gains leading to
  increased production and improving food availability and nutrition, with little mention of specific aspects
  and measures to achieving improved and sustainable access to food and improved nutrition by the
  target communities, which is the core element of food and nutritional security in the literature (PAD, para.
  9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of Bank supervision support was satisfactory, based on the evidence provided in the ICR
 (para. 76), including: (i) Bank supervision focused on facilitating timely and appropriate technical and
 operational approaches to developing and implementing the IDPs; (ii) the Bank's project team forged a
 strong collaboration with the GAFSP Coordination Unit; (iii) the Bank's project team accorded high priority
 to establishing a strong M&E system; this included providing timely technical support to devising the
 baseline study, and high quality benefit monitoring system (BMS), including several impact evaluation
 studies (via additional GAFSP funds); active technical support by the Bank's health/nutrition specialists,
 and provision of trust fund for training MEFCCA specialists; (iv) regular and timely supervision and other
 technical support missions (10 and 13, respectively). Since most of the mission members were country-
 based, this enabled the Bank team to be responsive and well-focused to their MEFCCA counterparts;(v)
 The Bank's supervision/ICR and performance assessments were of high quality, candid and
 comprehensive; and (vi) The continuity of Bank staff throughout the project's implementation also
 contributed to project performance (ICR, para. 76).

 The main shortcoming was the Bank team’s neglect to formally revise some of the RF targets, thereby
 resulting in the apparent significant overachievement of some of the project's targets (due to
 underestimated baseline figures for two key outcome targets (ICR, para. 66, and explanation provided by
 the Project Team to the IEG Evaluator, Note dated February 4, 2021).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



a. M&E Design
 Overall, the M&E design was sound.

 (i) The project’s M&E design was based on a sound results framework/RF. The RF provided the basis for
 designing a sound M&E system; the results indicators at various levels were well linked --- impact,
 outcome, intermediate outcome and output performance indicators, which also provided a common basis to
 help define implementation priorities, facilitate decision-making, and guide implementation adjustments
 (ICR, para 64); and the ToC laid out clearly the chain of activities that were intended to lead to higher
 productivity in food production. As stated above (under Efficacy), there were various weaknesses in the
 explicit linkages and measures for achieving food and nutrition security.

 (ii) The PAD described clearly the main project indicators, at various levels, with a focus on relevant and
 verifiable outcomes and outputs, especially with respect to the IDPs (ICR, Annex 6), enabling the partial
 measurement of progress toward the two core objectives of food and nutritional security.

 (iii) The M&E scope was consistent with project design and implementation requirements, especially by
 devoting emphasis to the M&E of the different types of IDPs during their cycles. These aspects also posed
 the main challenges, which were managed effectively.

 (iv) The design of the M&E system gave importance to the early design and implementation of the baseline
 study (BL), the beneficiary monitoring system (BMS), and the carrying out of an independent impact
 evaluation study (in several components).



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, M&E implementation proceeded smoothly, based on the following evidence presented in the
  ICR (para. 65):

  (i) the BL and BMS developed and implemented early during the project's implementation, constituted a
  key element to supporting implementation activities and associated decision-making processes. These
  instruments also contributed to the measurement procedures and estimation of two of the PDO outcome
  indicators, albeit with limitations in assessing the extent of their achievement;

  (ii) Baseline Study and Evaluations: there was a high quality BL study, which was developed early during
  implementation, and developed jointly by various institutional actors, with Bank technical support. It was
  based on a sound methodology, based on sample of IDP beneficiaries, for more in-depth monitoring and
  for informing the subsequent impact evaluation studies. These evaluations were carried out in two
  phases: at mid-term review and at project closure;

  (iii) Beneficiary Monitoring System (BMS): It was an innovative, real time, geo-referenced system
  enabling each community to track IDP progress. The design was robust and applied good practices. The
  design was robust and applied good practices;

  (iv) The ICR affirmed the high quality of the M&E implementation, which is verified by the availability of
  reports that were of good quality and delivered on time. It is notable that MEFCCA "adopted the M&E
  system" for its own institutional M&E system, to support its other programs and projects (ICR, para. 65).



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)




c. M&E Utilization
  The Project's M&E information was utilized moderately effectively, based on the evidence presented
  in the ICR (para. 66), as follows: (i) Project monitoring data, progress and evaluation reports were a
  "valued input" into management decision-making, and as input for research and various reporting
  deliverables. However, the ICR recognizes that the data generated by the BL and BMS were not used
  to adjust the targets of several project indicators. Also, it was recognized only at the end of project
  implementation/closing (end of 2019), with the completion of IDP execution, that the data regarding the
  achieved targets became clear;

  (ii) The differences between the estimated targets at appraisal and achieved targets at completion
  revealed that two PDO outcome indicators exceeded significantly their target values because project
  design used baseline figures which were too high, and did not adjust the target values during
  implementation: "Baseline study and the Beneficiary Monitoring System/BMS revealed that
  agricultural/livestock productivity rates reported by IDP beneficiaries were actually much lower than
  estimated/assumed during project preparation. This information should have prompted a significant
  increase in the target above 10%." (ICR, para. 66) (e.g., with reference to: "increased
  agricultural/livestock productivity among all direct beneficiaries", exceeding the target by 680%; and
  "increased production volume", exceeding the target by 720%).

  (iii) M&E activities and outputs provided meaningful inputs for guiding project implementation, including
  generating progress and evaluation reports which were used to some extent for decision-making by
  various entities (ICR, para. 66).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B (partial assessment) and triggered various environmental
   safeguards, including: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment; OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats; OP/BP 4.36
   Forests; OP4.09 Pest Management; and OP/BP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The ICR concludes that
   "overall, the Project's compliance with triggered environmental safeguards was satisfactory" (para. 69). The
   ICR provides relevant supporting evidence, including:

   (i) an Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) were prepared, consulted and disclosed, in accordance with the Bank's policies and directives;

   (ii) the promotion and application of climate smart agriculture and sustainable production/fishing practices;

   (iii) an Environmental Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared & disclosed for each of the 58 IDPs;



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



  (iv) through the implementation of the ESMPs, there were two positive effects: (a) strengthening the
  institutional capacities for environmental management in the Caribbean Coast; and (b) the technologies
  were aligned with recommended adaptation/mitigation measures, and climate smart agricultural practices;

  (v) the quality & timeliness of the ESMP documents were satisfactory, complying with Bank requirements.

  The main actions carried out in compliance with the Bank’s Environmental Safeguards which were triggered
  by the project (covering 5 OPs/BPs) were carried out satisfactorily (para. 69).

  The Project triggered the social safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. The ICR concluded that
  the Project compliance with the social safeguard policy triggered was satisfactory. Relevant evidence is
  summarized in the ICR (para. 70).

  The Project developed and implemented a grievance redress mechanism, in consultation with communities,
  and was implemented effectively (para. 71). A total of 129 incidents were recorded, 81 of which were
  complaints. The ICR concludes that all complaints were satisfactorily resolved prior to project closing (and
  report available in project files).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management

  FM performance aspects during preparation were "mixed", due to capacity constraints. During
  implementation, the ICR concludes that FM performance ranged from "moderately satisfactory" early in the
  project’s implementation to becoming "satisfactory", based on improved capacities of key actors/entities,
  and on the evidence presented in the ICR (see paras. 73 and 74).

  (ii) Procurement Aspects

  Procurement was carried out by MEFCCA at the central level, as well as by its three decentralized regional
  offices, through “delegated administrative” modalities, which reflected institutional capacities. The ICR
  concludes that, notwithstanding procurement delays at the outset due to capacity constraints, the project's
  procurement performance was "satisfactory" (para. 72).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  N/A



d. Other




                                                                                                Page 16 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



The ICR highlighted 4 other positive aspects arising from the project. While recognizing some attribution
challenges, the nature/scope of these benefits are summarized below, based on evidence presented in the
ICR, paras. 47 - 53), and also presented in the Project's impact evaluation studies, dated 2019.

(i) Gender: The proactive gender approach implemented by the project contributed to tangible results, as
reflected by the following evidence: (a) The project was guided by a gender strategy, which was developed
during the first year of the project’s implementation (2016, ICR, para. 47). This strategy was strongly aligned
with the Government's and the Bank's broader gender policies/strategies (National Development Plan and
CFP, respectively); (b) the Project promoted gender equality through several integrated activities, especially
through the IDPs; (c) IDPs provided direct support to 6,994 women (ICR, para. 47), which comprised about
50% of the support to beneficiaries being channeled to female heads of households; (d) a prominent role of
women in the key decision-making platforms of the IDP's participatory approach, including women's
prominent roles in the: executive boards of the IDPs; rural development promoters' network;
commercialization promotion events; and (e) a prominent gender-sensitive approach embedded in the
project's M&E system, and corresponding performance indicators.

(ii) Institutional Strengthening: The ICR concludes the project promoted "substantial" institutional
strengthening, based on the following evidence (ICR, paras. 48-51 and Annex
7):                                                 (a) effective functioning and strengthening of the Project's
overall coordination and implementation institutional roles and arrangements, which enabled: several public
national (especially MEFCCA) and regional entities to carry out vital technical functions/activities; effective
decentralization of project implementation to MEFCCA's three regional delegations (which also manage
other projects/activities);                                                                     (b) effective
strengthening of the MEFCCA regional delegations, thereby enabling enhanced capacities for continued
decentralized and expanded development support to the Caribbean
Coast;                                           (c) institutional strengthening reaching the Indigenous and
Communal government, whereby project activities reached 17 of the 23 indigenous territories, 208 local
authorities in IDP approval and implementation, including the role of the two autonomous governments for
the Caribbean Coast (RACCS and
RACCN);
                                                             (d) enhanced sanitary and phytosanitary
surveillance/services, including increased number of specialists, building capacities of technical teams and
provision of these services to all communities; and                                     (e) strengthening to
artisanal fisheries modernization, including the strengthening of the National Fisheries and Aquaculture
Institute (INPESCA), and its expanded and more effective role and support to fishery communities;

(iii) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing (ICR, para. 52): The Project-supported IDPs fostered “in-kind”
counterpart contributions from private sector beneficiaries, varying between 10 and 15 percent of the total
cost of each IDP. The actual amount of their contributions exceeded the initial target ($3.4 million vs. $2.3
million, or an increase of 48%);

(iv) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: The Project contributed to poverty reduction among
agricultural producers in the poorest areas of Nicaragua, which had the highest poverty levels and
incidence of extreme poverty (para. 53). The IDP approach provided tangible interventions for promoting
increased productivity and production levels of staple food crops production and several types of nutrition
interventions, to contribute to increased incomes and well-being of the targeted population groups. With the
IDP support, the net agricultural family income per year of project beneficiaries, arising from the IDP
support, was stated by the ICR to have increased between two to six-fold (from about $320 to $1,300 (ICR

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



   para. 53, Annex 4, although the details of how these figures were estimated are not clear in the ICR). To the
   extent that incomes of farmers and other members of the targeted communities were increased through on-
   farm employment, it is likely that the food security of their households will have been enhanced. However,
   the ICR did not conduct an explicit assessment of the food and nutrition security impact arising from the
   increased incomes.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                While the relevance of the
                                                                                project's objectives and its
                                                                                efficiency were rated substantial,
                                                                                the efficacy with which the
                                                                                project's Objective 1 was
                                                                                achieved was rated "substantial
                                                                                with moderate shortcomings",
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                and the extent to which
                                                                                Objective 2 was met was rated
                                                                                "modest", which this review
                                                                                assessed as having an outcome
                                                                                with moderate shortcomings and
                                                                                an overall outcome rated
                                                                                moderately satisfactory.
                                                                                Quality at entry for the project
                                                                                was rated Moderately
                                                                                Satisfactory (see Section 8),
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                which brought the rating for the
                                                                                Bank Performance as a whole to
                                                                                the same rating.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents 6 lessons (ICR, paras. 80-85). The aspects of the lessons that have broader
application than this project have been summarized below. IEG suggests one additional lesson.

(1) Flexible and Customized Targeted Interventions: The ICR referred to the importance of following
“flexible implementation arrangements” for a project targeting a culturally diverse population. The
ICR adds that most of the project's targeting and implementation instruments had been developed
and agreed prior to project launching. The lesson is that there are benefits in having clear and
agreed selection criteria for community and beneficiary participation prior to the project's
effectiveness, which enabled the implementation agency/MEFCCA and its 3 regional delegations to

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



carry out an efficient and successful project, by targeting the expected benefits to the targeted
beneficiaries. Accordingly, an additional aspect of this lesson involves customizing the project’s
interventions to the priority needs of the targeted communities and direct beneficiaries (e.g.,
contributing to the enhancement of nutritional security of children in poor communities of the
Caribbean Coast region).

(2) Efficiency Benefits of Sound and Strengthened Implementation Roles and Arrangements: The
ICR correctly highlights the importance of clear institutional roles and arrangements, including M&E
system, for implementing the project’s integrated approach, especially through MEFCCA's three
regional offices/delegations. Moreover, these arrangements enabled a strengthened regional multi-
agency participation and coordination, including customizing the design, implementation,
sustainability and scaling up IDPs (including cost sharing arrangements), according to the different
types of beneficiaries and their priority needs and capacities. The specific lesson is that these
arrangements, coupled with institution capacity building of key entities and implementation
processes, contributed to both fiscal and implementation efficiencies in generating, scaling up and
sustaining the project results.

 (3) Effective Collaboration is a Key to Project Success: The ICR highlighted some essential
conditions and elements for successful projects. This project was successful because of the strong
commitment at all levels of responsibility from: (a) committed and decisive Government leadership,
at both central and regional levels, which was further enabled by formal cooperative agreements
between MEFCCA and relevant public service entities (ICR, Annex 7);         (b) effective
collaboration with and participation of the Autonomous Regional Authorities and indigenous
communal governments, consistent with Government legislation; (c) sound M&E system; and (d) the
continuity of the Bank and Government technical teams. The lesson is that collaboration between
various implementing institutions through transparent communication, clear allocation of
responsibilities and participation, consistent with Government legislation of roles, formal cooperation
agreements amongst key entities and a functional M&E system can result in successful project
outcomes.

(4) Explicit and Measurable Integrated Strategy to Enhanced and Sustained Food and Nutrition
Security: The ICR emphasized the project’s integrated strategy and supporting interventions which
promoted enhanced food and nutrition security, as evidenced partially by various complementary
outcome measures outlined in Annexes 1 and 6 of the ICR. The main lesson is that a focus on food
productivity increases and qualitative indicators are not sufficient to achieve and sustain robust and
measurable improvements in food and nutrition security for the target population (which included
landless, laborers, urban poor);

IEG suggests one additional lesson which may have application to similar other projects.

It is vital for the project's design to accurately and rigorously define key concepts embedded
in project objectives. The project’s objective was to “enhance food and nutritional security”. The
ICR defined food security in a multitude of ways. Without providing an explicit rationale, it was
assumed that interventions which would increase food productivity/production would lead to
increased food and nutritional security of targeted households. In practice, increased and diversified
food production does not automatically lead to improved access to food and nutrition by all persons
in the target population. Given the structural poverty in areas like the Caribbean Coast, the project
ICR did not provide relevant and robust evidence on the extent to which food and nutrition security


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)



for the target group (including landless and laborers) was achieved, and yet the ICR claimed
(without evidence) that food security had been "fully" achieved because food production and its
diversification had increased. The lesson is that, in the absence of a cogent and precise definition of
a project’s objective, and the indicators with which results are measured, it is not possible to
conclude the extent to which the objective is achieved.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well written, consistent with the Bank's ICR guidelines, analytical (especially the EFA
analysis), candid, results-focused, and most sections were supported by adequate evidence. The evidence
included the analyses of the data presented in the Results Framework (Annex 1), a Project Impact
Evaluation Study, with two supporting and complementary evaluation studies. Together these assessments
provided timely inputs and evidence-based information for preparing the ICR. Annex 8 of the ICR aimed to
provide a summary of the main findings of the impact evaluation. However, because of its brevity, Annex 8 did
not include the substance of important and relevant findings (e.g., increased farmer incomes, and the
potential linkages between increased incomes and enhanced access to food and improved nutrition).

Despite acknowledging alternative definitions of food security, the ICR chose to focus the theory of change
(ToC) and the assessment of the productivity of food production and domestic food supplies, rather than
assessing in more explicit manner, expanding access to food as the basis for achieving and assessing food and
nutrition security by all beneficiary target groups. The ICR does not question why, during project
implementation, PDO indicators were not amended to include measures of enhanced food security.

The ToC also did not include explicit reference to strengthening extension systems needed to scale up
and sustain increases in productivity, and also to scaling-up/sustaining food and nutrition security. On the other
hand the Bank project team clarified that "In Nicaragua, there is no formal national agricultural extension
system per se. Rather, diverse extension/technical services in rural areas are delivered by 6 institutions under
the Public Sector Innovation System, with different levels of rural capacity" (Bank project team response to IEG
questions, February, 2021).

The lessons outlined in the ICR focused on some important issues based on evidence from the project.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NI Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)




                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
