     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022374

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P118196                                     DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Tajikistan                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57090,IDA-D0870,IDA-H6920               31-Dec-2015                                          24,732,697.05

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jun-2011                                 31-Mar-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            16,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             26,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         24,793,420.99                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project is to assist the Recipient in improving water utility performance and water supply
   services in selected areas of Dushanbe (Schedule 1 to the Financing Agreement dated July 13, 2011). The
   Recipient was the Republic of Tajikistan.

   For the ICRR, the efficacy of the project is assessed under the following two objectives:



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



   Objective 1: To improve water utility performance in Dushanbe

   Objective 2: To improve water supply services in selected areas of Dushanbe

   The PDO was revised at the first project restructuring in June 2015. The revised objective was: To improve
   water utility performance and water supply services in selected areas of Dushanbe. (Schedule 1 of the
   Financing Agreement dated August 7, 2015).

   A split evaluation in regard to the project outcome is not undertaken since the change in PDO was not
   substantive (only the words "to assist the Recipient" were removed), and the changes within
   components under the project restructurings were within the scope of the original project.

   .




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Jun-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Reference PAD paras. 16 to 19.

   Component 1: Metering and Demand Management (appraisal estimate US$7.62 million; revised estimate
   US$9.80 million; actual cost US$7.98 million)..

   This component was to finance consumption metering and bulk metering of water including:

          supply and installation of 76,500 residential meters (about 46% of DVK users)
          installation of 1,500 apartment building master meters in selected areas of the city
          rehabilitation of 1,500 apartment building service connections
          supply and installation of bulk flow meters in water production facilities
          supply and installation of a Network Information System (NIS)
          Communication strategy and public awareness campaigns to promote metering and demand
           management
          Installation of a SCADA system


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



  Component 2: Water Quality Improvement (appraised estimate US$6.27 million; revised estimate
  US$13.07 million; actual cost US$12.22 million).

  This component was to support system upgrades for improved quality of water including:

          partial renewal of filtration capacity at the Samotechnaya (SAM) water treatment plant WTP)
          network cleaning
          installation of in-network re-chlorination systems
          equipment for water quality monitoring
           reconstruction of pumping stations at the Naporaya (NAP) WTP
          Procurement of maintenance equipment

  Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building: (appraisal estimate US$3.34 million;
  revised estimate US$3.70 million; actual cost US$5.30 million).

  This component was to finance activities to build institutional capacity and improve utility performance of
  DVK including:

        carrying out of an assessment of DVK's organization and capacity building needs
        installation of modern accounting, billing and water revenue collection systems
        provision of technical assistance and carrying out of studies to improve water system operations of
           DVK including hydraulic modelling, design for pressure zones, and installation of a SCADA system

  Component 4: Implementation Support (appraisal estimate US$1.78 million; revised estimate
  US$3.27 million; actual cost US$3.12 million).

  This component was to provide project implementation support including:

        design and supervision of works
        project implementation operating costs of the PMU
        annual project audits

  Component 5: Unallocated contingency (appraisal estimate - none; revised estimate US$0.16 million; the
  ICR has provided the actual total project cost but not the actual cost for individual components; the project
  team has been requested to provide the actual cost by components).

  This contingency allocation was added at the first restructuring in June 2015.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$19 million. Under an Additional Financing (AF)
  approved in August 2015, the project cost was revised to US$30 million. The AF was provided to address a
  funding shortage resulting from exchange rate changes between the SDR and the US$, and to scale up
  some investments (Restructuring Paper, para. 7). The actual cost at project completion was
  US$28.73 million. (ICR Data Sheet)


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



Project Financing: The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$16 million supplemented by an IDA
credit of US$5.5 million and an IDA grant of US$4.5 million under the Additional Financing, for a total IDA
financing of US$26 million. The amount disbursed was US$24.73 million (95% of the grant amount).

Borrower Contribution: The Municipality of Dushanbe provided in full its agreed contributions in the amount
of US$3 million under the original project and US$1 million under the Additional Financing for a total of
US$4 million.

Dates: The project was approved on June 7, 2011 and became effective on October 12, 2011. The project's
closing date was extended twice: (i) by 27 months (from December 31, 2015 to March 31, 2018) under the
June 2015 restructuring (AF) to allow time for completion of the additional activities included under the AF;
and (ii) by 24 months (from March 31, 2018 to March 31, 2020) to allow time for completion of some
ongoing contracts. The project was thus extended for a total of 51 months, i.e. 4 years and 3 months.

Mid-Term Review (MTR): A MTR was carried out in July 2014.

Restructurings: The project underwent two restructurings.

First Restructuring (June 2015 - disbursed amount US$8.91 million): This was a Level 1restructuring. The
rationale was to provide Additional Financing in the amount of US$10 million to address a funding shortage
for the project , restructure some components, and to scale up some investments. A minor
change was made in the PDO (only the words "to assist the Recipient" were removed from the
PDO). Changes were made in the project components with the dropping of some activities and addition of
others judged to be of a higher priority. Changes were made in the PDO and output/intermediate results
indicators to align them with the changes made under the restructuring.

Change in PDO formulation: (Restructuring Paper, Section III,- Proposed Changes and ICR para. 20). A
change was made to drop the reference "to the Recipient" under the original PDO. The revised objective
was "To improve water utility performance and water supply services in selected areas of Dushanbe".
(Schedule 1 to the Financing Agreement dated August 7, 2015).

Change in PDO indicators: (Restructuring Paper, Section III - Proposed Changes and ICR paras. 21 to 24).
The target were increased for the following indicator: improved water quality. Targets were reduced for the
following two indicators: (i) number of residential customers registered and billed as a percentage of the
total population; and (ii) accounts receivable outstanding as a percentage of total revenues. The calculation
methodology for two financial indicators (cash operating ratio and accounts receivable as a percentage of
total revenues) was streamlined.

Change in Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (Restructuring Paper, Section III - Proposed Changes and
ICR paras. 21 to 24). A new indicator was added: Direct project beneficiaries (of which female %). Targets
were adjusted for the following two indicators: (i) per person water production in the system (to reflect
savings through reductions in wastage); this was estimated as total water production divided by the total
population served; and (ii) yearly energy consumption (for water supply services).

Change in Components: (Restructuring Paper, Section III - Proposed Changes and ICR para. 25). The
project experienced a funding shortage due to cost overruns for some contracts and unfavorable exchange
rate changes between the SDR and the US$. (Restructuring Paper para. 10 and ICR para. 24). It led to a
budget shortfall of about US$3.5 million. This was addressed under the Additional Financing of US$10
million approved in June 2015. Under this restructuring, changes were made within the components to

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



   reflect new priorities that had emerged during implementation. Priority was given to restoration of clean
   potable water and elimination of high turbidity in the water supply, and to completion of the targeted
   residential metering. The changes were as follows:

         Component 1: Activities dropped: (i) rehabilitation of 1,500 apartment building service
          connections; and (ii) SCADA installation. Activities added: (i) sectorization and replacement of
          prioritized portions of the network; (ii) energy efficiency upgrades; (iii) customer communication and
          outreach activities including annual Customer Satisfaction Surveys (CSSs) and introduction of a
          mobile-phone based customer feedback and complaint system.
         Component 2: Activities dropped: rehabilitation of the NAP WTP including pumping stations and
          water tanks. Activities added: (i) installation of network re-chlorination systems; (ii) additional tranche
          of filter reconstruction at the SAM WTP; and (iii) automation of coagulation process at the SAM
          WTP.
         Component 3: Activities added: (i) development of a tariff and connection fee study; and (ii) technical
          assistance for capacity development in financial management, customer service, revenue
          enhancement, and operational improvements.
         Component 4: Allocation increased for supporting project management including design
          and supervision services, PMU operating costs, and carrying out of annual audits.

   Second Restructuring: (March 2018 - disbursed amount US$16.60 million): This was a Level 2
   restructuring. It provided a further extension of the closing date by 24 months (from March 31, 2018 to
   March 31, 2020) to enable completion of ongoing contracts and project activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Despite periods of economic growth, Tajikistan remains one of the poorest
countries in the Central Asia region. At appraisal in 2011, an estimated 41% of the population lived below
the poverty line. Tajikistan had a population of 7.3 million, with the share of the younger population growing
rapidly. Lack of employment opportunities had led to immigration of labor, mainly to Russia, and the
economy depended upon remittances. Tajikistan was, and continues to be, vulnerable to natural disasters
(floods, landslides, droughts) which, from time to time, affect agricultural production, the mainstay of the
economy. A large part of the population had only limited access to basic services. Water supply service
covered about 59% of the population but with a substantial disparity between urban and rural areas (93%
urban, 47% rural). Water quality in many communities did not meet drinking standards and service
interruptions are common. Water supply and sanitation infrastructure had deteriorated over time and sector
institutions had relatively weak capacity. Responsibilities for water supply provision had been decentralized
to the municipalities which tended to exercise undue control over the water supply companies and
restrict their autonomy of operations.

Alignment with National Priorities: The project objectives are well aligned with the key pillars of the GoT's
National Development Strategy (NDS) for 2016 to 2030, particularly in regard to its pillars of (i)

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



               strengthening institutional capacity; (ii) investing in human capital; and (iii) improving quality of economic
               growth.

               Alignment with the Country Partnership Framework: The project is well aligned with the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2019 to 2023. The project objectives are consistent with Focus Area II
               under the CPF: Improving the effectiveness of public Institutions for sustainability. The CPF (para. 64)
               states that World Bank Group (WBG) interventions under this objective will focus on increasing the
               efficiency and viability of public utilities to ensure access to, and affordability of, public services. The CPF
               (para. 65) specifically mentions that the WBG interventions under this objective aim at improving the
               financial viability of two key public utilities in Tajikistan, one of which is the Dushanbe water utility
               (Dushanbe Vodokanal).

               Prior Bank Experience: The Bank has been supporting the water supply sector in Tajikistan
               since 2003 including through the Dushanbe Water Supply Project (DWSP) completed in 2011 and the
               Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (MIDP) completed in 2015. The beneficiary under DWSP was
               the DVK which is also the beneficiary under the Second Dushanbe Water Supply Project (SDWSP). The
               PAD indicates that, under DWSP, some gains were made regarding improving reliability, safety and quality
               of Dushanbe's water supply. However, weaknesses remained within DVK's capacity and governance, and
               DVK's technical and management capacity improved only marginally (PAD paras. 8 and 9). The SDWSP is
               directed towards addressing these issues by improving DVK's performance and the quality of water supply
               services in Dushanbe.

               Given the priorities set out in the national development strategy and the CPF, the PDO of improving DVKs'
               performance and water supply services in Dushanbe were pitched at the right level with the intended higher
               level outcomes of improved heath and socio-economic benefits for the population of Dushanbe.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve water utility performance in Dushanbe

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): Despite some gains made under the predecessor DWSP, significant weaknesses
                             remained regarding DVK's technical and management capacity. DVK's operational efficiency was affected by
                             deteriorated water production, treatment and distribution infrastructure as a result of years of underinvestment
                             due to underfunding. This resulted in high water losses and production; variable quality of water supplied,

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



uncertain reliability of water supply due to insufficient pressure in the networks, and service interruptions. The
TOC was that a combination of measures including priority investments for rehabilitation of infrastructure, and
funding and technical assistance for institutional strengthening, would lead to improvements in DVK's utility
performance and in water quality services in Dushanbe. Investments in (i) installation and operation of
improved residential and bulk water supply metering; (ii) installation of a network information system; and (iii)
execution of a public awareness campaign (inputs) would lead to improved water demand management,
including reduction of water losses, and improved revenue collection performance (outputs). Investments in
water quality improvement, including (i) renewal of filtration capacity at SAM WTP; (ii) network cleaning; (iii)
installation of re-chlorination systems; (iv) equipment for water quality monitoring; (v) reconstruction of
pumping station at the NAP WTP; and (vi) procurement of maintenance equipment (inputs) would lead to
improved water quality as reflected in reduced levels of turbidity, residual chlorine, and bacteriological
content. (outputs). These infrastructure-related measures would be supplemented by institutional
strengthening of DVK through technical assistance (inputs) which would result in (i) preparation of a tariff and
connection-fee study; (ii) installation and operationalization of a new billing and collection system and (iii)
strengthening of consumer outreach including awareness campaigns and satisfaction surveys (outputs).
These would contribute to improving DVK's financial performance. Overall, the combination of the above
measures would result in improving DVK's performance and the quality of water supply services in Dushanbe
(outcomes). The improved water supply services were expected to have a long term impact of improved
health and socio-economic benefits.

Outputs: (as reported in the ICR Results Framework and ICR paras. 34 to 36).

      Per person water production in the system (baseline 938; original target 487; revised target 580;
         actual 550; achievement level 108%)
      Installation and implementation of a Network Information System (baseline 0; original target - yes;
         revised target - yes; actual - yes; achievement level 100%)
        Yearly energy consumption (for water supply services) (megawatt hours - MWh): (baseline 112.04;
         original target 83.43; revised target 100.83; actual 110.94; achievement level 91%)
        Reduction of technical water losses in a pilot area of Dushanbe (baseline 0%; original target - not
         defined; revised target - not defined; actual - 3%; achievement level - cannot be assessed)
        Installation and operationalization of computerized billing system (baseline no; original target - yes;
         revised target - yes; actual - yes; achievement level 100%)
        Completion of Water Supply Master Plan (baseline no; original target - yes; revised target - yes; actual
         - yes; achievement level 100%)
        Completion of tariff and connection fee study (baseline no; original target - none; revised target - yes;
         actual - yes; achievement level 100%)
        Completion of training in monitoring of energy costs and energy audits (baseline no; original target -
         yes; revised target - yes; actual - yes; achievement level 100%)

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Results Framework and ICR paras. 34 to 36).

      Improvement in the cash operating ratio (baseline 1.07; original target 0.90; revised target 0.90; actual
         0.85; achievement level 106%)
      Reduction in accounts receivable as a percentage of revenues (baseline 42%; original target 25%;
         revised target 0%; actual 15%; achievement level 64%)



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)




      Number of residential customers registered and billed as percentage of the total population (baseline
       42%; original target 96%; revised target 92%; actual 97%; achievement level 92%)

Assessment: As indicated earlier in Section 2, at the first restructuring (AF) in June 2015, changes were
made within the original project components with the dropping of some activities (apartment building level
metering and the SCADA system) and the addition and scaling up of others that were judged to be of a higher
priority. The rationale for the changes was the priority to be given to ensuring supply of clean potable water to
the population served and reduction of turbidity in the water supply, and to completion of the targeted
metering for the residential customers. As indicated above, the intended principal outputs and IRIs were
substantially achieved. This includes the key items related to institutional strengthening (tariff and connection
fee study, computerized billing and collection system, master plan for water supply, and training of DVK staff
in energy efficiency) Regarding outcomes, the three PDO indicators adopted under the project were all
related to DVK's financial performance. The original and revised targets for two of the three indicators were
exceeded. However, in the case of the indicator "accounts receivable as percentage of revenues", the ICR
(para. 36) acknowledges that improvements were primarily the result of increases in tariffs rather than
reductions in the baseline level of overdue receivables from large customers. The ICR indicates, however,
that the reduction in overdue receivables was expected to be achieved within about six months after project
closing. The project team has informed IEG that the audit report for 2019 was delayed (in part due to the
COVID situation) but the information available indicates that the accounts receivable situation may have
deteriorated (due to increase in dues from large organizations). Also, the achievement of the target for the
cash operating ratio, to some extent, was the result of the increase in water tariffs. In general, except for the
IRI in regard to reduction of water losses, there was a lack of indicators measuring improvement in DVK's
operational efficiency. (e.g. operating cost per unit of water sold, revenue collection
performance) independent of water tariff effects. The efficacy of Objective 1 is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of water supply services in selected areas of Dushanbe.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC); Objectives 1 and 2 are closely aligned. The overall TOC is presented under
Objective 1 above.

Outputs: (as reported in the ICR Results Framework and ICR paras. 37 to 38)

      Number of piped household connections benefiting from rehabilitation under the project (baseline
       2,887; original target 90,151; revised target 78,487; actual 118,459; achievement level 151%)
      Direct project beneficiaries (baseline - not specified; original target - none; revised target 906,000;
       actual 906,000; achievement level 100%) of which female (revised target 50%; actual 50%;
       achievement level 100%)


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)




      Improvement of water turbidity at the outlet of SAM (baseline 10%; original target 99%; revised target
         99%; actual 99%; achievement level 100%)
        Improvement of water turbidity at the outlet of the NAP WTP (baseline 30%; original target 99%;
         revised target 99%; actual 99%; achievement level 100%)
        Reconstruction of filters at the SAM WTP (number) (baseline - not specified; original target 2; revised
         target 5; actual 5; achievement level 100%)
        Supply of modern water testing laboratory equipment to DVK (baseline 0; original target - yes; revised
         target - yes; actual - yes; achievement level 100%).
        Introduction of re-chlorination systems in the network (number) (baseline - 0; original target - not
         specified; revised target 5; actual 5; achievement level 100%)

Outcomes: (as reported in the ICR Results Framework and ICR paras. 37 to 38).

Improvement in water quality in the network

      Turbidity in the network (percentage of samples meeting required standards) (baseline 40%; original
       target 98%; revised target 99%; actual 99%; achievement level 100-%)
      Residual chlorine in the network (percentage of samples meeting required standards) (baseline 98%;
       original target 99%; revised target 99%; actual 99%; achievement level 100%)
      Bacteriological water quality (percentage of samples meeting required standards): (baseline 96%;
       original target 99%; revised target 99%; actual 99%; achievement level 100%)

Increase in customer satisfaction with water supply services

      Availability of 24 hour water supply (baseline 57%; original target 87%; revised target 87$; actual 94%;
         achievement level 108%)
      Improved water quality (in general) (baseline 70%; original target 86.6%; revised target 96%; actual
         92%; achievement level 96%)

Assessment: As indicated above, the intended principal outputs and IRIs were substantially achieved. In
regard to improved water quality in the network, the original and revised targets in regard to the three PDO
indicators (turbidity, residual chlorine and bacteriological content) were achieved. In regard to increase in
customer satisfaction, the original and revised targets for the two PDO indicators (24 hour availability of water
supply and improved water quality) were achieved and substantially achieved respectively. The efficacy of
Objective 2 is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed above in the respective assessments under Objective 1 and Objective 2, the intended
                            outcomes in regard to both the objectives were substantially achieved. The efficacy for Objective 1 is rated
                            Substantial with moderate shortcomings and that for Objective 2 is rated Substantial. Based thereon, the
                            overall efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings..



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Administrative and Implementation Efficiency

   Project cost: The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$19 million. At the Mid Term Review (MTR) in July
   2014, it was assessed that there was a funding shortage of about US$3.5 million. due to cost overruns for some
   contracts and unfavorable exchange rate changes between the SDR and the US$. (Restructuring Paper para.
   10). Under the restructuring for Additional Financing (June 2015), some of the originally planned activities were
   dropped while others were added which were judged to be of higher priority. The estimated project cost was
   increased to US$30 million to cover the cost overrun and to scale up some activities. The actual cost at
   completion was US$28.73 million.

   Project implementation period: The original closing date was December 31, 2015. It was extended twice by a
   total of 51 months: (i) in June 2015, it was extended by 27 months to allow for completion of the additional
   activities included under the AF; and (ii) in March 2018, it was extended by a further 24 months to allow for
   completion of contracts in progress. There were significant delays in completing works including meters
   installation, completion of rehabilitation activities at the SAM WTP, and rehabilitation of the distribution system.
   The final closing date was March 31, 2020. The project experienced a very slow start-up despite being a follow-
   on intervention from a previous project, and the subsequent delays led to more than four years of extensions.

   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   At appraisal, the indicator of economic viability estimated was the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR).
   Project costs included capital costs and O&M (operating and maintenance costs). Project benefits included
   reduction in electricity costs, reduction in losses of economically valuable water, and increased water supply
   sales to customers in Dushanbe. The estimated EIRR was close to 100%. (PAD para. 44). The indicators of
   financial viability were the Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) and the Financial Net Present Value (FNPV).
   The estimated FIRR was 30% and the FNPV was TJS 183 million. (PAD para. 43).

   At the Additional Financing in June 2015, the methodology was revised citing some shortcomings in the
   appraisal analysis (ICR para. 40). The revised benefits were identified as: (i) O&M cost savings from reduced
   water production and reduction in non-revenue water (NRW); (ii) direct cost savings to customers from avoided



                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



costs of filters for potable water; (iii) additional cost savings to customers from avoided water treatment (boiling)
and avoided health related costs.

            Comparison of Economic and Financial Viability
                                           Additional
Indicator                        Appraisal                          Completion
                                           Financing
EIRR (%)                         100%      26.1%                    24.1%
ENPV (TJS million) at a discount Not
                                           83.2                     110.2
rate of --%                      estimated

FIRR (%)                              30.0%       15.4%             39.8%
FNPV (TJS million) at a discount
                                      183.0       23.4              136.0
rate of 10%




Assessment: In regard to economic viability, although lower than the corresponding estimates at appraisal, the
post-completion economic viability indicators (EIRR and ENPV) are at satisfactory levels. The ICR (para. 40)
indicates that there were some shortcomings in the appraisal analysis e.g. the assumed levels of NRW were
unrealistic and the valuation was based on cost recovery level tariffs. The post-completion estimated EIRR of
24.1% is substantially higher than the prescribed discount rate of 6% to 8% under the Bank's Guidelines for
Economic Analysis of Investment Projects. The estimated post-completion FIRR and FNPV are also at
satisfactory levels. The ICR (para. 43) indicates that the high post-completion financial indicators are due to
higher tariff increases than assumed earlier. In regard to administrative and implementation efficiency, the
project was completed within the overall budgeted amounts although there were some changes (cancellations
and additions) within components. The project's implementation period had to be extended twice, by a total of
51 months (as compared to the original estimate of 50 months) to allow for completion of project activities
which included significant delays in some activities as mentioned above. The efficiency is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is high. Both efficacy and efficiency are rated substantial and thus the overall outcome
rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risks: (Moderate); While DVK is familiar with the technological upgrades made during the
rehabilitation of the water supply infrastructure, proper functioning of the metering and water quality
improvement equipment and associated facilities will depend upon regular and sufficient O&M activities.
There is a risk that DVK will not be able to devote sufficient resources towards this end.

Administrative and policy risks: (Moderate).: DVK will need sufficient operational autonomy to be able to
function efficiently. There is a risk that the municipal government may revert to the past experience of close
involvement in DVK's operations and decision-making.

Financial risks: (Moderate): Adequacy of cost-recovery level water supply tariffs will be a key requirement for
financial sustainability of DVK and its ability to operate efficiently. The level of DVK's tariffs is approved by
the municipal government, and there is a risk that this could be influenced by political rather than economic
considerations. DVK will also need continuing support from the municipal government to be able to enforce
timely and adequate payment performance by its customers, including state-owned enterprises and public
institutions.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design benefited from the experience under the predecessor DWSP under which there were
  modest gains in improving DVK's water supply services, but significant weaknesses remained in DVK's
  technical and management capacity (ICR para. 4). The project design was constrained by availability of
  funds for the project. DVK's investment needs were estimated at about US$47 million but the funds
  available at appraisal were US$19 million. The project therefore incorporated only those investments


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



  assessed, at the time, to be of the highest priority. The strategic relevance was consistent with national
  and Bank CPF priorities. The project design included several measures for institutional strengthening
  including the requirement that, prior to negotiations, DVK and the municipal government of
  Dushanbe sign an agreement of understanding regarding their respective responsibilities. However, the
  risk assessment did not adequately recognize the risk of significant implementation delays. Costs may
  have been underestimated in regard to some components and the resulting cost overrun had to be
  covered under the Additional Financing. Social and fiduciary aspects were adequately addressed. The
  implementation arrangements were adequate but there were some weaknesses in the design of the M&E
  system (see Section 9 below) as concerns the Results Framework.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team carried out a total of 16 missions over the implementation period of nearly 8.5 years. The
 TTLs changed twice during this time. Most of the project team were based in Dushanbe which facilitated
 timely interaction with the counterparts. The team was adequately staffed with social, environmental and
 fiduciary specialists. The project team carried out an MTR in July 2014 which identified the need for project
 restructuring and Additional Financing. Project ISRs were filed timely and the reporting was candid. Two
 areas which could have benefited from greater attention from the supervision team were: (i) closer
 monitoring of issues affecting timely execution of contracts - the project's implementation period was 101
 months (compared to the original estimate of 50 months) with two closing date extensions for a total of
 51 months - a part of this extension was due to allowing sufficient time for completion of the additional
 activities and scaling up under the Additional Financing, and (ii) correction of some weaknesses in the
 Results Framework (see Section 9 below) which remained through the implementation period.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was based on the experience under the predecessor DWSP. Baseline data were based
 on DWSP information and updated at the time of appraisal. The theory of change and the Results
 Framework were adequately framed. However, there were some shortcomings regarding the choice of
 PDO indicators to measure the improvement in DVK's performance. The chosen indicators were all related
 to DVK's financial performance which could be influenced by increases in water supply tariffs regardless of
 improvements in the DVK's operatinal efficiency. The intermediate results indicators did not include

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



 sufficient indicators of operational efficiency e.g. operating cost per unit of water sold, energy cost per unit
 of water sold, reduction in non-revenue water (NRW), time taken to carry out repairs, revenue collection as
 a percentage of billing, etc. The ICR (para. 64) reports that there were shortcomings in the methodology for
 measurement of some PDO indicators that had to be corrected during the Additional Financing (June
 2015).



b. M&E Implementation
  Although the project became effective in October 2011, there were delays in recruitment of M&E staff at
  the PMC, and M&E implementation started only in October 2012 (ICR para. 65). This affected the
  baseline setting, data collection, and reporting in the early part of implementation. Some of the identified
  weaknesses in the measurement of the PDO and IR indicators were addressed during the August
  2015 restructuring for the Additional Financing (Restructuring Paper, Annex 1 - Results Framework).
  These included modification of: (i) the indicator "number of registered residential customers" to relate the
  number to the total population served; and (ii) the target for reduction of accounts receivable based on
  ongoing experience. However, some weaknesses persisted in the Results Framework, e.g. lack of
  targets for reduction of technical losses in the pilot area in Dushanbe, supply of modern water testing
  laboratory equipment, number of re-chlorination systems in the network). A positive feature during
  implementation was the execution of bi-annual Customer Satisfaction Surveys which were essential to
  assess the progress being made towards achieving the objective of improved water supply services.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was the main source of information for the project team for assessing progress in
  achieving the objectives of the project. Data collected from the bi-annual Customer Satisfaction Surveys
  (CSS) provided useful inputs into assessing progress in project coverage, operational efficiency
  improvements, and impacts on the beneficiary population. The system set up under the project is
  continuing to be built upon under the successor project to the SDWSP.

  Assessment: Based on the above, the rating for the M&E system is Substantial with moderate
  shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental: (ICR para. 68 and 69): At appraisal, the project was assigned Category B (Partial
   Assessment). Two safeguards were triggered: Environmental Assessment (EA) - OP 4.01 and Projects on
   International Waters (PIW) - OP 7.50. Since the SDWSP supported the same type of activities as DWSP,
   the Environmental Management Monitoring Plan (EMMP) for DWSP was updated and adopted for
   SDWSP. The ICR reports (para. 69) that regular reporting was an issue. The PIW safeguard was triggered

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



  because a portion of the water supply to DVK's WTPs comes from surface water from sources that are a
  part of the Amu Darya river watershed which extends to Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan. Because the project
  activities consist only of rehabilitating and improving of facilities already in use, exemptions to notify the
  other riparians was approved by the Regional Vice-President in April 2011 for the original project and in
  May 2015 for the Additional Financing.

  Social: (ICR para. 71): At appraisal, the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard (OP 4.12) was triggered. The
  ICR reports (para. 71) that a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed, but not
  utilized as all activities under the project were limited to publicly owned and well delimited land. No
  resettlement issues were identified. There was one case of temporary access closing which was resolved.
  The ICR reports (para. 75) that a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was set up in 2013 to register
  complaints and provide feedback but does not provide any information on the extent and nature of
  any complaints received and how they were addressed.

  The project team informed IEG that the Environmental & Safeguards (E&S) rating in the last ISR before
  project closing was Moderately Unsatisfactory with the E&S risks assessed as Moderate. .




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: The ICR reports (para. 76) that, at appraisal, procurement risk was assessed as high due to
  the lack of capacity in DVK. Under the project, the PMC included procurement staff that enabled it to
  maintain an up to date procurement register. The ICR reports that procurement processes were conducted
  in compliance with the provisions under the Financing Agreement. It does not report any issues in regard
  to procurement. It is not clear to what extent procurement-related issues contributed to the extensions in
  the project's closing dates. The project team informed IEG that the procurement rating was Moderately
  Satisfactory and the fiduciary risks were assessed as Moderate in the last ISR filed prior to project closing.

  Financial Management (FM): The ICR (para. 78) reports that the FM arrangements were acceptable. FM
  specialists were employed at the PCU. The ICR reports that, during the last several quarters (before
  project closing), Interim financial reports (IFRs) were submitted mostly on time and found to be acceptable.
  The ICR does not indicate what the FM ratings were before this time. The ICR further states that the
  auditor issued clean opinions in FY 2017 and FY 2018. However, the project team informed IEG that the
  auditor's opinion for 2012 was adverse; for 2014 and 2015 a disclaimer; and for each of the years 2016 to
  2019, qualified (not clean)..

  The project team informed IEG that the FM rating was Moderately Satisfactory and the fiduciary risks were
  assessed as Moderate in the last ISR filed prior to project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



d. Other
   Gender: The project design did not specifically include gender aspects. An indicator was included as to the
   targeted percentage of the number of female beneficiaries (50%) and the target was reported to be
   achieved. However, there is lack of clarity as to how the target and achievement levels were estimated.
   Project outcomes in regard to improved water supply services included improvements in the quality of
   drinking water and reliability of water supply. While no analysis was done under the project for assessing
   gender relations or related impacts, based on results observed from similar projects elsewhere, the ICR
   claims that the project contributed to improved time, coping cost, and health benefits to households where
   women play an important role.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: (ICR para. 74): The tariff study undertaken under the project
   recommended design of socially inclusive tariffs. A Poverty Diagnostic in the water and sanitation (W & S)
   sector was carried out under a separate Trust Fund finance activity. This provided relevant information on
   household expenditure patterns and willingness to pay (WTP) for improved W & S services. Under the
   Additional Financing, changes were incorporated in DVK's tariff structure including design of a block tariff
   structure and introduction of lifeline tariffs to ensure affordability for lower-income households.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                The discrepancy in ratings is
                                                                                due to shortcomings in (i)
                                                                                appropriate indicators for
                                                                                assessing operational efficiency;
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   (ii) addressing risks of
                                                                                implementation delays; (iii) cost
                                                                                estimation; and (iv) addressing
                                                                                the factors leading to significant
                                                                                implementation delays.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 84 to 88) lists a number of lessons learned which are relevant for other projects
implemented in similar environments.

Utility reform takes time and requires a progressive combination of infrastructure
rehabilitation/modernization and institutional strengthening. In the case of DVK, gains made under




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)



the DWSP needed to be supplemented and reinforced under the SDWSP. Totally, the Bank
interventions concerning DVK have spanned 23 years..

Citizen engagement plays an important part in identifying and sustaining the benefits from project
interventions. The use of customer awareness campaigns supplemented by periodic Consumer
Satisfaction Surveys (CSSs) helped improve customer relations and behavior, and enabled DVK to
track progress in meeting the intended outcomes.

Principal stakeholders need to be proactively involved in acceptance and achievement of project
objectives. In the case of the project, both GoT and the Municipality of Dushanbe were supportive of
the project and the institutional strengthening of DVK, including the implementation of the
recommendations of the tariff reform study under the project (ICR para. 84).




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written, concise, candid, and consistent with the OPCS ICR preparation guidelines.
It provides a clear theory of change. The analysis is evidence based although constrained to some extent by
weaknesses in the project's M&E system (e.g. lack of sufficient indicators related to DVK's operational
efficiency). The ICR does commendably draw on supplementary sources where possible (e.g. estimation of
household economic benefits resulting from the project). However, the ICR does not provide the estimated
actual cost for each component. The figures presented in Annex 3 are the revised cost estimates under the
Additional Financing and not the actual costs at completion. Areas which could have received greater attention
in the ICR are more substantial discussion of: (i) the progression of DVK's financial performance over the
project implementation period; including the effects of tariff adjustments; and (ii) impact evaluation of the
institutional strengthening measures (tariff and connection fee study, water supply master plan, new billing and
collection system) supported under the project. The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DUSHANBE WATER SUPPLY II (P118196)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
