     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022454

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P111548                                    VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49000                                  31-Dec-2016                                        152,310,658.32

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Mar-2011                                29-Feb-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          175,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           175,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       152,529,765.36                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) was "
   to improve urban accessibility and strengthen urban management planning capacity in Haiphong
   City".




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



   The PDO as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) was similar, although not identical " to
   improve urban accessibility and strengthen urban transport management and planning capacity in Haiphong
   City".

   This review is based on the two objectives in the Financing Agreement: (i) to improve urban accessibility in
   Haiphong City; and (ii) to strengthen urban management planning capacity in Haiphong City. For the purpose
   of this review, these objectives will be referred to, respectively, as objective 1 and 2 below.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 5 - 6). The ICR does not provide any reasons for why the
   estimated and actual costs are reported the same for all the components, while the total actual
   cost was lower than the estimated (see section 2e below).

   1. Urban Main Road Development (estimated and actual cost US$263.6 million). This component planned
   to finance activities aimed at improving access to cross-town traffic within Haiphong and long-distance
   freight to and from Haiphong's port system. Activities in this component included: (i) construction of the new
   urban arterial road in Haiphong (Bac Son - Nam Hai East - West link); (ii) replacement of the deck structure
   of Niem 1 Bridge and surface treatment of Truong Chinh road; (iii) compensation and resettlement of project
   affected persons; and (iv) support for design, procurement and construction supervision.

   2. Public Transport Improvement (estimated and actual cost US$8.0 million). This component planned to
   finance activities aimed at improving public transportation services in Haiphong city. Activities in this
   component included: (i) developing an institutional framework, a regulatory model, and operational
   procedures for establishing a public transport management authority, developing a strategic approach to
   service delivery (including route optimization reviews, implementing fare setting measures, and public
   awareness campaigns); (ii) transforming the line 2 bus services along the Tam Bac - Kien An corridor
   (including acquiring new vehicles and introducing global positioning system-based fleet
   management operations); (iii) infrastructure and facilities upgrade along the Tam Bac - Kien An corridor
   (including installing bus shelters, road markings, improving pedestrian sidewalks and constructing a bus
   depot in the Au Lao area); and (iv) support for design and construction supervision.

   3. Capacity Building (estimated and actual cost US$5.0 million). Activities in this component included:
   (i) implementing the first phase of the rollout of an integrated Geographic Information System (GIS) based
   application for transport planning (including installing equipment, establishing institutional arrangements,
   providing technical support to the Department of Transport, training, and developing a strategic plan for
   expanding system functionality to other urban management and planning agencies; (ii) human resource
   development of relevant Haiphong entities through training programs; and (iii) support to the Regional
   Transport Works Project Management Unit.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$276.6 million. The actual cost was US$254.1 million
   (ICR, Data Sheet, page 3).

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$175.0 million. The amount disbursed
   at closure was US$152.5 million. According to the information provided by the team, as of November 15,
   2020, about US$22.0 million was not disbursed due to the delays in payments to foreign contractors. The
   Bank processed an extension of the grace period for disbursements. According to the clarifications provided
   by the team, by the deadline of the extended grace period for disbursements (December 31, 2020), most of
   the disbursements were completed, with the Bank disbursing US$174.7 million (out of US$175.0 million).
   The undisbursed amount of US$219,107 was refunded to the bank.

   Borrower contribution. The actual borrower contribution was US$101.6 million, as planned.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 29, 2011, became effective on July 28, 2011, and was
   scheduled to close on December 31, 2016. The project closed 38 months behind schedule on February 29,
   2020.

   Restructurings. The project went through five Level 2 restructurings. The changes made through these
   restructurings were minor, and none of them changed any of the project objectives, components, or
   monitoring framework.

   The first restructuring on August 29, 2014, introduced changes to the Financing Agreement to increase
   eligible financing percentage for civil works from 85% to 100%. A portion of the credit proceeds originally
   intended to refinance the Project Preparation Advance (PPA) was reallocated to fund road construction
   activities.

   The second restructuring on June 9, 2015, reallocated funding between disbursement
   categories, following a request from the recipient to use IDA financing for resettlement activities.

   The third restructuring on June 9, 2016, took place as part of an amendment for 13 World Bank projects
   in the Vietnam portfolio. This change was intended to simplify the results framework during implementation.
   The performance indicators were removed from the Loan Agreement. The project objectives, components
   and the monitoring and evaluation framework however remained unchanged.

   The fourth restructuring on December 22, 2016, extended the closing date by 20 months (from
   December 31, 2016 to August 31, 2018) to complete the longer-than-expected resettlement activities.

   The fifth restructuring on August 16, 2018, extended the closing date further by18 months (from August
   31, 2018, to February 29, 2020) to complete component one activities, which were delayed for a
   combination of factors including: land acquisition delays, delays in payments to contractors, and
   unsatisfactory performance of some subcontractors.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



Rationale
Country Context. Rapid economic growth in the years before appraisal, with 7.3% average economic
growth between 2001 and 2010, enabled Vietnam to reduce the incidence of extreme poverty. This
growth also fueled urbanization. Haiphong city is the second-largest urban center in Northern Vietnam, with
a population of 1.8 million. Given the rural to urban migration trends, Haiphong's population was projected
to double by 2030. Haiphong also had Vietnam's largest seaport in the Northern region serving as a key
transport hub connecting several northern provinces, and linking the northern and southern regions.

Sector Context. The urban road network of Haiphong city was relatively limited. Most port-related traffic
volumes crossed the city via the NH5 route. Traffic forecasts indicated growing inter-city traffic
volumes through the inner-city road network, with the volumes estimated to triple by 2020 (from 52,000 trips
per day in 2011 to 150,000 by 2020). The growing volume was expected to increase congestion and traffic
accidents. Alongside this, despite the city's relatively high urban density, less than a percent of trips in
Haiphong were through public transport. The main reasons for the low ridership being, poor service
frequency, sub-optimal network designs, and inadequate public transport services. Therefore, improving
connectivity and traffic patterns for vehicles transiting between the western area of
Haiphong, improving access to affordable public transport services, and strengthening the institutional
capacity for managing urban infrastructure was important to the Haiphong municipality.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. At the national level, Vietnam's Socio- Economic Development
Strategy (SEDS) for the 2011-2015 period articulated the need for developing favorable conditions for
private sector development and foreign direct investment. Vietnam's SEDS strategy for 2016-
2020 underscored the need for enhancing the quality of infrastructure planning, and prioritizing funding for
transport projects. At the sub-national level, Haiphong city's 2006 - 2020 Master Plan on Socio - Economic
Development identified construction of three belt roads and extending inner roads to improve traffic around
the city, as priorities.

Alignment with the Bank Strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal,
the first pillar of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2012 - 2016 highlighted the need for
improving delivery of transport services. This pillar specifically called for integrated urban development
initiatives, and investments in urban transport and mass transit systems in larger cities for efficient
management of road assets (CPS, paragraph 65, page 21). The PDOs are well-aligned with two focus
areas of the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework for 2018 - 2022. The first focus area of the CPF
articulated the need for inclusive growth and private sector development, through improving planning,
management and infrastructure service delivery in cities. The third focus area of the CPF highlighted the
need for ensuring environmental sustainability and resilience, through among other things, reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.

The Bank had executed several urban projects in Vietnam in the past. These included activities associated
with implementing Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in several agencies and cities, with different
priorities and approaches (such as application of the GIS system with cadastral mapping for the Ministry of
National Resources and Environment, and piloting the implementation of GIS at the municipal level in the
cities of Ho Chi Minh, Hue and Da Nang in 2006, 2007 and 2008 respectively). This project aimed at
piloting the GIS technique for urban road and pavement management in Haiphong city through
the integrated planning management information system (Planning Connect System). This system, besides
aiding in formulating infrastructure systems, was also expected to aid other areas of socio economic
development (such as, land titling, monitoring and climate change factors). Given that Vietnam's rapid


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



               economic growth in the past decade had resulted in serious transport bottlenecks and called for
               investments that were beyond the government's own resources to meet municipal demands, the relevance
               of the PDO is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve urban accessibility in Haiphong City.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The results framework was clear. Constructing a new urban arterial road for cross-town
                             traffic and longer distance freight, improving bridges, road surface treatment, providing buses with Global
                             Positioning System (GPS), constructing bus depot/ terminals and increasing the frequency of buses - were
                             aimed at improving urban accessibility. While construction of the new urban arterial road was likely to reduce
                             traffic congestion in the existing road, introducing new bus service with more frequencies was likely
                             to increase the number of passenger trips through the public transport system. The combination of these
                             activities were likely to improve urban accessibility in Haiphong city. The causal chain between the project
                             activities, outputs and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

                             Outputs (ICR, page 42).

                                        These activities were completed as targeted: 20 km of urban road on the Bac Son - Nam Hai East-
                                         West Link was constructed; two bridges were rehabilitated; and surface treatment was provided on 14
                                         km of roads.
                                        Twenty new buses equipped with Automatic Vehicle Location Systems (AVLS) were procured, and
                                         twenty GPS tracked buses were operational on July 2015; two bus routes were optimized; a new bus
                                         depot/terminal was constructed; twenty bus stops were upgraded; and six traffic
                                         engineering measures were implemented.
                                        The project delivered disabled-accessible infrastructure and fleet, including and improved boarding
                                         and alighting geometry for the disabled. The ICR notes (para 51) that the Bus Line #2 is considered
                                         Haiphong’s first accessible public transport service, benefiting the elderly and disabled populations,

                             Outcomes (ICR, paragraphs 28 - 34).

                             The outputs of the project activities were expected to reduce travel times on the two road segments (the
                             existing NH5 - Nam Hai segment and the Bac Son Nam Hai segment). The ICR notes that the Bac Son Hai
                             Link was to be launched in 2015, however it opened only in March 2020 due to delays in the resettlement


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



process of the project affected people. The ICR team carried out field surveys to document traffic counts,
traffic volumes, travel time savings, and road user's socioeconomic profile to estimate travel time savings (as
discussed below):

      78,206 people (city residents residing in the proximity of the NH5 Nam Hai road corridor) benefitted
       from project activities (baseline was 50,030 and target was 74,207).
      The construction of the new road link was expected to increase traffic flows on the new road and also
       reduce traffic volumes on the existing road corridor (NH5). The ICR (page 16) notes that the mode
       disaggregated traffic flows (from motorcycles, cars, buses, and trucks) did show an increase in traffic
       in the new road more than anticipated at appraisal. However, the diversion of traffic from the existing
       road was not to the extent expected, as traffic volumes on the existing road were still higher than on
       the new road (the new road opened only on March 2020). The ICR (page 15) notes that limited
       diversion of traffic from the existing road could be due to the larger percentage of users continuing to
       use the traditional route. The traffic counts were based on "16-hour traffic counts" during three
       weekdays.

The results of the field survey are as follows.

      There was a 20% reduction in travel time between NH5-NH10 (at the west of the project to Nam Hai
       (port area), compared to the baseline scenario (NH5 - Nam Hai connection).
      According to the survey, the highest travel time savings occurred for light vehicles (cars and
       motorcycles), with travel time reductions close to 21%. Reduction in travel times for trucks was less,
       and there was nearly no change in travel time for buses, presumably due to the frequent stops and
       limited speeds.
      Despite the improvements made on Bus line # 2, the target for ridership indicator was not met. The
       improved bus line # 2 was launched in 2016, with fifteen-minute frequencies, as compared to the
       thirty-minute frequencies on old buses. The travel time on the entire line was around 38 minutes per
       direction in regular traffic conditions. Information from passenger counts showed an average of 3,066
       passengers per day on the bus line, which was less than the baseline established in 2009 of 3,410
       passengers, and did not meet the target of a 22.5% increase, or 4,177 passengers per day. Manual
       passenger traffic carried out in June 2020, while economic activity was still fraught due to the impacts
       of the COVID -19 pandemic, reflected a continual fall in passenger demand numbers at 1,900 (the
       ICR acknowledges that the trendline showed that even without COVID - 19, passenger counts would
       not have significantly increased relative to the baseline).

Although, the ridership on the critical bus route was lower than at baseline and the diversion of traffic from the
existing road was not to the extent expected, the construction of the new urban arterial road in Haiphong,
facilitated travel across the city, and enhanced connectivity to the port. Given the reduction in travel time,
urban accessibility in Haiphong improved. However, given the relative shortcomings against various outcome
measures, efficacy of this objective is rated as modest.



Rating
Modest




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To strengthen urban management planning capacity in Haiphong City.

Rationale
Theory of change. The results framework was logical. Activities discussed above entailed construction of a
new arterial urban road to reduce traffic congestion and improved bus service to facilitate accessibility in
urban areas. Capacity building activities aimed at implementing an integrated GIS for supporting urban
transport planning and optimizing bus routes, and institutional and human capacity development in urban
management and planning were aimed at strengthening planning capacity. The outcomes of these activities
were likely to strengthen urban management planning in Haiphong city.

Outputs

These activities were completed as targeted.

      The GIS-based Planning Connect Software system for urban roads was established and human
       resource development plans were developed as targeted.

      The institutional framework for a Public Transport Authority was developed.

      A Public Transport Unit within the Haiphong Department of Transport (DOT) was created.

      Specialized on the job and structured training was provided to 78 staff of the DOT on subjects,
       including fiduciary management, project management and environmental management. Training
       included visits to Ho Chi Minh, Da Nang and Can Tho cities, and a three-year training plan that
       included visits to Brisbane, Melbourne, Sydney in Australia, Singapore and Malaysia.

Outcomes

      An onboard satisfaction survey of 209 passengers was carried out during 2020 to gauge user
       satisfaction with the service of bus line two. Nearly 40% of the users were commuting for work,
       followed by 20% of users commuting to school, and 15% commuting to medical-related duties. 95% of
       the bus users expressed satisfaction with the quality of bus services (on aspects such as safety and
       security, cleanliness of buses, distance between stops, cost of ticket, driver attitude, punctuality and
       seat availability).

The project assisted in strengthening the institutional capacity for urban transport management and planning
in Haiphong. The efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project is substantial as the project improved urban accessibility and strengthened
                            urban management planning capacity in Haiphong City, although there were some moderate shortcomings in
                            selected outcomes, ie, low ridership on the bus line and limited diversion of traffic from the existing road.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted for activities associated with the construction of the
   new urban arterial road using the Highway Development and Management Model (HDM - 4). This component
   accounted for about 96% of the cost at appraisal and at closure. The methodology entailed comparison of the
   costs and benefits of "with project case", to "without the project". The project costs included the investment and
   operational and maintenance costs. The project benefits were assumed to come from time savings in Vehicle
   Operations Costs (VOC) and travel time savings. The other unquantified benefits of the project were assumed to
   come from lower traffic accidents. The Net Present Value (NPV), at 10% discount rate was US$159.5 million at
   closure, compared to US$60.5 million at 12% discount rate at appraisal. The ICR (page 48) notes that the lower
   discount rate at closure was in line with the World Bank Guidelines of 2016 (Technical Note on discounting in
   economic analysis of World Bank Projects). The ex-post Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was 17.4%,
   substantially higher than the ex-ante ERR of 13.8%.This was because the traffic flows on the new urban arterial
   road were higher than estimated at appraisal (although still lower than on the existing road).

   Administrative and operational efficiency. Delays in completing the land acquisition and resettlement
   activities, due to inadequate counterpart funding, delayed implementation in the initial years. There were delays
   in completing the road activities, with the new road launched only in May 2020 (almost three and half years
   behind schedule), and the project closed 38 months behind schedule on February 2020.

   In sum, efficiency is rated as substantial, in view of the economic justification for the project.


   Efficiency Rating
          Substantial


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                         Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



                                                                                       96.00
Appraisal                                                   13.80
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       93.00
ICR Estimate                                                17.40
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and the Bank strategies is substantial. Efficiency is substantial in
view of the economic justification for the project. Overall efficacy is rated as substantial, as the project improved
urban accessibility and strengthened urban management planning capacity in Haiphong City. However given
that there were moderate shortcomings, with a lower ridership on the new bus service and traffic diversion from
the existing road, overall outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Operations and Maintenance Risk. The Bank team ensured that the assets acquired and created through
the project had proper maintenance arrangements. Public transport assets are being maintained by the
Haiphong Road (Bus) company, and road assets are maintained under an asset management strategy and
through the project-financed GIS tool (ICR, paragraph 80). The operational and maintenance risk is likely to
be modest.

Technical risk. According to the information provided subsequently by the team, the major investment under
the project - development of the new arterial road was relatively straightforward in terms of technical
feasibility. The team also clarified that this road was fully completed, and maintenance arrangements for the
new road were in place. The technical risk is likely to be modest.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project design incorporated lessons from prior Bank-financed projects in Vietnam. The lessons
  included: (i) given that past projects in the transport portfolio had shown the need for timely funding for
  preparing project activities (government regulations prevented agencies from initiating procurement
  activities without confirmed financial commitment), the design included a Project Preparation Advance
  (PPA). This enabled the implementing agency to initiate the procurement process a year before approval;
  (ii) establishing a Grievance Address Redress Committee (GRC), with civil society members and


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



  representatives of affected households; and (iii) having an independent land appraiser to determine
  the prevalent market rates for the affected assets (including land) (PAD, paragraphs 24 - 26).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including implementation of social and environmental
  safeguards and lack of implementing agency's experience with the Bank's fiduciary policies. Mitigation
  measures incorporated at design, included setting independent land appraiser and on-the-job training for
  the implementing agency's fiduciary staff. With mitigation measures, risk was rated as medium at
  appraisal (PAD, paragraph 39). The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Department
  of Transport (DOT) and the Project Management Unit of Regional Transportation Works (PMURTW)
  responsible for supervision (PAD, paragraph 28). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for
  fiduciary compliance (discussed in Section 10).

  There were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paragraph 79) reports that fifteen supervisions were held over the project lifetime. The continuity
 of leadership was maintained, with two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during implementation. The core
 supervision team, included fiduciary management, environmental and social safeguards specialists, and
 this aided in maintaining regular and close communications with the DOT and the Project Management
 Unit (PMU). In the face of delays in resettlement issues due to inadequate counterpart funding, the
 supervision team appropriately reallocated funding between disbursement categories, following a request
 from the recipient to use IDA financing for resettlement activities. This, along with the proactive support to
 the Project Management Unit (PMU), aided in resolving resettlement activities. Although a mission at
 project closure was not possible due to the worldwide COVID - 19 related travel restrictions, follow-up was
 done by the supervision team remotely. The support provided by the supervision team aided in fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10).

 Given the M&E design shortcomings, the supervision team could have addressed the M&E design
 shortcomings issues following the mid-term review (MTR) of the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



a. M&E Design
 The Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Regional Transportation Works (PMURTW) was responsible
 for data collection. The baseline data and targets were specified at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 33). The
 M&E design also envisioned customer satisfaction surveys for determining the effectiveness of public
 transportation services and facilities financed by the project (PAD, paragraph 34). The Aligned Monitoring
 Tool (AMT) developed by the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) in collaboration with the Bank and
 other donors, was to be used for monitoring project performance.

 The results framework had three key outcome indicators. Of the three outcome indicators, the first indicator
 "reduction in travel time on project corridors" although appropriate for the objective of improving urban
 accessibility, could have included a clear methodology, such as when the travel time was to be
 measured (that is, on a weekday at rush hour, or between points A and B).

 The second key outcome indicator "annual ridership on a specific (Bus line #2)" also had methodological
 issues. The methodology could have defined, for example, if the daily ridership included all boarding along
 the route in both directions, the operating hours of the route, and if the daily ridership resulted from an
 average of weekly ridership of weekdays in a calendar year.

 The third key outcome indicator "establishing a Geographic Information System (GIS) to improve urban
 sector management issues" aimed at monitoring the capacity building activities of the project, was output-
 oriented. Given that the project road was in a densely populated urban center, the M&E design could have
 formally included an indicator for monitoring road safety issues. Given that land acquisition and
 resettlement was foreseen at appraisal, the M&E design could have incorporated an indicator for
 monitoring progress in land acquisition and resettlement activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E design shortcomings were not addressed during project implementation. The ICR (paragraph
  65) notes that there were several challenges during implementation: an M&E contract was signed in 2013
  after a minor delay (the ICR does not provide any additional information); and the poor performance of
  the M&E consultant (the contract was not renewed, discussed in section 10b). The ICR also notes that
  the M&E reports submitted by the consultant did not provide accurate information on indicators consistent
  with the project status.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR notes that the utilization of the M&E framework was hampered due to a combination of factors,
  including little details on the monitoring methodologies, and inadequate understanding of indicator
  values (ICR, paragraph 66). According to the clarifications provided subsequently by the team, despite
  shortfalls in the performance of the M&E consultant, M&E was carried out throughout the life of the
  project, reporting primarily on intermediate indicators, and that the M&E system was utilized with the
  frequency required by the project supervision team.

  In sum, M&E is rated modest, given the shortcomings in M&E design, and shortfalls in implementation.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (Full Assessment) project under World Bank Safeguard Policies:
   Three safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). No other safeguard policies were
   triggered during implementation.

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. An Environmental Impact Assessment
   (EIA) was conducted at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 56). Adverse environmental impacts were expected,
   given that construction of the proposed urban arterial road was expected to intersect with local roads that
   had fairly heavy pedestrian traffic. The project's potential adverse environmental impacts were associated
   with construction activities and included: increased dust, noise and vibration, worker and community health
   safety, temporary disturbance of small household business, soil erosion, spoil disposal and water
   pollution. No adverse effects were expected on any known sites with archeological, historical, religious or
   unique natural values. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed to
   address issues pertaining to environmental and physical cultural resources.

   There was compliance with environmental safeguards during implementation (ICR, paragraph 69). The
   ICR notes that good practice in workers and community health and safety was maintained, and there
   were no worksite accidents during implementation. The project complied with the safeguards on physical
   cultural resources. The ICR also notes that when the project closed, there were no outstanding
   environmental issues.

   Involuntary Resettlement. Land acquisition was expected for activities associated with constructing
   the Bac Son - Nam East West Link Road (PAD, paragraph 48). Preliminary survey results
   indicated relocation of 3,307 households or 12,605 persons living in 13 communes/wards of five urban/rural
   districts. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal. The
   Project Management Unit of Regional Transport Works (PMURTW) also identified potential resettlement
   sites covering an area of 37.5 hectares (ha). Land acquisition for these resettlement sites was expected to
   affect an additional 871 households (4,233 persons). A standalone Resettlement Plan (RP) for the affected
   people was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 54).

   The ICR (paragraph 71) notes that there was compliance with social safeguards during implementation,
   although significant delays in land acquisition and resettlement activities contributed to implementation
   delays. The ICR notes that complaints raised by Project Affected Persons (PAPs) were addressed in a
   timely fashion by the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). By October 2019, 109 cases were resolved,
   with three outstanding cases remaining. Two cases were resolved when the project closed. The ICR
   (paragraph 71) notes that one resettlement case which was outstanding at project closure, was resolved as
   of October 1, 2020.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment of the Haiphong Project Management Unit of the Ministry of
   Regional Transport Works (PMURTW) was conducted at appraisal. This assessment concluded
   that financial arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 46). The financial risk was rated as
   medium, as the PMURTW had no experience with IDA funded projects. Mitigation measures incorporated
   at design, included developing a draft Project Financial Management Manual and training the relevant
   PMURTW staff.

   The ICR (paragraph 73) notes that financial management was rated as either satisfactory or moderately
   unsatisfactory for most of the project implementation period. The ICR notes that in the initial years, there
   were delays and inaccuracies in setting the accounting software, delays in submission of interim financial
   reports (IFRs), and delays in payments to contractors. To overcome this, on the job training was provided
   to the staff of the PMUTRW during Bank supervision missions. The ICR notes that annual project audit
   reports were provided in a timely fashion since then and the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. A procurement capacity assessment of the PMURTW conducted at appraisal, concluded
   that the procurement arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 47). However, PMURTW had no
   prior experience with IDA-funded projects. The mitigation measures incorporated at design, included
   targeted training and capacity building of the staff of PMURTW.

   The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that procurement management was rated as moderately satisfactory
   during implementation. The ICR notes that procurement for goods, services, and works was carried out
   under international competitive bidding. However, there were procurement delays which affected the
   procurement rating during implementation. The ICR notes that PMWRTW staff were trained by the Bank
   procurement specialist during implementation.

   There were two Integrity Vice Presidency (INT) investigations on allegations of corruption, fraudulent,
   coercive and obstructive practices in connection with the Bank-financed contracts in Vietnam (ICR,
   paragraph 75). The investigations conducted during 2014-2015, examined whether firms working
   on contracts in Vietnam and East Asia had engaged in World Bank sanctionable practices. This
   investigation affected the firm awarded with the M&E consultancy contract for this project in 2013. The ICR
   (paragraph 75) notes that this investigation influenced the task team's decision not to renew the M&E
   contract to the firm.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Following lessons are taken from the ICR with some modification of the language:

1. Appropriate measures need to be incorporated at design to ensure compliance with
environmental and social safeguards. This project faced significant delays during
implementation, due the difficulties associated with counterpart funding for land acquisition and
resettlement activities. The lesson from this is that future projects need to raise the visibility
of situations where land acquisition and resettlement activities are involved, and intensify additional
supervision efforts towards resolving these issues. This is especially so for projects classified as
Category A (full assessment) projects.

2. M&E framework need to be comprehensive and incorporate all features of project
activities. Given that project activity on the construction of a new urban arterial road was in areas of
urban agglomeration with heavy pedestrian traffic, the M&E framework could formally have
incorporated a key outcome indicator for monitoring road safety incidents. Further, where the M&E
framework at design had shortcomings (unclear methodology) as in this project, they could have
been identified and addressed during project implementation.

3. Urban transport components need to include a more robust set of measures to amplify the
demonstrative effect of interventions. This project provided technical inputs for supporting the
creation of a Public Transport Unit (PTU) within the Department of Transport. The efforts to improve
the fleet, operations and infrastructure could have been articulated as part of a broader public
transport strategy. This aspect of design is particularly important given growing urbanization in many
countries in Africa and Asia.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. The analysis provided in the ICR on shortcomings in the M&E design under this urban
transport project is exemplary. The ICR also candidly discusses the issues associated with land acquisition and
resettlement, which contributed to significant delays during implementation. The theory of change articulated in


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Haiphong Urban Transport Project (P111548)



the ICR provides a good analysis of the links between project activities, outputs and outcomes. It also
specifically notes the assumptions under which these outcomes are likely to be realized.

There were a few shortcomings in the ICR: (i) it provides no information on whether there are risks to
development outcomes (although this information was subsequently provided by the team); (ii) the table on
"Project Cost by Component" in Annex 3 is incomplete and erroneous on actual costs that should add up to
US$254.1 million; and (iii) the ICR does not provide justification of the overall outcome rating of MS in Section
D, based on the table with ratings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
