     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022453

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P121414                                   CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81220                                31-Dec-2017                                         100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Feb-2012                               31-Oct-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         100,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally               April B. Connelly            Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) of the Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agriculture Development
   Project as articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 10) were identical to those stated in
   the Loan Agreement (LA, page 5) and aimed to:

   "(a) increase the coverage of irrigation services in the Project Area in order to increase agricultural
   production; (b) provide water supply, in bulk, to small rural communities and industries in the project
   area; and (c) introduce a community-based participatory approach in the management of water

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



   facilities and infrastructure and increase of production capacity of higher-value agro-products in the
   Project Area to ensure the sustainable development of agriculture."

   In December 2017, the PDO was revised as follows:

   "(a) increase the command area for irrigation in the project area; (b) increase bulk water supply
   capacity for small rural communities and industries in the project area; (c) introduce community
   based participatory approach in the management of water facilities and infrastructure in the
   demonstration areas."

   According to the PAD (page 3, footnote#1) "The project area refers to the irrigated area of 70,200 hectares
   covered by the Wudu Second-phase Irrigation Scheme, including 60,250 hectares under Xizi Main Canal, and
   9,950 hectares directly under Wudu Reservoir."

   The key beneficiaries of the project were about 1.35 million poor farmers (397,000 households) who were
   expected to receive reliable irrigation water supplies and change from mainly dry farming to irrigated
   agriculture and boost their agriculture production. Other key beneficiaries were about 1.7 million poor people
   in rural and small urban communities, in addition to the industries in Mianyang City and other cities who would
   be provided by water supply, in bulk, from the irrigation infrastructure for drinking and industrial purposes
   (PAD, paragraph 11).




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDOs were supported by three components as follows:

   1. Construction of Main Irrigation Systems (appraisal cost: US$691.03 million, of which Bank
   Financing was US$97.41 million, actual cost: US$662.94 million). This component aimed to finance the
   construction and operation of the second phase of the Wudu Scheme to irrigate
   about 70,200 hectares of land as well as to supply water to urban and rural areas, and water to industries in
   the project area. This included two systems: (1) Construction of branch canals from the right and left
   segments of the Wudu Reservoir to irrigate areas directly under said Reservoir.
   (2) Construction of a new main irrigation system consisting of: (a) Construction of Xizi Main Canal with a
   total length of about 108 km to divert water from the Wudu Reservoir to irrigate areas under said Canal in
   the Project Area and consisting of numerous structures including tunnels, aqueducts, siphons, gates and
   other structures; (b) Construction of a reservoir at Jinfeng with intake from the Xizi Canal with a total storage
   capacity of 98 million cubic meters consisting of tunnels, aqueducts, siphons, gates and other structures

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



  including an asphalt concrete core sock-fill dam with a height of 88m and a chest length of 454.87m, an
  irrigation intake and a tunnel to supply and regulate the supply of water to the irrigation system to be
  constructed; and (c) Construction of Jinlong sub-main canal and 16 branch canals consisting of numerous
  structures including tunnels, aqueducts, siphons, gates and other structures to divert water to irrigate areas
  covered under the Xizi Main Canal to be constructed.

  2. Development of Community Demand Drive (CDD) based WUAs and construction of on-farm
  Works in Demonstration Areas (appraisal cost: US$4.49 million, of which Bank Financing was
  US$0.90 million, actual cost: US$3.36 million). This component would support carrying out of on-farm
  development works under CDD approach in selected demonstration areas in the counties of Jiangyou,
  Zitong and Yanting of Mianyang City covering about 766 hectares within the irrigated area covered by the
  second phase of the Wudu Water Diversion and Irrigation Scheme and consisting of: (1) Construction of on-
  farm works including 1 lateral canal and 3 sub-lateral canals with a total length of about 48 km; (2)
  Establishment and development of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) and enhancement of producer co-
  operatives based on community demand driven approach around a lateral canal area or sub-lateral areas in
  each demonstration area to organize and implement the construction, operation and maintenance of on-
  farm works; and (3) Provision of an integrated package of agricultural inputs and supporting services in
  each demonstration area to small holder agricultural producers and farmer groups to maximize the benefit
  of irrigated water delivered to the field and help increase farmer’s production and income.

  3. Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management Support (appraisal cost: US$1.44 million
  with Bank financing 100%, actual cost: US$1.46 million). This component would provide technical
  assistance for the institutional strengthening of the project counties and Sichuan to implement the project
  including: (1) Capacity building through, inter alia, study tours and training; (2) Consulting services and
  office equipment; and (3) Acquisition of vehicles to provide necessary technical support for implementing
  the activities under the Components 1 and 2 of the Project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated to be US$700.77 million, which included: US$3.56
  interest during construction and US$0.25 million front end fees. Actual cost according to the ICR Data Sheet
  (page 2) was US$672.17 million or about 96% of the appraisal estimate. The difference was due to a lower
  contribution of counterpart funding by the borrower (see below for more details).



  Financing. The Project was financed through an IBRD Specific Investment Loan (SIL) in the amount of
  US$100.00 million. The Bank Loan was on standard IBRD terms for a US Dollar denominated, variable
  spread loan (VSL) based on six-month LIBOR, plus an additional variable spread. Commitment-linked
  repayment in 25 year period, including a 6 year grace period, level repayment of principal. The full amount
  of the Bank loan was disbursed ICR, page 2).



  Borrower Contribution. The borrower and the beneficiaries were expected to contribute US$599.64 million
  and US$1.13 million, respectively. The actual amount according to the ICR (page 2) was US$572.17 million



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



   or 95% of the estimated amount. The ICR did not provide a disaggregation of the counterpart funding
   amount and did not explain why the counterpart funding was less than expected.



   Dates. The project was approved on February 28, 2012 and became effective four months later on July 11,
   2012. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 11, 2016, four months later than the scheduled
   date on December 31, 2015. The project closed on October 31, 2019, which was twenty two months later
   than the expected closing date on December 31, 2017. According to the ICR (paragraph 23) "the closing
   date was extended to address the project implementation delay in the completion of the main systems
   construction and the demonstration of participatory on-farm works management." The project was
   restructured once (Level 2) on December 28, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$71.69 million, in
   order to revise the Project Development Objectives, change the Results Framework, change components
   and costs, extend the Loan Closing Date, and change the implementation schedule. These changes,
   specifically the revision of the PDO, were relevant and reflected the project scope in terms of the physical
   structure, which was defined as “construction of main irrigation system” in both the PAD and Loan
   Agreement (ICR, paragraph 20).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Mianyang City had relatively abundant water resources with over 1,100 mm of
annual rainfall and the water-rich Fujiang river flowing through the City. However, the project area was very
short of water for irrigated agriculture, mainly because of the relatively
uneven temporal and spatial distribution of water resources. Four key development issues were identified in
water resources development and utilization in the project areas: (a) main irrigation infrastructure systems
and on-farm works (lateral, sub-lateral and farm ditches) needed to be constructed or rehabilitated urgently
to help agricultural production recover from the big earthquake; (b) water shortages and frequent droughts
impeded agricultural development; (c) water use efficiency and productivity were very low (water use in
irrigated agriculture accounts for 66% of the total water use, and the actual consumptive use of water
accounted for only 20% of the total available water resources in the City); and (d) sustainability of
constructed water infrastructure was not ensured.

Previous Sector Experience. The design followed Chinese national technical standards and benefited
from the lessons learned from the Wudu First-phase Irrigation Scheme built in 2002. It also took into
account the 2008 earthquake which hit some of the project areas and the design of the scheme structures
in those areas was adjusted to resist an earthquake of magnitude of 7.0 on Richter scale.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, objectives were in line with the Government’s
strategy and its 12th Five-year plan (2011-2015) in such water shortage areas to increase agricultural
production and farmer incomes with integrated measures. At completion, objectives also remained in line
with the Government's priorities for water resources development as outlined in China’s 13th FYP for 2016-
2020. These priorities included: emphasizing the construction and rehabilitation of water engineering works,
particularly in irrigated agriculture, and integrating the increase in water use efficiency with
increasing farmers' income and agricultural production. Objectives were also in line with China’s recently

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



launched National Rural Revitalization Program and the 14th FYP (for the period 2021-2025) as the
project focused on delivering water to communities for domestic and industrial use in the project areas.
Finally, according to the ICR (paragraph 27), "the second phase of the Wudu Scheme remains the top
priority in water sector development for Sichuan Province in its new program for large scheme rehabilitation
and development."

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, objectives were in line with Bank’s 2006-2010
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for China. Specifically, the project would support Pillar 2 of the CPS to
reduce poverty, inequality and social exclusion, through promoting balanced urbanization, sustaining rural
livelihoods, and expanding access to basic social and infrastructure services, particularly in the rural areas.
Objectives would also support Pillar 3 to manage resource scarcity through conserving water resources. At
completion, objectives were also in line with Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for China (CPS, FY11-
FY15). Specifically, objectives would contribute to Strategic Theme 1: Supporting Greener Growth, through
promoting Sustainable Agriculture Practices by in particular helping to deliver water to expand agricultural
production and also to improve water productivity through support to agricultural extension technologies,
modern irrigation technologies, WUAs and water markets in the demonstration areas. Objectives would also
contribute to Strategic Theme 2: Promoting More Inclusive Development through enhancing Opportunities
in Rural areas and small towns. The project would enhance secondary town development by helping local
governments design integrated rural-urban development plans, financing small town infrastructure,
including water supply and sanitation. The project would entail investment in water supply facilities to
provide water supply in bulk to small rural communities and industries in the project area. Finally, objectives
continued to be in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for China (CPF, FY20-FY25) which
emphasized support for addressing natural resource (including water) scarcity, increasing farm productivity,
promoting efficiency and productivity in water use and its quality, and overall water governance. While the
current CPF continued to reflect a strong engagement with China, activities will be increasingly selective as
lending declines, with a focus on China’s remaining institutional gaps and the country’s contribution to
global public goods (ICR, page 12, footnote#11). This implies that the relevance of objectives to the current
CPF declined.



The original statement of objectives was clear, outcome oriented and focused yet ambitious. While the
original objectives were overambitious, it was connected to higher level objectives of contributing to the
sustainable development of agriculture in the region. However, the "original PDO and indicators were not
aligned with the project scope (ICR, paragraph 28)". This questions the relevance of the original objectives,
which were later revised in 2017. While the revised objectives were realistic and reflected the real scope of
the project within its implementation time-frame, they could have been pitched at a more intermediate level
to reflect outcome level results not just outputs. Also, the revised objectives lacked a connection to higher
level objectives, namely, to improve livelihoods of poor farmers in the project area; and to enables farmers
to decide on ways to increase their incomes-through showcasing CDD approaches, with assistance as
necessary from local government.



Overall, Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. This rating reflects an over ambitious original
objectives that were beyond the scope of the project, and realistic revised objectives. The revised
objectives reflected the Government and Bank priorities, but lacked a connection to higher level objectives.



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



               Finally, the most recent Bank CPF (FY20-FY25) for China pointed out a decrease in lending and a shift in
               the Government's priorities, which implied that the relevance to the current CPF declined.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the command area for irrigation in the project area.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To increase the commend area for irrigation in the project area, the
                             project financed the upstream infrastructure (main, sub-main and branch canals) which can provide water to
                             the command area. This included: the construction of Xizi Main Canal with a total length of 108 km, the
                             construction of 24.24 km of the Jinlong sub-main Canal, and the construction of 16 branch canals with a total
                             combined length of 325 km. Improving the upstream irrigation infrastructure was expected to result in more
                             irrigation water availability which in turn would result in an increase in the command area. Anticipated longer-
                             term outcome was the enhancement of irrigation services in the project area which would lead to increased
                             and higher-value agricultural production. The upstream irrigation infrastructure that the Bank is financing will
                             be complemented by on-farm infrastructure that the local government is financing.

                             Key Assumptions. The ICR did not include any assumptions that relate to the achievement of the stated
                             PDO.

                             The ToC clearly reflected the relation between the intended activities and the expected outputs, outcomes
                             and longer-term outcomes. However, it lacked any mention of the key assumptions the underpinned the
                             achievement of the stated PDO.



                             Outputs

                             The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

                             Construction of Main Irrigation Systems, which includes completion of:

                                        Xizi Main Canal with a total length of about 108 km including tunnels, aqueducts, siphons, gates and
                                         other structures (target achieved).
                                        a reservoir at Jinfeng with intake from the Xizi Canal with a total storage capacity of 98 million m3
                                         consisting of tunnels, aqueducts, siphons, gates and other structures including an asphalt concrete

                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



       core sock-fill dam with a height of 88m and a chest length of 454.87m, an irrigation intake and a tunnel
       to supply and regulate the supply of water to the irrigation system to be constructed.
      Jinlong sub-main canal and 16 branch canals consisting of numerous structures including tunnels,
       aqueducts, siphons, gates and other structures to divert water to irrigate areas.



Outcomes

By project completion, 108 km of the Xizi main canal and 305.24 km of sub-main or branch canals were fully
completed under the project. These works were expected to ensure that water was delivered, through sub-
main or branch canal and on-farm works (once completed), to the field. The increased command area for
irrigation with the project (PDO outcome indicator #1) reached 929,600 mu (a Chinese unit of land
measurement that varies with location but is commonly 0.165 acre, or 666.5 square meters - ICR page 7,
footnote#6). While the target for the increase in the command area for irrigation was fully achieved, the ICR
did not provide a baseline value for the command area prior to the project intervention. About 1.2 million
farmers were expected to benefit from the increased command area for irrigation with the project (PDO
outcome indicator #3, target: 1.15 million, exceeded). The ICR (paragraph 30) reported that "all six counties
have prepared and approved investment plans for the construction of on-farm works (in addition to the on-
farm works already completed in the three demonstration areas). Construction was underway in three
counties at the end of September 2020 on 11 lateral canals (of the total of 52, including the one from the
demonstration site) in the scheme areas and three (of nine) water treatment plants. The remaining three
counties are scheduled to start construction by end 2020."

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, efficacy of achieving this outcome is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase bulk water supply capacity for small rural communities and industries in the project area.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To increase bulk water supply capacity for small rural communities and industries
in the project area, the the project financed the upstream infrastructure (main, sub-main and branch
canals). This included: the construction of Xizi Main Canal with a total length of 108 km, the construction of
24.24 km of the Jinlong sub-main Canal, and the construction of 16 branch canals with a total combined
length of 325 km. Improving the upstream irrigation infrastructure was expected to result in increasing bulk
water supply capacity for small rural communities and industries in the project areas. Anticipated longer-term
outcome was the provision of reliable bulk water supply to rural communities and industries to ensure
sustainable development of agriculture.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



Key Assumptions. The ICR did not include any assumptions that relate to the achievement of the stated
PDO.

The ToC clearly reflected the relation between the intended activities and the expected outputs, outcomes
and longer-term outcomes. However, it lacked any mention of the key assumptions the underpinned the
achievement of the stated PDO.



Outputs

The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

The outputs mentioned under Objective 1 pertain to this objective as well.

Outcome

As a result of the completion of the main and sub-branch canals, there was sufficient water available in the
canal to be diverted by local industrial and domestic water users. By project completion, the Increased annual
industrial and domestic water supply capacity (PDO outcome indicator #2) reached 137.52 million cubic meter
per year (m3/year, target achieved). The ICR did not provide a baseline for this indicator. According to the
ICR (paragraph 33) "completion of the increased water supply capacity has sped up the construction of rural
water supply networks to provide clean water to the rural communities along the water supply canals to
ensure drinking water safety, and have contributed greatly to China’s National Program on Drinking Water
Safety in the project areas."

Based on the above-mentioned information and on the achievements under PDO1, it is plausible to assume
that the project succeeded in increasing bulk water supply capacity for small rural communities and industries
in the project area. Therefore, efficacy of achieving this outcome is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To introduce community based participatory approach in the management of water facilities and infrastructure
in the demonstration areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To introduce community based participatory approach in the management of water
facilities and infrastructure in the demonstration areas, the project would organize study tours and capacity
building activities as well as establishing water user associations (WUAs) with respective O&M plans. These
activities were expected to in result in community based participatory approach in the management of water
facilities and infrastructure in the demonstration area. Anticipated longer-term outcomes include an enhanced
of irrigation services in the project area which would lead to increased and higher-value agricultural

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



production, and the provision of reliable bulk water supply to rural communities and industries to ensure
sustainable development of agriculture.

Key Assumptions. The ICR did not include any assumptions that relate to the achievement of the stated
PDO.

The ToC clearly reflected the relation between the intended activities and the expected outputs, outcomes
and longer-term outcomes. However, it lacked any mention of the key assumptions the underpinned the
achievement of the stated PDO.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      Development of 63 additional WUAs (as of project closure) in non-demonstration areas, with an
       additional 127 WUAs in the pipeline that will extend coverage to the entire project area, thus
       confirming the sustainability and replicability of the model demonstrated under the project.
      To strengthen capacity of project management, 40 PMO staff were familiarized with project concept,
       approach and operational procedures (target achieved), and 80 female project staff participating in
       domestic and overseas study tours organized by the project (target achieved).
      38.91 km of laterals and sub-laterals were completed in demonstration sites which ensures that water
       was delivered directly to the farmland in the demonstration areas.

Outcomes

The project organized WUAs and producer co-operatives based on a community demand driven approach.
The ICR did not report on the number of cooperatives involved in the project, but stated that "various
producer cooperatives and organizations became proactive in their involvement in WUA operations, including
oilseed cooperatives, pig raising cooperatives, horticulture associations, and shrimp farming associations
(ICR, paragraph 38)." To maximize the benefit of irrigated water delivered to the field and help increase
farmers’ production and income, the project provided an integrated package of agricultural inputs and
supporting services in each of the three demonstration areas to smallholder agricultural producers and farmer
groups (ICR, paragraph 37).

The WUAs developed under the project were registered with the local Civil Affairs Authority as autonomous
entities with a mandate for O&M of on-farm works and water management (ICR, paragraph 38). The WUAs
carried out on-farm works and operated and maintained them on completion of construction. Also, WUAs
helped readjust cropping patterns and increase cropping intensities with irrigation water delivered during the
critical stages of crop management. By project completion, 22 O&M plans were prepared for both main
system and on-farm system in the demonstration areas (PDO outcome indicator #4, target achieved). O&M
plans for the on-farm works were prepared and will be financed through inputs in kind and a limited water
tariff surcharge to be decided by the WUA members. While the WUAs were expected to address low cost
O&M repairs, local Governments "would assume responsibilities for big repairs of on-farm works (mainly for
laterals, rather than farm ditches)" (ICR, paragraph 38).

According to the ICR (paragraph 40), when compared to non-demonstration villages, the data showed that
the CDD demonstration villages saw the summer crop yields increase by 20% and cropping intensity by 30%
as a result of additional vegetable production in Changliang village, one of three demonstration sites in Zitong

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



                            County. Also, farm household incomes were estimated to have increased between 30-70% depending on the
                            cropping pattern. This Review agrees with the assessment in the ICR (paragraph 40) that "further increases
                            in income are expected in the coming years from improved crop yields, changes in cropping patterns (shifting
                            to higher value crops), increased cropping intensities, and diversifying into aquaculture/livestock production."

                            Based on the above-mentioned assessment, efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The provided evidence point to the success of the project in increasing
                            the irrigation command area through the completion of the main and branch canals in the project area
                            (PDO#1). As a result of the completion of the main and sub-branch canals, there was sufficient water
                            available in the canal to be diverted by local industrial and domestic water users (PDO#2). By project
                            completion, the Increased annual industrial and domestic water supply capacity (PDO outcome indicator #2)
                            reached 137.52 million cubic meter per year (m3/year, target achieved). Finally, the project successfully
                            introduced community based participatory approach in the management of water facilities and infrastructure
                            in the demonstration areas (PDO#3). It also demonstrated results in terms of increased production and the
                            replicability of the participatory on-farm water management for the scheme as whole .



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex ante

                               The overall project economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at 13%, and the NPV (at a discount rate
                                of 12%) was estimated at US$278.98 million.
                               Economic Analysis. A cost benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal. The major quantifiable benefits
                                of the project (on an incremental basis) were derived from: (a) agricultural production from increased
                                irrigation service areas; (b) value of water for industrial uses; and (c) value of water for domestic use.
                               Non-quantifiable benefits that were not included in the analysis: flooding control/drainage function
                                provided by the irrigation canal system; development of improved water management, social capital and


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



       institutional capacity; and the improved quality of soil and agricultural products due to the adoption of
       good agricultural production practices.
      Financial Analysis. Financial analysis was conducted to gauge project impact on farmers’ incomes, and
       to set the minimum water price charged for reservoir water users to cover the O&M costs. Crop budget
       and farm models were formulated under “with” and “without” project situations to gauge the financial
       attractiveness to farmers from: (a) improved crop yields; (b) changed cropping pattern (shifting to higher
       value crop); and (c) increase cropping intensities.
      The PAD included a brief description of the economic and financial analysis and it did not include a
       detailed Annex as expected. The assumptions used in the analysis were not clearly reported, and there
       was no sensitivity analysis included.



ex post

      The ERR at completion was estimated at 11%, which was moderately lower than the ERR estimated at
       appraisal (13%), but against the Opportunity Cost of Capital of 5% represented a high return. According
       to the ICR (paragraph 43) the lower ex-post ERR was "due to the scheme-wide on-farm works starting
       after project closure, instead of before project closure." The analysis followed the same approach
       adopted at appraisal.
      Assumptions. The economic life of the scheme was assumed to be 30 years; both cost and benefit flows
       are based on 2019 constant prices; costs are net of duties and taxes; the discount rate adopted by the
       analysis was 5% ; and the construction schedule of the on-farm works was based on the latest local
       government investment plan by county.
      Sensitivity analysis. To gauge the impact of a delay in on-farm investments beyond the next FYP (2021-
       2025), a sensitivity analysis indicated that the ERR would drop to 6%. It worth noting that the on-farm
       investments were not financed by the Bank (ICR, paragraph 54).



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency.

The project required a 22 months extension of the closing date. According to the ICR (paragraph 46), this
extension was needed to accommodate delays that stemmed from "procurement issues and delayed
government approval of the preliminary design (ICR, paragraph 46)." Despite the delays, all project activities
were implemented and completed at costs below the appraisal and restructuring estimates (96% of appraisal
estimates and 93% of estimates at restructuring), mostly due to bidding savings. The bank loan was fully
disbursed.




Overall, Efficiency is rated Substantial. While the estimated ex-post ERR was moderately lower than the ERR at
appraisal (11% compared to 13%), it was still considerably higher than the opportunity cost of capital at 6%. The
project faced implementation delays that were largely beyond the control of the project. Finally, project
implementation costs were below the appraisal and restructuring estimates despite the delays.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   100.00
 Appraisal                                                13.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             11.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall efficacy was rated Substantial. The evidence provided in
the ICR point to the success of the project in increasing the irrigation command area (PDO#1) through the
completion of the main and branch canals in the project area. As a result of the completion of the main and sub-
branch canals, there was sufficient water available in the canal to be diverted by local industrial and domestic
water users (PDO#2). The project also successfully introduced community based participatory approach in the
management of water facilities and infrastructure in the demonstration areas (PDO#3). Efficiency was rated
Substantial despite that the estimated ex-post ERR was moderately lower than the ERR at appraisal (11%
compared to 13%).



Given that all of the three assessed criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency) were rated
Substantial, this project’s implementation had minor shortcomings and its overall outcome is therefore rated
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraph 79) discussed one main risk that could impact the project development outcome:

The risk that slow or insufficiently funded on-farm works investment would negatively impact the
materialization of the long-term outcomes of the project. While the ICR (paragraph 79) described this as a

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



major risk, it stated that adequate measures were taken to address it. These measures included the
following:

1. A positive policy environment that puts on-farm investments as a priority for national and provincial water
sector development;

2. On-farm works and water supply facilities investment for the second phase Wudu Scheme are also part of
an economic stimulus package addressing the outbreak of COVID-19;

3. The investment plans for on-farm works by county and by lateral canal for the entire scheme are
being funded by local government bonds and development banks;

4. O&M plans for the main system were approved and funded through the municipal budget;

5. WUAs are being expanded to cover the entire project area and are expected to address on-farm
works O&M.



This Review adds the following risk:

The risk concerning the sustainability of the WUAs that the project created. While the WUAs were expected
to address low cost O&M repairs, local Governments "would assume responsibilities for big repairs of on-
farm works (mainly for laterals, rather than farm ditches)" (ICR, paragraph 38).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was the second phase of a large-scale water diversion scheme of the Sichuan Province. The
  first phase was partially financed by the International Development Association (IDA), and was completed
  in 2002. This project was designated as a national key water-sector project by the Ministry of Water
  Resources in China’s 12th FYP (2011-2015), and it supported the government’s strategy in such
  economic water scarcity areas to increase agricultural production and farmer incomes (ICR, paragraph
  4). The original project development objectives were ambitious and beyond the scope of the project
  activities. These objectives were revised as part of the 2017 restructuring. The project design involved
  complex works in mountainous areas. Activities were adequately sequenced to complete the upstream
  works prior to reaching the farms. Implementation arrangements reflected the centralized scheme-wide
  design, but featured a decentralized approach at the county level (ICR, paragraph 53). A notable design
  shortcoming was the lack of clarity on the inclusion of on-farm works in the project (ICR, paragraph 74).

  According to the ICR (paragraph 54), "risks were assessed appropriately at appraisal and mitigation
  measures were explicitly identified." Notable risks identified at appraisal included lack of familiarity with
  Bank requirements and procedures with regards to fiduciary aspects and safeguards, synchronization of



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



  the construction activities, and delay in the completion of the on-farm works-which were not financed by
  the Bank.

  During appraisal, the Bank appraised the on-farm works as part of the project. However, the Sichuan
  government policies required that the on-farm works be funded through local funds after the completion
  of the upstream works (main system). The PDO and the indicators were formulated to reflect the Bank's
  understanding of the project- that the main system would be connected to the on-farm works and water
  would be transferred to the farm level within the project implementation timeline. While this was corrected
  in the loan agreement, the PDO and RF in the PAD presented to the World Bank Board of Executive
  Directors for approval were not revised. These revisions were only made in 2017 right before the original
  closing date. The ICR did not explain the reason(s) for such late attention to this issue.

  M&E suffered from design weaknesses as the results framework (RF) "was not reflective of the project
  design (ICR, paragraph 53)." Specifically, the PDO indicators were long-term impact indicators that
  would not be realized by project completion. These were closely linked to on-farm works and water
  supply facilities investments that were expected to be completed after the project (see section 9a for
  more details).

  Overall, Quality at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This rating reflect significant shortcomings
  that included an overambitious original PDO that was beyond the scope of project activities and M&E
  design weaknesses.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted implementation support missions, but the ICR did not specify the number of missions
 conducted. It stated that missions were "regular, candid and timely in reporting progress and highlighting
 issues, and proposed practical follow-up actions (ICR, paragraph 76)." Supervision benefited from basing
 the Task Team Leader in Beijing for most of the time through preparation and implementation, with the
 exception of the period from July 2015 to July 2017 (ICR, paragraph 76). Bank supervision focused on
 the quality of engineering work as well as on the development of CDD-based on-farm works in the
 demonstration areas, and on project management capacity. Supervision missions also provided timely
 support on safeguard policies and on fiduciary aspects. The Bank missions worked with the project
 management on formulating the investment plan for on-farm works, O&M plans for the completed works,
 and scheme-wide WUA development. Bank supervision promptly identified and addressed implementation
 bottlenecks including procurement-related delays, and follow up actions were proposed and addressed.
 The Bank team worked closely with the government to put in place appropriate remedial actions to address
 the conflicts of interest raised in the 2014 and 2015 audit reports in a timely manner (see section 10 b for
 more details).

 A notable Bank supervision shortcoming was the long time taken to address the the misalignment of the
 original PDO and related indicators with the project scope. This Review is in agreement with the ICR that



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



 restructuring "the project should have been carried out much earlier during implementation (ICR, paragraph
 58)."

 Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory given the limited response to using restructuring as
 a means to quickly improve the project's performance.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project appraisal document (PAD) did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not mandated at
 appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR (page 9) included one which reflected the relation between the planned
 project activities, its outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts. However, the ToC in the ICR lacked the
 critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDOs and could have benefitted from a brief
 discussion. The achievement of the PDO was to be assessed through five PDO level indicators:
 #1. Increased new effective irrigated area with the project, #2. Annual value of agricultural production per
 mu, #3. Annual amount of industrial and domestic water supply, #4. Number of farmers (and female1
 farmers) benefiting from the supplementary irrigation, and #5. Number of O&M plans prepared and
 implemented for both main and on-farm systems. PDO indicators # 1, #2 and #4 address the first objective
 (to increase the coverage of irrigation services in the Project Area in order to increase agricultural
 production). While these indicators were relevant, specific, measurable, and time bound, increasing
 agricultural production was beyond the scope of the project. PDO indicator #3 addressed the second
 objective (to provide water supply, in bulk, to small rural communities and industries in the project area).
 This indicator was directly linked to the objective and measurable. PDO#5 addressed the third objective (to
 introduce a community-based participatory approach in the management of water facilities and
 infrastructure and increase of production capacity of higher-value agro-products in the Project Area to
 ensure the sustainable development of agriculture). The indicator was measurable and relevant, but it
 addressed only the first part of the objective. There were no indicators to assess the increase of production
 capacity of higher-value agro-products in the project area to ensure the sustainable development of
 agriculture. The ICR (paragraph 59) correctly stated that "the PDO indicators were long-term impact
 indicators, which could only be realized when on-farm works and water supply facilities investments were
 completed after the project."

 The results framework (RF) included ten intermediate outcome indicators to assess the different activities
 supported by the project. The majority of these were quantitative capturing different physical targets that
 would be achieved under the project. Some intermediate outcome indicators were later dropped because
 they were connected to the on-farm works, these include: Irrigation water use efficiency increased in the
 irrigation area, and Agricultural value increased per unit of water.



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



 M&E design suffered from a notable shortcoming reflected in the disconnect between the original indicators
 and the project’s scope and interventions. Also, some outcome indicators lacked baseline targets and most
 output indicators had no targets.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data collection and processing was done through an independent institute supported by the county
  Project Management Offices (PMOs) and the Management Information System (MIS) (ICR, paragraph
  60). The project staff at both municipal and county levels were trained in the operation of the MIS.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 60) "the data verification process was rigorous, backed by engineering
  quality assurance reports, and cross-checked with contract payments for reliable progress status and
  indicator values." While M&E reports on the intermediate indicators were prepared regularly, tracking of
  the original PDO indicators was limited until restructuring in 2017. According to the ICR (paragraph
  60) "the original PDO indicators could not have been reported on until only after the project closed."



  Restructuring and revision of the RF. Part of the 2017 restructuring was the revision of the RF. This
  included the following changes: first the PDO was revised (see section 2), second, changes to the
  original PDO indicators included: increased new effective irrigated area with the project was changed to
  Increased command area for irrigation with the project; annual value of agricultural production per mu
  was dropped; number of farmers (and female farmers) benefiting from the supplementary irrigation was
  changed to number of farmers (and female farmers) that would be benefitting from the increased
  command area for irrigation with the project; annual amount of industrial and domestic water supply was
  changed to Annual industrial and domestic water supply capacity; and number of O&M plans prepared
  and implemented for both main and on-farm systems was changed to number of O&M plans prepared for
  both main system and on-farm system in the demonstration areas. Third, intermediate outcome indicators
  were revised with targets revised downwards for three indicators and four indicators were dropped. The
  ICR (paragraph 20) provided logical explanations for the changes introduced at restructuring, most
  importantly the changes realistically reflected the scope of the project with its different activities and
  within its implementation time-frame.

  M&E implementation suffered from a notable shortcoming as data collection on PDO indicators were only
  collected after restructuring in 2017.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 61), the project data was useful and to was used to "evaluate physical
  progress, calculate costs, assess efficiency, and measure progress towards the realization of the
  indicators." In addition, the progress reports were based on the verified project data generated by the
  MIS. These reports informed project management on the status of implementation. Finally, the project's
  monitoring data and implementation progress reports were used in guiding restructuring as well as the
  final evaluation of the project.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



  M&E Quality is rated Modest. Design suffered from a notable shortcoming reflected in the disconnect
  between the original indicators and the project’s scope and interventions. While M&E implementation
  was successful in tracking the progress of the project through intermediate indicators, collecting data on
  the main PDO indicators only started in 2017. Finally, utilization suffered from the late collection of PDO
  data.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was an environmental category A. It triggered five safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP4.09), Indigenous peoples
   (OP 4.10), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in
   accordance with national requirements and the Bank’s OP/BP/GP 4.01. The EA concluded that the Project
   would bring significant positive impacts including: the provision of reliable, equitable and stable water supply
   to the irrigation areas of 1.053 million mu (70,235.1hectares); increasing agricultural yield; improving the
   livelihood of the farmers in the irrigated areas; and promoting benign circulation and sustainable
   development for the regional economic, social and ecological environment. However, there were also
   limited negative impacts that might arise during project implementation, including limited negative impacts
   on soil, air, water, acoustic environments, and solid wastes, mainly during construction. The Environmental
   Assessment (EA) documents, including EA summary, Environmental Impact Assessment, Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP) and Pest Management Plan as required by OP 4.09, were disclosed on
   December 2, 2010 at the Bank Beijing office website and at Bank headquarters (Infoshop).

   Environmental Compliance. According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "during project implementation, the
   mitigation measures and monitoring plan were carried out satisfactorily and the biannual reports on EMP
   implementation were submitted to the Bank on time." The borrower also followed the Bank's
   recommendations regarding dam safety with no issues during the project duration (ICR, paragraph 66)."

   Social Compliance. During project implementation, 4,408.04 mu (about 9.6 square km) of land were
   subject to acquisition. This also involved relocating 3,449 people in 992 households. In addition, about
   16,500 people were affected by land acquisition to a limited extent in the main canal areas as well.
   According to the ICR (paragraph 67) "resettlement was implemented and managed in compliance with the
   Bank safeguard policy requirements as well as with the relevant national laws and regulations."

   Overall, the ICR (paragraph 68) concluded that "the project complied with all applicable safeguard policies
   and the overall safeguards rating was Satisfactory throughout project implementation."




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



   Financial Management. According to the ICR (paragraph 69) the "project financial management was
   overall in compliance with Bank requirements." While fourteen unaudited interim financial reports were
   submitted to the Bank, only half of these were on time. The required annual audit reports were submitted
   on time since 2015 and the external auditors issued unqualified audit opinions. However, the audit reports
   of 2014 and 2015 raised an issue regrading conflict of interest in procurement (see below). The final
   project audit report was submitted to the Bank in August 2020.



   Procurement. According to the ICR paragraph 70) "procurement of works, goods and consultant services
   was carried out satisfactorily in accordance with the legal covenants and the Bank procurement policy and
   procedural requirements." However, there were procurement issues relating to weak coordination between
   the municipal PMO and its county level branches in approving designs and contracting of works, which
   resulted in implementation delays. Finally, the audit reports of 2014 and 2015 raised an issue related to
   conflict of interest involving a contractor and a supervision company in two Bank-financed contracts.
   According to the ICR (paragraph 70) "the PMO/Government prepared an action plan acceptable to the
   Bank and it was implemented in 2016." While the ICR did not explicitly mention that the issue was
   resolved, it noted that the 2016 audit report did not report any issues relating to conflict of interest.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None were reported in in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



1. To ensure realistic and achievable outcomes of irrigation projects, PDOs need to reflect
the scope of the project as negotiated with the Borrower. It is essential to have a mutually
agreed understanding on the sequencing of main systems and on-farm works, and define the PDO
accordingly. The agricultural productivity related indicators should be selected realistically and
conservatively, as improvements in agricultural production lag irrigation works development and take
longer than the typical duration of an investment project.

2. For large scale and technically complex projects, out-sourcing M&E to a reliable
independent third-party institution contributes to efficient M&E and ensures compliance with
environmental and social safeguard policies. Third party external entities specialized in M&E and
safeguard issues are in a better position to exercise fair judgment and allow the Project
Management Offices (PMOs) to focus on their core management and coordination functions. The
PMO employed a professional team responsible for project M&E, and also external monitoring
teams responsible for social aspects (including resettlement) and environmental safeguards,
respectively, to carry out their respective tasks during project implementation. As a result, safeguard
aspects were in full compliance with Bank policies throughout implementation, despite the large
scale and technical complexity of the project.

3. Engaging middle income countries like China is important because it allows the Bank
to share knowledge and build capacity in critical areas such as social development and
environmental management. Although the Bank loan only covered about 15% of the entire
second phase of the Wudu irrigation scheme development, Bank policies and procedures
(particularly in environmental management and social development) were fully incorporated in the
entire Phase II Wudu Scheme. In addition, the Bank’s close support to the development of the CDD
based on-farm works in demonstration areas was key to its success and on-going
scaling up.

4. Realizing the full potential of irrigation infrastructure calls for longer-term involvement in
the overall scheme development process. In hindsight, an approach similar to the Multiphase
Programmatic Approach would have allowed the Bank to engage with the client in structuring a
longer, larger, and more complex engagement as a set of smaller linked operations (or phases),
each with interim outcomes that link to make incremental change.

Although the instrument was not available at the time of appraisal, a similar long-term engagement
would have enabled the Bank to support the demonstration CDD approach for on-farm works
management through the entire Phase II Wudu Scheme for the intended agriculture productivity
enhancement.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Sichuan Wudu Irrigated Agric Dev (P121414)



Quality of Evidence. M&E suffered from a disconnect between the PDO indicators and the scope of the project.
This hindered collecting data on PDO indicators until restructuring in 2017. That said, the M&E system was
successful in collecting data on the physical targets related to infrastructure investments.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and provided convincing
arguments under the different sections, including the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a good discussion on the three objectives. It provided a well balanced
discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to the indicators and what the project
actually achieved on the ground. However, outcome targets lacked baseline values for comparison, and some
details could have been a better fit under the Annex section.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify the assigned ratings.
Discussion of outcomes was comprehensive, and the efficiency analysis was robust.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and candidly
reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. However, the outputs in Annex
1 lacked targets, and the sections on M&E design, implementation and utilization could have benefited from
more detail. Also, the Theory of Change did not include any assumptions that underpinned the achievement of
the stated PDOs.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 20
