     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022437

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127303                                    MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                 Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52370                                  31-Oct-2019                                         90,147,999.29

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2013                                30-Apr-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         90,147,999.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project development objective of the Mozambique
   Integrated Growth Poles Project was "to improve the performance of enterprises and smallholders in the
   Zambezi Valley and Nacala Corridor, focusing on identified high growth potential zones (growth poles)."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components.

   Support for the Tete Growth Pole in the Zambezi Valley (US$35 million estimated at appraisal, US$32.2
   million actual) supported the: (a) rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance of market access roads linking
   agricultural producers in the Angonia, Tsangano, and Macanga districts to markets in Tete; (b) rehabilitation
   of office buildings to house the Tete business center; and (c) provision of Innovation and Demonstration
   Catalytic Fund (IDCF) grants (not to exceed US$1.5 million) to finance: business linkage sub-
   projects between smallholder producers (individually or through their associations and cooperatives) and
   agribusiness value chains that improve the ability of the smallholder producers to access markets; and
   partnerships between private and public service providers and micro, small and medium enterprises
   (MSMEs) that enable the MSMEs to access existing and new market opportunities emerging from the large
   investments in Mozambique, particularly in natural resources.

   Support for the Nacala Special Economic Zone in the Nacala Corridor (US$44 million estimated at
   appraisal, US$39.2 million actual) supported the: (a) expansion and extension of approximately 110
   kilometers of water supply networks and distribution systems in Nacala; (b) rehabilitation of the Nacala
   Porto–Nacala-a-Velha bridges and water passages (channels connecting bodies of water); (c) construction
   of small civil works, including site demarcation and fencing of industrial plots for the Nacala Special
   Economic Zone and rehabilitation of office buildings; (d) provision of Innovation and Demonstration Catalytic
   Fund (IDCF) grants (not to exceed US$1.5 million) to finance business linkage sub-projects between
   smallholder producers (individually or through their associations and cooperatives) and agribusiness value
   chains that improve the ability of the smallholder producers to access markets, and partnerships between
   private and public service providers and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) that enable the
   MSMEs to access existing and new market opportunities emerging from the large investments in
   Mozambique, particularly in natural resources.

   Institutional Development and Capacity Building (US$8 million estimated at appraisal, US$6.24 million
   actual) supported strengthening the technical and institutional capacities of: (a) the Ministry of Economy and
   Finance to plan, coordinate, implement, and monitor and evaluate public investment programs; (b) the
   Ministry of Industry and Commerce to design and implement the Investment Climate Program; (c) the
   Zambezi Valley Development Agency and the provincial authorities in the Zambezi Valley to
   plan, coordinate, and monitor and evaluate investment promotion and facilitation activities; (d) the
   Promotion Agency for Investments and Exports and the provincial authorities in Nacala to plan, regulate and
   administer the Nacala Special Economic Zone; and (e) the Unit for Coordination of Integrated Development
   in Nampula to exercise its mandate to coordinate integrated development in Nampula.

   Project implementation (US$13 million estimated at appraisal, US$13.4 million actual) supported
   the provision of goods, consultant services, training, and the financing of operating costs of the Project
   Coordination Unit, the Zambezi Valley Development Agency head office in Tete and the Promotion Agency
   for Investments and Exports office in Nacala to execute, manage, coordinate and implement the project.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated at appraisal to cost US$129.1 million.

   Financing: The project was financed with a credit from the International Development Association (IDA) of
   Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 66.1 million (US$100 million equivalent). The amount of SDR 64.8 million
   (US$90.1 million) was disbursed, representing 98 percent of the IDA SDR financing. The large difference in
   equivalent U.S. dollar terms was due to the appreciation of the U.S. dollar against the SDR over 2013-19.

   Borrower Contribution: The remainder of the project cost of US$29.1 million, not covered with the IDA
   credit of US$100 million, was to be financed by: (a) a contribution from the government of US$9.1 million ---
   to be appropriated in the 2017 Budget for the Mozambique Road Fund as counterpart funding for the
   rehabilitation of the Nacala Porto–Nacala-a-Velha link road and bridges (see Section 1.D); (b) local
   beneficiaries, in the amount of US$10 million; and (c) foreign private commercial sources, for
   US$10 million. The government was unable to provide the US$9.1 million counterpart funding for the
   Mozambique Road Fund from the 2017 Budget because of higher than reported public debt in 2016 and the
   subsequent suspension of donor budget support. The project was able to mobilize US$26.5 million in
   private sector contributions for IDCF sub-projects, some US$16.5 million more than the expected US$10
   million. There is no record of foreign private commercial contributions to the project, for which US$10
   million was expected.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 25, 2013, became effective on August 23, 2013, and closed on
   April 30, 2020, seven months after the original closing date of October 31, 2019.

   Restructuring: The project was restructured twice: (a) on June 30, 2017, with US$19.2 million disbursed
   (19.1 percent of the original credit), to change the project components and cost (upgrade the Nacala Porto-
   Nacala-a-Velha bridges and water passages rather than rehabilitate the Nacala Porto-Nacala-a-Velha link
   road, following the unavailability of government counterpart funding for the Mozambique Road
   Fund), the results framework (see Section 9.B), the financing plan (see Section 1.E - Borrower
   Contribution), the institutional arrangements (change the project implementing agency from the Ministry of
   Planning and Development to the Ministry of Economy and Finance, following the former's merger with the
   Ministry of Finance, and recognize the Promotion Agency for Investments and Exports as the new agency
   replacing the Special Economic Zones Authority), and the implementation schedule; and (b) on September
   3, 2019, with US$72.8 million disbursed (72.8 percent of the original credit), to revise the allocation of funds
   among disbursement categories and to extend the loan closing date (from October 31, 2019 to April 30,
   2020). Neither of the restructurings triggered the need for a split rating of outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was clear and relevant to the development priorities of Mozambique at appraisal and
at closing.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



      The Zambezi Valley, located in Tete, Manica, Zambezia and Sofala provinces, and the Nacala
       Corridor, located in Nampula, Niassa and southern Cabo Delgado provinces, offered Mozambique
       an opportunity to advance a growth pole development strategy that would help diversity the
       economy beyond mining and energy, address regional imbalances, draw domestic private
       investment, improve economic competitiveness, and boost productivity growth. Harnessing
       this potential required addressing two sets of binding constraints to the development of these
       regions as growth poles: (a) the high cost of doing business, gaps in irrigation, energy and road
       infrastructure, the low productivity of labor, and the lack of credit and extension services --- which
       hampered agribusiness investment; and (b) limited access to competitive factor markets and
       business development services, the inability to meet quality and procurement standards of large
       investors, and lack business and management expertise --- which hampered local MSME
       development.
      A strategy focused on concentrated and targeted public investments that catalyzed domestic
       linkages would spur the development of these growth poles, and, additionally provide demonstration
       and spillover effects for the development of other potential growth poles across Mozambique. The
       Tete Growth Pole in Zambezi Valley would be targeted at agricultural production and processing
       and require infrastructure investments in the Angonia, Tsagano and Macanga districts to address
       gaps in the agribusiness supply chains and enable smallholders to access expanding markets in
       Tete. The Nacala Growth Pole, anchored on the Nacala Special Economic Zone, would be targeted
       at light manufacturing and logistics and would require infrastructure investments to address gaps in
       road access and water supply and thereby boost the development impact of the Nacala Special
       Economic Zone. Implementation of these strategic elements was a necessary conditions for the
       project's objectives to be achieved.
      The government's growth pole development strategy and the project objective were relevant to
       the Mozambique Strategic Plan for Agricultural Development, 2010-2019 and the National
       Agriculture Sector Investment Plan, which advanced two "pillars": agricultural productivity, and
       access to markets. The project objective was also consistent with the Mozambique Poverty
       Reduction Action Plan for 2011-14, which aimed to achieve inclusive growth through a strategy
       that boosted productivity in labor-intensive sectors, including agriculture.

The project objective was aligned with the country strategy of the Bank Group in Mozambique at appraisal
and at closing.

      The Country Partnership Strategy FY12-15 for the Republic of Mozambique committed Bank Group
       support to Mozambique organized around two "pillars": competitiveness and employment, and
       vulnerability and resilience. The project objective was aligned with the first pillar, specifically with
       the goals for "improved management of development process through spatial planning," "increased
       crop yields and overall productivity," "increased employment and growth in the tourism
       sector," "improved provision and management of road infrastructure," and "improved provision of
       water and sanitation service."
      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Mozambique for the Period FY17-
       FY21 committed Bank Group support in three "focus areas": promoting diversified growth and
       enhanced diversification, investing in human capital, and enhancing sustainability and
       resilience. The project objective was aligned with the first focus area, specifically with the objective
       "to increase agricultural growth" and the associated strategies to adopt "an integrated approach to
       increasing productivity in agriculture and forestry with a focus on smallholders and emerging
       commercial farmers" and to create "an environment conducive to developing backward and forward
       linkages between large investments in extractive industries and local companies to support

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



                                        diversification and ensure that the benefits of Mozambique’s natural resource wealth are more
                                        broadly distributed." The project objective was also aligned with the second focus area, specifically
                                        with the objective "to improve access to water and sanitation."

               In summary, the project's broad strategic objective was highly relevant to providing the enabling
               environment to facilitate the achievement of the specific objective "to improve the performance of
               enterprises and smallholders in the Zambezi Valley and Nacala Corridor."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the performance of enterprises and smallholders in the Zambezi Valley and Nacala Corridor,
                             focusing on identified high growth potential zones (growth poles).

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Targeted investment in core road infrastructure in Zambezi Valley and water and road
                             infrastructure in the Nacala Corridor and financial and technical support for structured commercial
                             arrangements between smallholder farmers and agribusiness chains and for partnerships between SMSEs
                             and public and private institutions would help improve the economic performance of smallholders and
                             enterprises in these growth poles. The upgrading of roads in the Zambezi Valley would provide smallholders
                             and MSMEs improved access to growing markets in Tete, which was envisioned as an agricultural production
                             and processing growth pole. Targeted investment in water and bridges infrastructure in the Nacala Corridor
                             should provide smallholders and MSMEs better access to water supply as well as bridges, with the
                             latter allowing them to better link with industrial sites, the nascent airport city, and Nampula, which was
                             emerging as a light manufacturing and logistics growth pole anchoring the Nacala Special Economic Zone. In
                             both the Zambezi Valley and the Nacala Corridor, IDCF grants would potentially help raise the productivity
                             and production levels of small-scale farmers and MSMEs within the framework of commercial partnerships
                             with larger enterprises. Moreover, support to key national, provincial and regional government agencies to
                             plan and coordinate these interventions would help improve the business environment for, and hence the
                             economic performance of, small-scale farmers and SMSEs in these growth poles.

                             Outputs. The project met all three output targets set for supporting the Tete Growth Pole in Zambezi Valley.

                                        The length of roads rehabilitated in the Zambezi Valley increased from zero kilometers in the baseline
                                          (2013) to 207.6 kilometers by the closing date, just seven kilometers under the target of 215
                                          kilometers.



                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)




      The number of smallholders located within two kilometers of the rehabilitated roads increased
       from zero in the baseline to 12,907 by the closing date, exceeding the target of 10,000. Some 6,578
       smallholders were within two kilometers of highway R604, while another 5,519 were within two
       kilometers of R605, according to data provided by the impact evaluation - both in Tete province.
      The number of smallholders in formal partnerships with IDCF grant recipients totaled 21,203 by the
       closing date, exceeding the target of 4,000 by more than five times. As the IDCF was developed and
       established for this project, there had been no smallholders in partnerships with IDCF grant recipients
       in the baseline. According to the ICR (pages 22-23): (a) 11 of 80 proposed IDCF sub-projects were
       approved and eight were implemented in Zambezi Valley for grants worth US$9.6 million which
       involved 13,484 smallholders; and (b) 10 of 104 proposed IDCF sub-projects were approved and
       implemented in the Nacala Corridor for grants worth US$10.9 million and involved 7,719
       smallholders. Moreover, the IDCF sub-projects in Zambezi Valley and the Nacala Corridor mobilized
       some US$26.5 million in additional private sector investments (almost thrice the US$10 million
       estimated in the Project Appraisal Document).

The project met all three output targets to support the Nacala Special Economic Zone in the Nacala Corridor.

      The length of the new water distribution network developed in Nacala-Porto increased from zero
       kilometers in the baseline to 139.2 kilometers by the closing date, exceeding the target of 110
       kilometers. According to the ICR (paragraph 27), the project raised surface water production to
       30,200 cubic-meters per day from 16,020 cubic-meters per day, groundwater production to 23,000
       cubic-meters per day from 10,820 cubic-meters per day, and reserve capacity from 8,900 cubic-
       meters per day from 5,100 cubic-meters per day.
      The number of people in urban areas provided with new improved water services under the project
       increased from zero in the baseline to 32,306 by the closing date, exceeding the target of 27,500.
      The number of bridges and water passages rehabilitated and upgraded in the Nacala Porto–Nacala-a-
       Velha Road (R702) increased from zero in the baseline to 41 by the closing date, just one short of the
       target of 42.

The project met the two output targets set for institutional development and capacity building.

      The number of potential investments evaluated by the Ministry of Planning and Development under
       the new Public Investment Management Program reached 26 by the closing date, exceeding the
       target of 25. According to the ICR (page 24), the project also helped the Ministry of Commerce and
       Industry: (a) implement the National Public Investment System to improve the management of public
       investment projects, and (b) upgrade the capacity of the One-Stop-Shop network for business
       registration and licensing.
      The number of laws, regulations, and codes that were enacted was one, meeting the
       target. According to the ICR (page 24): (a) the new Property Registration Code, Decree-Law No.
       2/2018 of August 23, 2018, was passed (it was the only piece of legislation/regulation recommended
       to be enacted under the project), and (b) the Insolvency Law was disseminated across eight
       provinces, providing training on the insolvency law to judges, prosecutors, and legal practitioners.


Outcomes. The project met two of three proposed outcome targets.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)




  The average increase in agricultural output sold per smallholder farm in partnership with the
   enterprises financed by the IDCF was 79 percent by the closing target, exceeding the final target for
   an increase of 20 percent (the original target was for an increase of 30 percent). However, there was
   a wide variation between the two zones and it is not clear what the base line was for the
   increase. While the increase was 134 percent for smallholders in the Zambezi Valley, it was only 23
   percent for smallholders in the Nacala Corridor. There was no explanation why the apparent outcome
   in the Nacala Corridor was so much smaller than in the Zambezi Valley.
  The total number of direct project beneficiaries was 211,660 by the closing date, exceeding the target
   of 140,000 for both Zambezi Valley and the Nacala Corridor, and consisting of: (a) 155,247 people
   within 10 kilometers of rehabilitated roads (ICR, paragraph 31); (b) 32,306 people in urban areas
   benefitting from improved water supply (ICR, paragraph 37); (c) 21,203 smallholders in partnership
   with IDCF grant recipients (ICR, paragraph 42); (d) 2,151 public sector staff benefitting from capacity
   building activities (ICR, page 44), including training related to public investment management (502),
   One-Stop-Shop business registration (302), One-Stop-Shop technical operations (25), insolvency law
   dissemination (463), the Promotion Agency for Investments and Exports (504), and environmental and
   social safeguards for projects (347).
  In contrast, the average share of agricultural output sold per smallholder farm located within two
   kilometers of rehabilitated rural roads declined from 35 percent in the baseline to 33 percent by the
   closing date, failing to meet the target of 42 percent. A bad year in 2018 and the cyclone in central
   Mozambique in 2019 contributed to this decline from the baseline. The results notwithstanding, the
   ICR (paragraph 32) reports that impact evaluations using a difference in difference analysis supported
   by the Africa Gender Innovation Lab (World Bank, Roads Rehabilitation of R604 and R605 in Tete
   Province - Impact Assessment Report, 2002) showed that: (a) the road investments had substantial
   impacts on enterprises and smallholders benefitting from the project (those located along rehabilitated
   roads R604 and R605) compared to the control group (those located along the non-rehabilitated roads
   as N302 and R603); (b) households within two kilometers of the rehabilitated roads had 38 percent
   higher agricultural output than the control group; (c) households near the rehabilitated roads had 40
   percent higher consumption than the control group. No such analysis was available for the Nacala
   Corridor.
  It is noteworthy, however, that the ICR provides no assessment of the performance of the enterprises
   which established contracts with farmers and farmer groups. The ICR referred to evidence of the
   anticipated positive impact of this project on farmers’ opportunities in the Zambezi Valley for selling
   their production and hence improving their performance, but there is a lack of comparable evidence
   for the Nacala Corridor and also a complete absence of any information on the performance of
   enterprises financed by the IDCF. Considering the optimistic assessment in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) (page 111) of the benefits of the project to farmers in Tete such as the expected
   “increased efficiency in production, the production and sale of more goods without increased efficiency
   (increase in inputs), switching to crops which result in higher profits, reduced costs and easier access
   to agricultural inputs, or higher price at sale due to reduction in transport and other input costs for the
   manager of the out-grower scheme” that more information is not available in the ICR on these
   expected benefits. Improved performance of enterprises and smallholders was the core of the
   project's objective, but there is no analysis of whether or not there was an improvement in the
   performance of enterprises and smallholders. The inclusion of at least some information on such
   issues would have strengthened the credibility of the efficacy with which this project achieved its
   objective. The lack of information is surprising because the ICR mentioned an impact assessment of




                                                                                                Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



                                    the sub-projects financed by the IDCF, which included two rounds of data collection on smallholders
                                    beneficiaries (para 66).

                            Based on the achievement of two out of three outcome indicators, this Review rates the efficacy with which
                            the project's objective was achieved as substantial, but only marginally so because of the weak evidence on
                            the extent to which the project's core objective of Improved performance of enterprises and smallholders was
                            achieved.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project met all eight output targets and two of three outcome targets aimed at the objective "to improve
                            the performance of enterprises and smallholders in the Zambezi Valley and Nacala Corridor," focusing on
                            identified high growth potential zones (growth poles). This Review rates the efficacy of the achievement of
                            the project’s objective as substantial but only marginally so because of the weak evidence for the
                            achievement of some of the outcomes.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. Although the ICR refers to the project’s expected economic rate of return (ERR) in the
   PAD, namely 25 percent, it does not provide any comment on the analysis of the PAD's analysis of the project’s
   efficiency. For the efficiency of domestic partnerships with individual farmers or groups pursuing ventures such
   as for processing agricultural production or marketing services, the PAD established base case scenarios and
   assumed cash flows and partnership investments using capital from the IDCF financed by the project. For the
   Zambezi Valley, based on published research for Mozambique quoted in the PAD, the scenarios assumed “4
   percent yearly growth in volumes without the project and 16 percent volume growth with the project between
   years 3 and 6, reverting back to an average 4 percent growth for the rest of the forecast period”. In addition, the
   scenarios assumed an “additional 1.1 percent annual income growth for the farmers in the partnerships” (Annex
   9, paragraph 6b, page 112). With respect to the analysis of road development, the PAD assumed that
   “improvements in the national corridor would raise total crop production by 24 percent and maize production by
   33 percent and investments in rural feeder roads raise national crop production by a further 131 percent and
   maize production by a further 146 percent”. Again this assumption was based on published research quoted in
   the PAD (Annex 9, paragraph 6a, page 111).


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



On the basis of these and other assumptions for partnerships and road development in the Zambezi Valley and
the Nacala Corridor, the PAD expected the project to generate an ERR of 20 percent (Annex 9, paragraph 18,
pages 116-117). The ICR quotes the PAD as having estimated the ERR for the Zambezi and Nacala growth
poles due to infrastructure developments as 25 percent and 19 percent respectively. The PAD’s estimate of the
overall ERR for all project activities was 16 percent. According to the ICR the PAD estimated an improvement in
“well-being” among farmers during the project of 16 percent.

Using the same methodology as in the PAD (with information available from the beneficiaries), the ICR
estimated the ERR for partnerships and road development at the project’s close as 23 percent and the
estimated the ERRs for the Zambezi and Nacala growth poles due to infrastructure developments at closing
at 29 percent and 20 percent respectively. The estimated overall ERR for all project activities when the project
closed was only 12 percent. The ICR refers to an estimate of an improvement in “well-being” among farmers
during the project of 12 percent.

The basis for the estimated rates of return reported by the ICR is Annex 4 in the ICR. It explains the basis for
the ERRs calculated, but most calculations are based on assumptions and projections because data drawn from
the project’s implementation were not available. For example, in the narrative on how the benefits from
infrastructure investments in the Nacala Corridor were estimated, it is stated that the investments “did result in a
better business environment for enterprise development” but the text that follows provides details on how
benefits were computed “by comparing the potential sustainable rate of growth with the estimated that would
occur if the constraint were not removed” (Annex 4, paragraph 5, pages 48-49). There are many such
examples, but, more importantly, it stood out that the project had not measured the efficiency with which the
“out-grower” scheme had “improved the performance of smallholders” (a core element in the project
development objective). The only measure in the assessment of the project’s efficiency was the “increase in
volume sold” which was actually the first outcome indicator, namely “average increase in agricultural output sold
per smallholder farm in formal partnership with IDCF recipients”. A more informative measure of efficiency
would have been the average additional income generated by smallholder farms compared with an historical
average without the project – to try to assess the attribution of results to this project. It is not clear why this
information could not have been collected. It would have provided a measure of the improved incentives for
smallholders to engage in the partnerships promoted by this project and addressed an important issue facing
agriculture in Mozambique, namely the lack of incentives for smallholders to adopt improved technologies to
produce a surplus. A similar question arises regarding the efficiency of the enterprises.

Operational Efficiency. The project funds were close to being fully disbursed (see Section 2e). According to the
ICR (page 25), there were less financial resources available to the project due to currency valuation changes ---
an estimated funding gap of 10 percent of the original commitment as a result of the appreciation, on one hand,
of the U.S. dollar against the SDR over 2013-19 (8.5 percent between April 2013 and October 2019) and on the
other hand, a depreciation of the Mozambican metical against the U.S. dollar over the same period (107.3
percent between April 2013 and October 2019). Nonetheless, all project activities were fully implemented, as
revised following two restructurings. The project closed seven months later than originally scheduled.

While the assessment of the project’s efficiency in the ICR reflects considerable work and a search for credible
reasons why this project was efficient, this Review of the ICR concludes that there is inadequate evidence that
this project was efficiently implemented because the assessment of efficiency in the ICR was to a large extent
based on assumptions. Inadequate information was collected on the project’s performance including the
efficiency of the two main actors in the project, namely the enterprises and the smallholder farmers. For these
reasons this Review rates the efficiency of this project as modest.



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 16.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              12.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objective was relevant to the development priorities of the government for a growth pole regional
development strategy and was consistent with the assistance strategy of the Bank Group in Mozambique. The
project met all three output targets for the Tete Growth Pole in Zambezi Valley, all three output targets for the
Nacala Special Economic Zone in the Nacala Corridor, all two output targets for institution building and capacity
development, and two of three proposed outcome targets for the objective to "improve the performance of
enterprises and smallholders in the Zambezi Valley and Nacala Corridor", focusing on identified high growth
potential zones (growth poles). While the ICR reports that the project achieved a 12 percent economic rate of
return, the basis for this conclusion is questionable since: (a) the efficiency analysis simply repeats assumptions
found in the Project Appraisal Document and uses little real data derived from the project; and (b) the analysis
misses some important issues that are far more important than those addressed under the heading of efficiency,
such as the incentives for farmers to engage with agri-business and the efficacy of the results.

To summarize, this Review finds that this Integrated Growth Poles Project had moderate shortcomings in
its efficiency and its overall outcome is therefore rated moderately satisfactory,


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this project appear to be moderate overall.

Political Risk. The political commitment of the government to the project development objective appears to
be solid. The government continues to promoted investment in Zambezi Valley and the Nacala Corridor,

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



following the growth pole strategy. According to the ICR (page 133), the government is engaged with the
Bank in planning future operations, which will help sustain the development outcomes of this project. The
Integrated Feeder Road Development Project and the Southern Africa Trade and Connectivity Project will
expand the rehabilitation of roads in Zambezi Valley and the Nacala Corridor. The Second Water Services &
Institutional Support Project will continue to improve water distribution in service areas adjacent to
this project. The Southern Africa Trade and Connectivity Project and the Economic Linkages for
Diversification Project will use the IDCF model to reach new smallholders and agribusinesses, with
geographical overlaps with this project.

Institutional Capacity Risk. The national and local agencies participating in the project have the institutional
capacity to sustain the project outcomes. All roads and water works constructed or rehabilitated under the
project are under the management of the National Roads Administration and the Water Supply Investment
and Assets Fund respectively. The Mozambique Road Fund has committed financing for the maintenance of
the roads and bridges rehabilitated under this operation. The Zambezi Valley Development Agency is
providing oversight of the agribusiness partnerships established under the project, mentoring IDCF sub-
project beneficiaries. The IDCF is developing a new pipeline of sub-projects, building on experience gained
with this operation.

Macroeconomic Risk. Mozambique's nascent recovery from two powerful tropical cyclones in 2019 was
interrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. The country obtained US$309 million from the IMF Rapid
Credit Facility in April 2020 to help meet balance of payments and fiscal needs stemming from the crisis. To
mitigate the impact of the pandemic and preserve macroeconomic stability, the government took
measures to increase health spending, strengthen social protection, and support MSMEs. Although the
economy is estimated to have contracted by 0.5 percent in 2020, a potential recovery in 2021, helped with
the deployment of vaccines, will help reset the macroeconomic framework to sustain the infrastructure
development achieved under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The growth poles strategy adopted for the project was informed by experience with similar Bank
  operations in other countries, including in Madagascar (Growth Poles Project), China (Agricultural
  Technology Transfer Project), Lesotho, Gambia, and Vietnam (Agriculture Competitiveness
  Project). According to the ICR (page 28), the project aimed to replicate the integrated, multi-sectoral,
  private sector-led approach to regional development, investment promotion, and job creation adopted in
  the other growth poles projects.

  The government had previously identified the Zambezi Valley and the Nacala Corridor as priority areas
  for regional development. The Bank designed the project to address development constraints in these
  areas that were vetted through its own analytical work and after extensive discussions with the
  government, other development partners, and the private sector. The priority infrastructure investments
  consisted of: roads, bridges and water passages that would support food production to serve the mining
  towns in Tete, water works for the Nacala Special Economic Zone, and facilities for out-grower
  schemes by which agribusinesses linked up with smallholders.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)




  While the design of the project was technically sound, there were some moderate deficiencies, however.

        The multiplicity of implementing agencies – the Ministry of Economy and Finance, National Roads
         Administration, Mozambique Road Fund, Water Supply Investment and Assets Fund, Office for
         Economic Areas for Accelerated Development, Integrated Development Authority of the
         North, Zambezi Valley Development Authority, Unit for Coordination of Integrated Development in
         Nampula, and Promotion Agency for Investments and Exports – implied that coordination and
         communication issues would likely arise during project implementation. The ICR (page 29)
         suggests that the Bank should have allowed for sufficient time for coordination mechanisms and
         communication links to be established firmly before project implementation.
        The implementation arrangements for the IDCF were not ready at project effectiveness. The ICR
         (page 29) points to multiple revisions to IDCF sub-project eligibility and selection criteria during
         project implementation as evidence.
        There were deficiencies with the choice and definition of results indicators at appraisal (see
         Section 9.a below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank responded actively to the slow implementation and the low disbursement rate during the early life
 of the project, as cited in Implementation Status and Results Reports and supervision mission Aide
 Memoires.

       The Bank increased the implementation support to the project, both in terms of staff time and
        budget, before and during the Mid-Term Review.
       The Bank revised the results framework for the project, changing some of the results indicators,
        during the first restructuring of the project in 2017.
       In mid-2017, the Bank expanded the in-country team, with specialists supporting various aspects of
        project implementation including safeguards and fiduciary compliance.
       The International Finance Corporation supported the implementation of the IDCF and extended
        assistance to various business environment improvement activities at the national level.
       The Bank regularly reviewed procurement and financial management activities and reflected its
        findings in reports to the government.


 The Bank prepared 14 Implementation Status and Results Reports over the seven-year duration of the
 project, or two a year, the average for investment projects. The supervision missions also filed 15 Aide
 Memoires. According to the ICR (pages 32-33), the reports were thorough and candid in identifying
 gaps with project implementation and offering recommendations to address them. The supervision helped
 boost the pace of project implementation, compensating for the early delays.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document (pages 45-48) provided for the following M&E plan for the project:

       The Project Coordination Unit at the Ministry of Planning and Development, employing both an M&E
        Specialist and an Impact Evaluation Specialist, would be responsible for the monitoring and
        evaluation of the project. The Project Coordination Unit would convey M&E reports to the Project
        Steering Committee, which would maintain a strategic oversight of the project.
       For the IDCF, the Fund Manager would be responsible for submitting quarterly financial reports to
        the Project Coordination Unit.
       Similarly, all other implementing agencies (see Section 8.a) would submit M&E data to the Project
        Coordination Unit.
       Eight output and four outcome indicators would measure the achievement of the project objectives,
        using the results framework adopted for the project.


 The Financing Agreement (pages 17-18) required the: (a) specification of the results indicators in the
 Project Implementation Manual; (b) preparation of quarterly project progress reports and their submission
 to the Bank; (c) conduct of a comprehensive Mid-Term Review of the project; and (d) performance of the
 M&E function by the Project Coordination Unit.

 According to the Mid-Term Review, there were problems with the choice of the original results indicators:
 (a) the indicators did not capture some of the results of the Nacala Corridor component; (b) the
 indicators mostly measured IDCF results; and (c) it was difficult to identify appropriate baseline data for
 some indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Coordination Unit implemented the M&E activities of the project. According to the ICR
  (pages 29-31):

        Actual project activities were tracked against work plans and budgets, and performance reports
         were prepared, aided by a computerized M&E reporting system.
        Progress with the output and outcome indicators were monitored regularly.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



  The Mid-Term Review recommended a revision of the original set of indicators to better align the results
  framework with the project objectives and activities. The Project Coordination Unit used the revised set
  of results indicators for M&E after the restructuring in June 2017.

        The "length of the new water distribution network developed in Nacala-Porto" and the "number of
           bridges and water passages rehabilitated and upgraded in the Nacala Porto–Nacala-a-Velha
           Road" substituted for the "length of non-rural roads rehabilitated" as output indicators for the
           Nacala Corridor component --- the principal infrastructure investments in the Nacala Corridor
           consisted of water works.
          The "number of smallholders in formal partnerships with IDCF recipients" substituted for "percent
           of IDCF sub-projects achieving their objectives" as an output indicator for the IDCF in both the
           Zambezi Valley and Nacala Corridor components.
          Two impact assessment studies were conducted: (a) the first, on the rehabilitation of the R604
           and R605 roads in Tete, which included three rounds of data collection, comparing households
           around the rehabilitated roads to households in the control group (Boxho, Montalvao, Ploen and
           Yang, 2020, Road Rehabilitation of R604 and R605 in Tete Province – Impact Assessment
           Report); and (b) the second, on the sub-projects financed by the IDCF, which included two rounds
           of data collection covering smallholder beneficiaries (the details of this assessment were not
           disclosed in the ICR).
          The "average share of agricultural output sold per smallholder farm within two kilometers of
           rehabilitated rural roads" was substituted for the outcome indicator "percent of smallholders in
           targeted zones selling crops to a medium or large commercial enterprise". However, even with
           the change, it could be argued that the share of agricultural output sold could not always be
           directly attributed to the project's investments because farmers made sales decisions based on a
           variety of considerations including: (a) weather conditions (farmers adjusted the share of output
           sold versus output consumed in response to bad harvests); (b) prices; (c) household food security
           concerns; and (d) the economic and financial returns to other household activities. To address
           these issues, additional information was necessary to help analyze agricultural sales decisions by
           farmers: their total assets; total livestock; agricultural inputs; the share of households that were
           better off compared to two years ago; the share of households that had not suffered from hunger
           in the past 12 months; and total household consumption over the last three months.
          The "number of people with wage employment of at least half-time per week in the targeted
           zones" was dropped as an outcome indicator.

  The Mid-Term Review recommended the preparation of a detailed M&E Manual to ensure the collection
  of quality information, consistent reporting over time, and the efficient tracking of the project outputs and
  outcomes by the Project Coordination Unit.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 31), the M&E data helped the Project Coordination Unit to direct its efforts
  and resources on activities that were material to the successful implementation of the project. It also
  mentions that:

        M&E results were conveyed to the Project Coordinator, the Project Steering Committee, the
           Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Bank, and other stakeholders.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



        The government regularly assessed the environmental and social risks of the project activities,
         including by continuously collecting related data and acting on recommendations for risk
         mitigation measures.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category "B"
   project at appraisal and triggered safeguard policies Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and its
   related General Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines, Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest
   Management (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). In response, the government prepared an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework, a Pest Management Plan, and a Resettlement Policy Framework, which were disclosed in-
   country and at the Bank’s Infoshop. The ICR (pages 31-32) reports the completion of the following
   safeguards policy compliance activities during implementation:

         A Simplified Environmental Impact Study was undertaken for the Tete Growth Pole in the Zambezi
          Valley. The impacts were monitored.
         An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and a Resettlement Action Plan were prepared for
          the Nacala road works (R702). Public consultation meetings were held. The assessments and
          plans were prepared notwithstanding that the bridges and water passages had no resettlement
          implications and a Resettlement Action Plan was necessary only if the road were rehabilitated.
         Environmental and Social Management Plans and related Implementation Plans were prepared for
          the Nacala water works, for which mitigation measures were necessary. The FIPAG discovered that
          four of the 10 boreholes drilled were artesian, implying that water flowed freely until the wells were
          properly equipped. A Remedial Action Plan was prepared to mitigate possible social effects on the
          community from the closure of the boreholes, although an audit cited a negligible effects. The Bank
          will need to continue supervising this component post-project closing to (a) assess the possible
          effects from the loss of access to water once the boreholes were equipped, (b) ensure that the land
          rights are secured; (c) undertake any additional remedial actions.
         For the IDCF, the Environmental and Social Management Framework was used to screen sub-
          projects for which social and environmental safeguard instruments, including environmental and
          social impact assessment and action plans, labor management plans, stakeholder engagement
          plans, and pest management plans, were required. Disbursements were conditioned on the
          completion of these instruments, which was closely monitored during implementation.

   Compliance with safeguard policy Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) was rated moderately
   satisfactory. Compliance with overall safeguards policies was rated moderately satisfactory.

   Social Safeguards. The ICR (page 32) reports that a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was active and
   functional throughout project implementation and covered all project components.


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



        GRM systems were operational for the road works in Tete and Nacala. Information on the
         mechanisms for handling complaints was relayed to project beneficiaries and to the wider
         population. A code of conduct for employees was disseminated via local radio, following the
         environmental and social action plan for the Nacala road works.
        A separate GRM system was developed for the IDCF, including a complaints handling mechanism,
         part of the implementation of a communication strategy. Channels to fill complaints were made
         available on-line and directed to the IDCF manager. Five cases were registered. Each IDCF sub-
         project was required to have a GRM system in place, part of the sub-project's environmental and
         social impact assessment and action plan.

  Compliance with overall safeguards policies was rated moderately satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The Financing Agreement (pages 19-23) required: (a) compliance with the Guidelines:
  Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and
  Grants by World Bank Borrowers and the Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants under
  IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers; (b) the use of international competitive
  bidding for the procurement of goods and non-consulting services and quality- and cost-based selection for
  the procurement of consultant services; (c) the specification in a Procurement Plan of other methods of
  procurement; (d) the specification in the Procurement Plan of contracts requiring prior-review by the Bank,
  with all other contracts subject to post-review by the Bank; and (e) the use of procedures defined under
  the Regulamento de Contratagdo de Empreitada de Obras Publicas, Fornecimento de Bens e Prestagdo
  de Servigos ao Estado of the Republic of Mozambique of May 24, 2010, following Decree No.
  15/2010, where national competitive bidding is used. According to the ICR (page 32), procurement issues
  delayed the implementation of the project. Post-procurement reviews and independent audits cited
  missing information for procurement execution, including delivery certificates and payments
  documentation. The Project Coordination Unit eventually addressed the procurement problems, leading to
  improved capacity and processes. Procurement was rated moderately unsatisfactory early on, but rated
  satisfactory beginning in 2017 and through the last Implementation Status and Results Report.

  Financial Management. The Financing Agreement (page 18) required the government to maintain a
  financial management system following the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
  General Conditions for Loans of 2012, including by preparing and submitting to the Bank quarterly interim
  financial reports and having the annual (fiscal year) financial statements audited. According to the ICR
  (page 32), early supervision missions cited the lack of a system to collect and summarize accounting data
  that would provide real-time information on project finances. The Project Coordination Unit was able to
  address this issue, however. The project was in compliance with financial management requirements and
  arrangements, and financial management was rated satisfactory throughout project implementation,
  including in the last Implementation Status and Results Report.




                                                                                                Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 34-35), with some adaptation.

Channeling assistance to farmers through support for structured commercial arrangements
with agribusiness firms offers a viable mechanism to simulate agricultural development. This
project supported the extension of IDCF grants to finance business linkage sub-projects between
smallholder producers, individually or through their associations and cooperatives, and agribusiness
value chains. These linkage projects, known variously as contract farming or out-grower schemes,
coordinate commercial relations between producers, processors, and traders and lead to a vertical
integration of the agricultural value chain. They provide agribusiness firms with opportunities to
explore local markets, stimulate domestic demand, control production to dampen price volatility, and
source locally for export markets. At the same time, they provide smallholder farmers ready access
to farm inputs, seasonal credit, and technological knowhow and help farmers to improve product and
quality standards.

The use of local development authorities to manage growth pole projects has the advantage
of better integrating local needs in government decision-making processes. In this project, the
Zambezi Valley Development Authority, the Integrated Development Agency of the North, and
the Unit for Coordination of Integrated Development in Nampula helped plan and
coordinate infrastructure investments that were linked to local demand, including food production for
mining towns in Tete, water infrastructure for the Nacala Special Economic Zone, and out-grower
schemes among smallholders and agribusiness chains in Zambezi Valley and the Nacala
Corridor. For the IDCF, a local investment committee in Zambezi Valley and another local
investment committee in the Nacala Corridor reviewed and approved proposals for IDCF
grants. According to the ICR (page 35), the use of local authorities strengthened institutional and
technical capacity at the local level, allowed for the prompt response to project implementation
issues, and ensured better monitoring of project results.


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



Output and performance-based road contracts provide incentives to deliver quality and
efficient services. According to the ICR (page 65), this project successfully adopted output-based
contracts, which had been used elsewhere globally, for the maintenance for the R604 and R605
roads in Tete. In an output and performance-based road maintenance contract, the contractor is
paid on an output basis, maintaining the road at a specified service standard, rather than on an input
basis, as occurring under traditional maintenance contracts. By paying contractors based on the
level of service they deliver, output-based contracts provide a clear financial incentive for contractors
to meet performance standards. Private contractors are also incentivized to improve their efficiency
and minimize waste because they are compensated at a set level for performance. With the use of
this approach in Tete, the National Road Administration has built up the capacity to introduce and
manage these contracts and has since adopted them for other road maintenance projects in
Mozambique, according to the ICR.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is consistent with the guidelines. It provides a fairly good record of the project. There was one
revision to the project components; this is explained in Revised Components (pages 17-18). There were
several changes to the output indicators; these are detailed in Table 2 (pages 18-19). There are more changes
to the outcome indicators; these are noted in Table 1 (page 17). There were two restructuring episodes; the
scope of the changes is explained in Other Changes (pages 19). The outputs and outcomes of the project are
summarized in Table 4 (page 24) and Annex 1 - Results Indicators (pages 36-41). The full narrative is laid out
in Achievements of PDOs (pages 21-24). More details are provided in Annex 1 - Key Outputs by Components
(pages 41-44) and in Mobilizing Private Sector Financing (page 28).

The discussions of the efficacy and efficiency of the project were candid although the efficiency analysis was
limited and lacked an analysis of the efficiency of the two groups engaged in agri-business and smallholder
partnerships. Higher-than-reported public debt spurred donors to suspend budget support to Mozambique; the
government was subsequently unable to provide counterpart financing for the rehabilitation of the Nacala
Porto–Nacala-a-Velha link road, a key infrastructure investment in the Nacala Corridor. The percentage of
output sold per smallholder farmers engaged in a partnership with IDCF grant recipients exceeded the
target. However, the percentage of farm outputs that smallholders sold, versus the percentage that they
consumed, was influenced by many other factors, other than simply being the results of their partnership
agreements with agribusiness chains. The economic rates of return for the first and second components of the
project were higher than estimated at appraisal. on the other hand, the returns for the third and fourth
components and the lack of an efficiency analysis of the enterprises and smallholder partnerships dragged
down the overall rating. The ICR provided useful lessons based on evidence in the ICR.

The ICR was crafted according to the Guidelines. One significant shortcoming, however, was the lack of a
definition and a full accounting of the number of direct project beneficiaries (reported as 211,660) which was
one of the outcome indicators. This was rectified by the authors of the ICR after its publication.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ:Integrated Growth Poles Project (P127303)



Despite some shortcomings, this Review rates the overall quality of the ICR as satisfactory.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 19
