     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022390

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P124942                                  Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53190                                30-Apr-2019                                         14,594,378.86

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Nov-2013                              30-Apr-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        14,594,378.86                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 24),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to develop the capacity of the Ministry of Natural Resources
   and Environment (MONRE), Vietnam National Mekong Committee (VNMC), and relevant agencies to manage
   trans-boundary water resources and climate risks through river basin approaches and improved water
   resources data collection, analysis, and exchange in order to contribute to the implementation of integrated
   water resources management in the Lower Mekong."


                                                                                                Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



   In addition to VNMC, the Task Team confirmed in its January 15, 2021 email to IEG that the other MONRE
   line agencies directly involved in the project were Vietnam National Meteorological Hydrological
   Administration (VNMHA) created in 2018 to replace the National Hydrological, Meteorological Service
   (NHMS), the National Center for Water Resources Planning and Investigation (NAWAPI), and the Department
   of Water Resources Management (DWRM).

   This review will assess project performance against the following objectives:

         to develop the capacity of MONRE, the VNMC, and other relevant agencies to manage trans-
          boundary water resources and climate risks;
         to improve water resources data collection, analysis, and exchange in order to contribute to the
          implementation of integrated water resources management in the Lower Mekong.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Institutional Development of Integrated Water Resources Management in the Vietnam Part of the
   Sesan-Srepok (2S) Basin (US$3.4 million at appraisal, of which US$2.5 million was IDA, US$3.8 million
   actual, all IDA). This component would establish and finance the operational needs of a River Basin
   Organization (RBO). The activities included developing a basin profile database using a geographical
   information system (GIS), a river basin management plan, technical studies, a water resources monitoring
   database system for the 2S Basin, and technical training for staff and stakeholders of the organization.

   In the 2018 restructuring, a River Basin Committee (RBC) was established as the organization to
   sustainably manage water resources of the 2 river basins, Srepok and Sesan (ICR, paragraph 31). The
   RBC would promote integrated water resources management by building consensus among stakeholders
   and coordinate approaches across sectors. Under the same restructuring, the scope of this component was
   refocused on completing only the Srepok River Basin Water Resources Plan (WRP), since - as confirmed
   by the Task Team (per email to IEG of January 15, 2021) - MONRE had already completed the Sesan River
   Basin WRP in 2017-2018 with their own budget resources. This restructuring furthermore refined the
   capacity support needs of NAWAPI.

   2. Water Resources Monitoring Network at the Border Areas with Cambodia and Lao PDR in the
   Lower Mekong and a Water Resources Information System for the Lower Mekong located in
   Vietnam (US$17.3 million at appraisal, of which US$15.1 million was IDA, US$5.8 million actual, of which
   US$5.7 million was IDA). This component was intended to finance the construction of a trans-boundary
   water resources monitoring network that would record water level, river flow, and water quality in the
   Mekong Delta and the Central Highlands; water quality laboratory equipment, and a data sharing
   mechanism with Cambodia and the Mekong River Commission (MRC). This component would establish a
   Water Resources Information System for the Lower Mekong in Vietnam by financing relevant studies and
   developing a data sharing system; build capacity to manage this system; and promote data sharing
   through a website. This component also intended to support a Salinity Monitoring Pilot for Kien Giang

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



  Province by constructing salinity monitoring stations; financing an integration study, and building capacity of
  staff from relevant institutions in hydrology modeling, geographical information systems, and data collection.

  Under the 2018 restructuring, the pilot activity for Kien Giang was cancelled from this component because it
  was now included in the Mekong Delta Climate Resiliency and Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P153544),
  approved by the Bank in June 2016 (ICR, paragraph 24). Two components - constructing water resource
  monitoring (Component 2) and hydro-met (Component 3 below) stations - were merged after the VNMHA
  replaced NHMS to be now responsible for both types of stations.

  3. Hydro Meteorological (Hydro-met) Information Network, Flood Forecasting, and Warning System
  in the Central Highlands (US$7.6 million at appraisal, of which US$6.2 million was IDA, US$4.6 million
  actual, of which US$4.2 million was IDA). This component would finance the upgrading and construction of
  hydrometeorology stations; integrate upgraded and newly constructed stations into the regional and
  national systems; and finance technical assistance, software, and hardware to enhance flood forecasting
  and flood warning system. In addition, this component would finance capacity building activities for MONRE
  and other users of forecasting services, and the operation and maintenance (O&M) of installed equipment
  and services. This component would further finance the regional integration for forecasting and early
  warning systems in the Lower Mekong by integrating regional hydro-met data; financing equipment, relevant
  studies, and other capacity building support.

  During the 2018 restructuring the integration of the upgraded hydro-met stations into the national system
  was cancelled because this activity had now become part of the Vietnam Managing Natural Hazards Project
  (P118783) approved by the Bank in 2012. The upgrading of monitoring stations, software, hardware and
  capacity building was added to strengthen the outcome of this component.

  4. Project Management (US$1.7 million at appraisal, of which US$1.2 million was IDA, US$1.1 million
  actual, all IDA). This component was to finance the operating costs of the Project Management Unit (PMU);
  technical advisory services; goods (including vehicles); training and workshops; monitoring and evaluation
  (M&E) of the project; financial management, procurement, and safeguards compliance; audits; other
  capacity building efforts; and regional collaboration and coordination.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was US$30 million. The project disbursed US$15.3 million, of which
  US$14.6 million was IDA credit. The balance of about US$10.2 million of the IDA credit was cancelled
  (equivalent to SDR5.8 million). (The slight discrepancy in actual totals on account of SDR to USD exchange
  rate fluctuations). The Task Team clarified in its January 15, 2021 email to IEG that the cancelled amount
  was associated with the non-implementation of the investment to improve the forecasting and early warning
  capacity of the national hydro-met network and hydro-met data sharing with Cambodia and Lao PDR.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this project with a credit of US$25.0
  million

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$5.0 million in borrower contribution and disbursed
  US$0.7 million. In its January 15, 2021 email to IEG, the Task Team clarified that three factors reduced
  government contributions: One, the need for land acquisition compensation was reduced because hydro-
  met and water monitoring stations were located on public lands. Two, some activities under Component 2

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



overlapped with World Bank-financed projects and were later dropped, further reducing the need for
these contributions. Three, project management activities were shifted to IDA financing rather than
government contributions.

Dates: The project was approved on November 27, 2013 and became effective on April 7, 2014. The Mid
Term Review (MTR) was conducted on April 17, 2017. The original closing date was on April 30, 2019 and
was extended by another 12 months to close on April 30, 2020. There were two level 2 restructurings:

      On January 31, 2018 - to introduce changes to the components, indicators, and targets in the
       Results Framework and to revise disbursement estimates.
           o The following components were revised: (i) under Component 1, the government intended to
              establish a River Basin Committee (RBC), and redefined its function to coordinate rather
              than directly manage water resources as envisioned during appraisal. In addition, the scope
              of this component was reduced since MONRE had already completed the Sesan River Basin
              study in 2017-2018 using government financing and refined the capacity needs of NAWAPI;
              (ii) under Component 2, cancelled the pilot salinity monitoring at Kien Gian province because
              this was now covered by the Mekong Delta Climate Resiliency and Sustainable Livelihoods
              Project (P153544) approved by the Bank in June 2016; and (iii) under Component 3,
              cancelled the integration of the upgraded hydro-met stations into the national system, which
              was now part of the Vietnam Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783) approved by the
              Bank in 2012. In addition, components 2 and 3 were merged because VNMHA (formerly
              NHMS) was now responsible for both water resource monitoring (component 2) and hydro-
              met (component 3) stations.
           o The original 11 indicators and corresponding target values were revised (see Section 4
              Efficacy below for a discussion of the changes made to the Results Framework):
                      Dropped 1 PDO outcome indicator - NMHS shared Central Highland Hydromet
                       forecasting information with Cambodia;
                      Dropped 2 intermediate outcome level indicators - Annual reports issued confirming
                       the participation of stakeholders in the RBC, and O&M needs of hydromet monitoring
                       network allocated;
                      Revised the definition and values of target indicators of 3 PDO outcome indicators -
                       first, that the organization to be established was a River Basin Committee, its
                       function revised from directly monitoring water use to coordinating the line agencies
                       that monitor water use, and therefore required reduced operational costs; the value of
                       the target indicator was replaced by a Yes/No; second, that provinces would be
                       replaced by hydromet and water resources monitoring stations, with a revised target
                       value from 5 provinces to 36 monitoring stations; and third, that water quality data
                       shared with MRC was redefined as data from border water resources monitoring
                       stations with no change in the value of the target indicator;
                      Revised the definition and values of target indicators of 4 intermediate level
                       indicators - first, the business plan was replaced by a work plan; second, water
                       quality monitoring station was replaced by water resource monitoring station, with
                       target value changed from 18 to 10; third, O&M allocated to the monitoring
                       network, replaced by monitoring stations transferred to a MONRE agency, with no
                       change in target value; and fourth, from additional stations to new/upgraded stations
                       with target value changed from 18 to 26 stations.



                                                                                                Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



                        Added 2 intermediate level indicators - first, a functional decision support system
                         (DSS) in place, and second, new or upgraded data hubs at the national, regional, and
                         provincial levels with a target value of 10.
         On April 1, 2019 - to extend the project closing date to complete two civil works, three equipment,
          and three consulting services contracts, formally establish the RBC, complete the 2S river basin
          plans; and allow the government-approved use of the remaining uncommitted IDA credit worth
          US$9.5 million to upgrade the Central Highland Regional Hydro-met Center. This
          investment would improve the forecasting and early warning capacity of the national hydro-met
          network, promote better hydro-met information sharing among Vietnam Cambodia, and Lao PDR but
          the Task Team January 15, 2021 email to IEG clarified that this investment was not implemented
          due to lengthy and complex internal government procedures and the amount associated with this
          investment was cancelled.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDOs for this project were “to develop the capacity of the MONRE, the VNMC, and relevant agencies
to manage transboundary water resources and climate risks through river basin approaches and improved
water resources data collection, analysis, and exchange, exchange in order to contribute to the
implementation of integrated water resources management in the Lower Mekong.” This project was one of
three projects designed to improve integrated water resources management and development in the
countries of the Lower Mekong River. Similar projects were developed for Lao PDR and Cambodia to
strengthen their national capacities in water resources monitoring systems to facilitate trans-boundary data
sharing and ensure that all member countries of the Mekong River Commission, i.e., Cambodia, Lao PDR,
Thailand and Vietnam, benefit from the Mekong River.

At closing, the PDOs were aligned with the country sector strategy embodied in its 2012 Water Resources
Law. The law outlined an integrated water resources management strategy, covering river basin
management, environmental flow, and water quality management, acknowledging that multiple water users
managed these resources. The PDOs were aligned with the country's water sector reform process to
improve its institutional capacity according to standards and expand the use of technology. The PDOs also
complemented the regional initiative in the Lower Mekong Basin (LMB) to avoid conflict in the use of trans-
boundary water since over 60 percent of the country’s surface water originated from upstream countries,
and over 50 percent of its rice production and 60 percent of its aquaculture depended on the water from the
Mekong Delta (ICR, paragraph 2). The PDOs also contributed to the country's Strategic Environmental
Development Plan 2016–2020 to strengthen human resources, scientific capacity and application, and
resilience to climate change impacts (ICR, paragraph 28). The project proposed interventions to improve
the institutional capacity of a dedicated government entity to manage water resources across sectors
and adopt technology-based tools such as a Decision Support System (DSS) and modeling capacity. The
PDOs were also relevant to the country's Socio-economic Development Strategy for the period of 2011-
2020, to improve and modernize human resource capacity.

With the Mekong Delta a significant socio-economic lifeline for the people along the basins, managing the
water resources in an integrated manner would reduce transboundary tensions arising from competing use
for irrigation, energy, or conservation, for example. Integrated water resources management would facilitate

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



effective and sustainable use of resources across several sectors and across boundaries. By focusing on
strengthening the institutional capacity of agencies such as Vietnam's MONRE, the PDOs provided critical
support to the government's commitment to implement its portion of the reform in integrated water
resources management. The PDOs were not formulated to address the development problems that would
impact the economic activities along the 2S river basins, considering its limited resources.
Institutional capacity constraints were mitigated by tools and technical training in integrated water resource
and trans-boundary management. MONRE piloted integrated water resources management practices
processes in the Sesan-Srepok (2S) basin. In addition to being the most modified segment of the river in
the country that could cause damages, the 2S basin was located in the Central Highlands that ran across
Vietnam and Cambodia and provided a window for trans-boundary management.

The PDOs were relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018–2022. The
CPF focused on three areas: (i) enable inclusive growth and private sector participation, (ii) invest in people
and knowledge, and (iii) ensure environmental sustainability and resilience. The PDOs directly contributed
to the third focus area to achieve Objective 10: Increase climate resilience and strengthen disaster risk
management; and Objective 11: Strengthen natural resource management and improve water security. The
PDOs validated the results of the World Bank's 2019 study, Vietnam: Toward a Safe, Clean and Resilient
Water System, Effective governance of the water sector would need a strengthened human and financial
capacity, implement the Water Resources Law, integrate river basin management, and a national water
resources information systems in place.

The Bank's historical experience in the country and in the sector included the Mekong River Commission's
integrated water resources management project co-funded with the Australian Department of Foreign
Affairs and Trade (then Agency for International Development) to strengthen regional coordination for trans-
boundary water resources management. Two other projects, one in Lao PDR (P104806) and another in
Cambodia (P1486547) were also intended to strengthen water resources management in the Lower
Mekong Basin (ICR, paragraph 7). The Phase 1 of this project focused on the Mekong regional integrated
water resources management and generated a Trans-boundary Action Plan for Cambodia and Vietnam
concentrating on the 2S River Basin and the Mekong Delta. There were other World Bank projects in
Vietnam. One was the Climate Change Development Policy Operation (P131775) to help draft the 2013
Water Resources Law, develop the decree to implement this law, and a national action plan on water
resources. Another was the Vietnam Renewable Energy Development Project (P103238). Still another
was the Vietnam-Mekong Delta Water Resources Management for Rural Development Project (P113949),
which invested in irrigation infrastructure, supported water resources planning, O&M, and pilot activities to
enhance water productivity. The Vietnam Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783) was yet another
that identified river basin as a planning unit for protecting against natural hazards, upgraded systems for
hydro-met data collection and analysis in the central coast provinces (frequent storm landfall site). The
World Bank's Water Partnership Program supported a Climate Change Adaptation Project. The Global
Environment Facility, also housed at the World Bank, financed the Mekong Water Utilization Program
(P045864). This program helped the Mekong River Commission promote sustainable water management in
the Mekong River Basin (ICR, paragraph 6). The Bank-financed Natural Disaster Risk Management Project
that closed on December 31, 2013 provided US$5.0 million to upgrade the Mekong Delta hydro-met
equipment (PAD, paragraph 29, bullet 3).

In sum, the PDOs were aligned with the country's development plan for the sector and contributed to the
Bank's current strategy for the country. However, after a history of nine previous projects affecting the
sector in Vietnam and the region, the PDOs did not aim for a progressively more challenging outcome for
an integrated water resources management in the Mekong Delta. As it were, the PDOs were narrowly

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



               limited to developing institutional capacity to accompany the sector reform. The Relevance of Objectives is
               rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To develop the capacity of MONRE, the VNMC, and other relevant agencies to manage trans-boundary water
                             resources and climate risks

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): According to the PAD, the project's causal chain started with institutional support
                             and training activities that would lead to outputs such as water resources plans, technical studies, information
                             networks for flood forecasting and early warning systems, and trained staff. Outputs from three activities
                             would generate four intermediate outcomes that would be measured by relevant output indicators: (i) a
                             functional river basin organization; (ii) Central Highland Hydrometeorology forecasting data shared with
                             Cambodia; (iii) provinces received improved Central Highland hydrometeorology forecasting and early
                             warning information; and (iv) water quality Information shared with the Mekong River Commission (MRC).
                             These outcomes reflected improved capacity of MONRE and other agencies to manage trans-boundary water
                             resources and climate risks. The underlying assumption was that training and technical assistance with
                             government budget support sufficiently equipped participating entities with the necessary tools to manage
                             trans-boundary water resources and climate risk. The project activities were not sufficient to improve capacity
                             in integrated trans-boundary water resources management since efforts would also need to address specific
                             climate risks, and upstream development that would affect agricultural production and economic
                             activities. While the sequence is logical, the objective was only focused on improving capacity and did not
                             address outcomes related to economic activity of the population affected by improved management of trans-
                             boundary water resources (see Section 9, M&E (a) Design below).

                             The TOC (ICR, Figure 1) was consistent with the causal chain presented in the PAD (PAD, Annex 1). The
                             capacity building activities under the three components would generate outputs such as a river basin plan,
                             tools, equipment, and trained MONRE staff. These outputs would achieve the 11 outcome and intermediate
                             outcome indicators defined at appraisal except for changes introduced in the 2018 restructuring. These
                             changes resulted in: (i) dropping one outcome and two intermediate outcome indicators; (ii) adding two new
                             intermediate outcome indicators; and (iii) redefining three outcome and four intermediate outcome indicators
                             with associated changes in targets (see discussions in the output and outcome indicators below). As at
                             appraisal, the activities in the TOC were not sufficient to improve MONRE and other agencies capacity to
                             manage trans-boundary water and address climate risks. The TOC also did not identify which climate risks
                             were addressed by the improved capacity. The TOC offered the following assumptions; (i) the regional nature
                             of the activities would be maintained; (ii) the project would comply with fiduciary policies; and (iii) MONRE line

                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



agencies would have adequate human resources and sufficient funds to monitor trans-boundary water
resources. These assumptions did not include the complex nature of an integrated water resource
management, a clear delineation of functions among the entities involved, and government approval
processes that could delay implementation.

According to the TOC, the objective would be achieved when the 2S River Basin Committee (i) had been
established; (ii) had met at least twice; and (iii) had decided on water resources planning, management, or
climate risk (ICR, footnote 5). The TOC at closing was properly sequenced but the capacity development
activities that generated plans and decision support system (DSS) tools did not provide a critical mass
to attribute improved capacity of the agencies assigned to address the development problem of
managing trans-boundary water resources and climate risks.

OUTPUTS:

Evidence on achievements showed that the following targets were achieved or partially achieved:

      The government established the 2S River Basin Commission on May 8, 2020 (after project closing).
         A 2S RBC work plan was prepared. In its January 15, 2021 email to IEG, the Task Team clarified that
         the 2S RBC Chairman was expected to approve these updated plans, which included Personnel and
         2021 Action Plans by February 2021. The Ministry of Finance had approved the 2S RBC 2021 O&M
         budget. The target for this indicator was that a fully functioning body would be achieved when the
         Committee (i) had been established, (ii) had formally met at least twice, and (iii) had decided on water
         resources plan, management, or climate risk. The RBC had not yet met but was scheduled to meet in
         December 2020. The Task Team notified IEG in its January 15, 2021 email that the meeting
         was postponed because of Covid 19 restrictions and a communist party congress meeting organized
         for January 25, 2021. According to the ICR, the RBC was supposed to submit for approval a Water
         Resources Plan to the Prime Minister in December 2020 but as the Task Team clarified, this plan was
         expected to be approved by March/April 2021 instead.
        Completed: 4 technical studies, which contained scenario assessment on the impact of various
         climate conditions (such as wet, dry, and normal) used for climate change risk management and
         adaptation, as targeted.
        No annual reports were prepared to confirm the participation of key stakeholders from the energy, and
         agricultural sectors, representing farming communities, and the Vietnam Women's Union. The original
         target was not achieved. During the 2018 restructuring, this indicator was replaced by pitting
         a functional decision support system (DSS).
        The revised target of having a DSS in place was achieved. The DSS included a range of modeling
         licenses that covered water resources, flood forecasting, reservoir operation, water quality, and
         groundwater levels.
        NAWAPI utilized the DSS to prepare a 2S Scenario Assessment Report, as targeted.
        MONRE used DSS to prepare the 2S Water Resources Planning document, as targeted
        The government acquired software and hardware related to the application of the DSS, as targeted
        Drafted an Agreement on Regulation of Water Resources Utilization along the border between
         Vietnam and Cambodia including the Preliminary Procedures for Sharing Information and Data from
         the border water resources monitoring stations invested under the Project.

OUTCOMES:


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



The following targets were not achieved:

      The 2S RBC was established shortly after project closing but not yet fully functional and did not
       achieve the original target. The Bank Tea provided additional information on April 7, 2021 referring to
       the impact of the Covid 19 pandemic - as a consequence of which resulted in the unavoidable
       postponement of the Mekong River Commission (MRC) Council meeting that had been planned by the
       River Basin Committee (RBC) to approve the protocol for data and information sharing between
       Vietnam and Cambodia. The Team added that while the formal meeting did not take place, the RBCs
       have been functional and operational at the sub-national level, holding regular meetings on water
       resource and river basin management issues.
      The approval of the committee structure has been delayed as noted above.
      Vietnam (VNMC) and Cambodia (CNMC) have discussed transboundary activities but not yet data
       sharing. The Agreement on Regulation of Water Resources Utilization along the border between
       Vietnam and Cambodia including the Preliminary Procedures for Sharing Information and Data from
       the border water resources monitoring stations was pending signature of Ministry of Foreign Affairs
       and Ministry of Justice of Vietnam. Delay was due to the selection of the new Government Cabinet in
       January 2021.

The following target was achieved:

      A functional decision support system (DSS) was put in place for the 2S basin in support of water
       resources planning and management. The DSS improved access to data and information, and
       strengthened how agencies carried out integrated water resource planning and management within
       and beyond the 2S basin.

It should be mentioned that while - as the ICR acknowledged - the outcome was Partially Achieved, the Bank
Team provided additional information on April 7, 2021 indicating the impact of the Covid 19 pandemic on the
unavoidable postponement of the MRC Council meeting planned by the RBC to approve the data sharing
protocol between Vietnam and Cambodia and the delay that resulted from the selection of the new
Government Cabinet in January 2021. The Team added that notwithstanding that the formal meeting did not
take place on schedule, the RBCs have been functional and operational at the sub-national level, holding
regular meetings on water resource and river basin management issues. With the additional information, the
efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial on the basis that the outcome indicator is
likely to be achieved soon.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve water resources data collection, analysis, and exchange in order to contribute to the
implementation of integrated water resources management in the Lower Mekong.

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



Theory of Change: According to the PAD, the following causal chain of activities and outputs would lead to
outcomes to achieve the PDO. Activities such as procuring a water resources information system for the
Vietnam segment of the Lower Mekong and providing technical assistance and training to strengthen the
hydro-met information network, flood forecasting, and warning system in the Central Highlands would lead to
outputs that support a water resources monitoring network at the Lower Mekong border with Cambodia and
Lao PDR; and would achieve this objective (PAD, paragraph 29). Two assumptions were to be tested during
implementation. First, that MONRE would develop permanent water resources monitoring stations at the
border with Cambodia, establish a baseline, and allow for periodic monitoring of the water resources in the
areas. Second, that the water quality data would cover all parameters under the Procedures for Water Quality
(PWQ), and generate a report implementing PWQ shared with MRC and other riparian countries.

The TOC was consistent with the causal chain in the PAD except for adjustments in indicators
and targets introduced during the 2018 restructuring based on new information provided by the updated
feasibility study supporting the project. These changes included the dropping of three activities, dropping one
outcome indicator, replacing one intermediate output indicator with a new intermediate output indicator and
refining the description of 3 intermediate output indicators (se also Section 9(a) M&E Design below).
However, a revised outcome indicator was miscategorized and was an output (see below). The TOC
remained valid after restructuring because the remaining 5 project activities would lead to four outputs to
strengthen the hydro-met and water resources monitoring networks. The capacity building inputs and the
resulting tools and instruments were sufficient to achieve the narrowly defined target outcome even though
this was likely to be fully achieved after the project closed.

OUTPUTS:

Evidence on achievements showed that the following targets were achieved or exceeded:

      36 new or upgraded monitoring stations with information for improved flood forecasting and water
         resources management (original target 23, revised target 31). The ICR reported this output as an
         outcome.
        Installed and upgraded 10 new water resource monitoring stations in the Mekong Delta and Central
         Highlands (original target 4, revised target 8)
        Installed/upgraded 26 additional hydro-met stations in the Central Highlands, transferred to MONRE,
         and connected these to the national system (original target 12, revised target 23).
        Constructed and installed new or upgraded 9 hydro-met data hub stations. at the regional, national,
         and provincial levels to process data from the Central Highlands. The Task Team added in
         their January 15, 2021 email to IEG, that these outputs included 4 central level data hubs at VNHMA,
         DWRM, VNMC, and NAWAPI; 1 central highland data hub, and 4 provincial level data hubs (original
         target 8)
        Completed the testing of all installed equipment with hands-on training and technology transferred to
         MONRE line agencies.
        Trained the VNMHA staff on the operations and maintenance (O&M) needs of the hydro-met
         equipment during installation.

The following target was partially achieved:




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)




                                   On April 30, 2020, MONRE endorsed the O&M budgets for the operation of completed hydro-met and
                                    water monitoring stations.

                            OUTCOMES:

                            The following targets were achieved:

                                   The hydro-met monitoring and water resources stations provided near real time data such as water
                                    level, flow rate, and water quality parameters to relevant agencies.
                                   VNMHA was now responsible for implementing data management generated by the water resources
                                    monitoring stations to be transferred to data hubs, as targeted.

                            The following target was partially achieved:

                                   Data from the border water resources monitoring stations were shared with Cambodia and the
                                    Mekong River Commission (MRC) but without a formal agreement in place. The next MRC Council
                                    Meeting was scheduled for late 2020 to take up this data sharing agreement. There is a high likelihood
                                    this target would be achieved in the near future.

                            In sum, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial because the revised outcome indicators
                            were exceeded and achieved and another likely to be achieved in the near future. In addition, the objective
                            was narrowly defined to contribute to implementing integrated water resources management. The
                            Government mobilized counterpart fund resources to operate and maintain all equipment and monitoring
                            stations built by the project to ensure its sustainability for long-term use. All 36 hydro-met stations were
                            adequately staffed, ensuring smooth operations.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's efficacy in achieving the first objective was Substantial because the Bank Team provided
                            additional information on April 7, 2021 to justify that the lone outcome indicator will soon be achieved. The
                            project's efficacy in achieving the second objective was Substantial based on exceeding and achieving the
                            revised target outcome indicators introduced during the restructuring and the likelihood that another indicator
                            would be achieved in the near future. M&E was rated Modest (see Section 9 below) because after the original
                            indicators were adjusted at restructuring to better reflect the reduced scope of the project, the indicators were
                            not used to monitor progress and the M&E was not implemented until toward the project closing. The Bank
                            Team added in their April 7, 2021 email, however, that the results obtained during implementation support
                            missions were in fact verified and steps were taken to confirm their accuracy. Taking this into account,
                            the overall efficacy of the project is rated Substantial.


                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the project did not undertake a conventional benefit-cost economic
analysis. Instead, the proposed investments were justified based on the economic benefits brought by
improved forecasting to reduce the risks from natural hazards (PAD, paragraph 51). The benefits were: (i) more
accurate forecasts; (ii) increase in forecast time span from 24 to 48 hours, (iii) sharing with the hydropower
operators of near-real-time upstream hydro-met data, and (iv) at least one hour lead time for warning. A lack of
information, a lack of capacity to utilize forecasted data, or assess the effectiveness of the early warning system,
and lack of supporting infrastructure (evacuation points and mitigation infrastructure) to develop assumptions
made valuing the benefits difficult. Economic benefits of hydro-met investments were then estimated using the
Schroeter, et al. study (2008). This study estimated the economic benefits of hydro-met investments. The study
found that with a 12-hour lead time, the effectiveness and efficiency of early warning systems for flash floods in
small river basins would reduce potential damage by 60 percent. A one-hour lead time would reduce potential
damage by 20 percent. Total damages from flood events from 2005 to 2009 were estimated at US$91 million, or
approximately US$18 million per year. The economic analysis was based on avoiding the impact from floods. A
long-term national average of annual losses associated with floods was projected, using a 'without project'
baseline. The project benefits were from additional (incremental) avoidance of these impacts for the project’s
target areas. The potential economic benefit was approximately US$4.7 million per year, which is slightly above
the proposed investment benefit at appraisal (US$3.6 million average per year) or around 20 percent per year
reduction in potential damages.

At closing, the analysis used at appraisal could not be replicated because the hydro-met stations were only
operational for a short time. Economic analysis would have limited value.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Several factors affected early implementation delays. These
included:(i) a lack of familiarity with Bank processes, (ii) some planned expenditures reverted from IDA funding
to counterpart funding when the country transitioned from the International Development Association (IDA) to
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), and (iii) protracted high-level government
approval processes (ICR, paragraph 54). By December 3, 2014 when the PMU was transferred
from VNMCSO to MONRE, the PMU was able to be registered and open bank accounts and facilitated
smoother implementation after the 2017 Mid Term Review (MTR). In 2018, the project was restructured to
reduce the scope of Component 1 after the government had already completed one of the two
planned WRPs; Components 2 and 3 were merged after the VNMHA was now tasked with implementing
both components; and two sub-activities under Components 2 and 3 were cancelled. The project used half the
project cost to complete the reduced planned activities due to the cancelled activities and because the original
feasibility study overestimated the number of stations to be established / upgraded (ICR, footnote 7 and Annex
4, paragraph 1). The study was revised two years into implementation. The revised Terms of References for the
study were cleared after another eight months. The feasibility study also took more than a year to be
approved. This delayed contracting for many activities that were now based on the revised study.
New government regulations affected key functions of the line agencies implementing project activities. Water
resource planning regulations were finalized by the second year of the project. NAWAPI became responsible for

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



the 2S water resources planning by year three of the project. River basin planning support started in the final
year of the project. MONRE's internal review and approval processes took longer than originally
estimated. Implementation improved after the approval processes were delegated from the central level to the
Project Management Unit. Finally, the COVID-19 pandemic delayed the operationalization of the RBC pushing
the first meeting to December 2020. The project was restructured twice and extended by 12 months. According
to the January 15, 2021 Task Team email to IEG, the Government disbursed only US$0.7 of its original US$5.0
million commitment because funds for land compensation were largely not utilized since most stations were
located on public lands. In addition, some activities that overlapped with the project and were dropped, and
project management activities shifted to IDA financing, further reducing the need for counterpart funds.

In sum, the overall efficiency is rated Modest due to the implementation delays, challenges arising from new
regulations, reduced scope, and significant underutilization of project funds. There were no comparative rates of
economic efficiency due to the limited time the project investments were in operation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial because the PDOs were not progressively ambitious following
nine other Bank-financed projects that affected the sector in the country and in the region. The project's efficacy
to achieve Objective 1 is rated Substantial because of additional information provided by the Bank Team on
April 7, 2021 regarding the high likelihood that the sole outcome indicator would be achieved shortly. The
project's efficacy to achieve Objective 2 is rated Substantial because an outcome indicator was exceeded while
another outcome indicator was likely to be achieved in the near future. The overall efficacy of the project to
achieve the objectives is rated Substantial. The project's Efficiency is rated Modest because of operational
shortcomings and a lack of comparative analysis of the project economic efficiency since the project
investments were completed late. In addition, while the Modest rating of the project's M&E was not a factor in
rating the project outcome, the shortcomings from the ill-defined original indicators that were addressed at
restructuring were not used to monitor the project progress because the M&E system was only implemented as
the project was closing and that "there were no clear mechanism to ensure quality in reporting (ICR, paragraph
61)." This meant that the project did not use the project M&E system to provide the evidence that the activities


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



and out[puts of the project led to the outcomes and calls into question the accuracy of the results achieved.
However, the Bank Team added in April 7, 2021 that despite the various shortcomings that did exist in M&E, the
results obtained were indeed verified and steps were taken to confirm their accuracy during implementation
support missions. The overall outcome of the project is thus rated Moderately Satisfactory..


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following posed risks to development outcome (ICR, paragraphs 76 - 80):

      Reduced government commitment. At closing, the 2S River Basin Council inaugural meeting was
       planned for late 2020 due to the delays in approving and implementing the accompanying Water
       Resource Planning instrument. The government allocated financial and human resources as
       evidence of its commitment to implement the Water Law and this instrument.
      Lack of budgetary O&M support to the technical innovations introduced by the project.
       The project introduced a Decision Support System (DSS) to improve access to data and information
       to strengthen agencies carrying out integrated water resource planning and management within and
       beyond the 2S basin. The DSS is operational but additional hardware and IT equipment would be
       needed to enhance its capacity and improve the security of the system. The government acquired
       additional hardware and IT equipment related to the application of the DSS (ICR, paragraph 78).
       However, long-term support for software and hardware upgrade, sufficient staff, and regular O&M
       would be needed to fully integrate DSS into the overall water resources planning and management.
      Institutional risk: The institutional arrangements introduced under the project called
       for building accountability across agencies involved in implementing the project. At closing the project
       identified post-project responsibilities for the VNMCSO but those for the other agencies such
       as DWRM, VNMHA, and NAWAPI were still being developed. The government reported that they
       continue to implement the approaches introduced by the project using their own resources and are
       likely to implement the cooperation among the various agencies in establishing these
       accountabilities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank designed the project taking into account its strategic relevance to the Bank's country program
  (see Section 3 Relevance of Objective above) as well as the government's efforts in water resources
  management. The Results Framework prepared at appraisal showed how the components would achieve
  the PDOs although the indicators used needed to be better linked and clarified at restructuring. Two
  activities had to be cancelled because these became part of other World Bank-financed projects (ICR,
  paragraphs 20 and 24). The design incorporated lessons from prior similar regional operations, analytic

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



  work in the water resources management sector, the first phase of this project, and experience from
  establishing River Basin Organizations (RBOs) in Vietnam. These included well-defined roles and
  responsibilities of the Mekong River Commission (MRC), practical collaborative arrangements for two
  country units, a sound legal framework with clear mandate for the participation of key sectors such as
  energy and agriculture, key stakeholders agreeing on the mandate of RBOs, and commitment of
  adequate human and financial resources (PAD, paragraphs 37-40).

  Environmental and social risks were adequately assessed, though less so, operational risks. According to
  the ICR, readiness to implement was constrained by unclear roles and functions of the implementing
  agencies (DWRM, NAWAPI, and NHMS) to oversee activities and by a lack of institutional arrangements
  on coordinating project implementation (ICR, paragraph 52). In addition, the implementing agencies were
  unfamiliar with Bank processes. Risks related to capacity of implementing agencies were not considered
  to be a substantial risk and more effective mitigation measures were not designed.

  Other critical risks were identified, and corresponding mitigation measures were integrated into the
  project design (ICR, paragraph 53). Fiduciary management, the integrity of the various components’
  activities to maintain the regional nature of the project, monitoring, and sustainability of the investments
  were identified as major risks. Mitigating measures involved engaging the MRC to facilitate the
  implementation of the activities at the national level; providing intensive trainings on procurement and
  safeguards; and monitoring the pledged allocation of the human and financial resources for O&M of
  software and information technology (IT) equipment. Costs related to land acquisition as well as the costs
  for other mitigation measures associated with the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan and
  Ethnic Minority Development Plan were included in the counterpart funds (PAD, paragraph 69).

  In sum, the quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to the limited readiness to implement the
  project, evident in the initial lack of familiarity of the implementing entity with Bank processes, and lack of
  clear coordination framework that would have better defined roles and responsibilities of the various
  beneficiary entities to implement the project. In addition, there were modest shortcomings evident in the
  indicators of the results framework that had to be refined through restructuring.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 15 supervision missions over the seven-year implementation period. Five task
 team leaders coordinated with four MONRE line agencies in implementing the project. The
 government acknowledged the challenge posed by five task team leaders over the six-year implementation
 period (ICR, Annex 5). Fiduciary and safeguard aspects were adequately supervised, based on satisfactory
 compliance with these aspects of project implementation (see Section 10, Other issues below). The task
 team provided timely No Objections and assistance relating to procurement, financial management,
 safeguards, and technical advice (ICR, paragraph 73). The Bank team also identified implementation
 challenges, pursued two restructurings after the 2017 Mid Term Review, and modified indicators to better
 reflect how these contributed to achieving the project objectives.



                                                                                                       Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



 Candor in reporting was evident in the performance reporting prior to restructuring. The justification for the
 modification of the results framework due to changes in activities financed under the project admitted to an
 ill-defined outcome indicator not supported by any project activity (ICR, paragraph 51) and lack of
 readiness to implement the project (noted above at Quality at Entry) persisted in the early implementation
 period. A procurement specialist was assigned to help overcome implementation delays. The Bank team
 also recommended the hiring of a competent M&E firm to help in implementing the M&E system (see
 Section 9 M&E below). However, early implementation delays could have been addressed by more
 frequent technical support missions to identify measures that would lead to better coordination among the
 four implementing agencies (ICR, paragraph 72).

 In sum, the Bank's performance in supervising the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory. More frequent
 technical support missions during the early implementation of the project would have been useful to better
 support integration of the WRP and modeling activities during the early years of implementation
 (ICR, paragraph 72). Another shortcoming was the impact from delayed used of the M&E system as
 designed, reliance on Bank supervision reports and PMU briefs to monitor project progress until the hired
 M&E consultant reported on reliable project outcomes toward closing, as clarified by the Task Team (see
 Section 9 M&E below).

 In sum, with moderate shortcomings in the quality at entry as well as in supervision, the overall bank
 performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD identified this project, implemented by Vietnam, as part of the regional Mekong Integrated Water
 Resource Management Program, monitored by the Mekong River Commission's Project Coordination and
 Monitoring Unit. The regional unit would also monitor this project to maintain coherence with the regional
 program (PAD, paragraph 41). Vietnam's MONRE under the VNMCSO, would implement the project
 through a Project Management Unit (PMU). Other entities would manage and report on progress of specific
 project components - e.g., the Department of Water Resources Management for the first component, the
 National Center for Water Resources Planning and Investigation (NAWAPI), formerly the Center for Water
 Resources Planning and Investigation, for the second component, and the National Hydro-met Services
 (NHMS) for the third component. However, there was no clear mechanism to keep reports consistent
 across the entities contributing to reporting on project progress (ICR, paragraph 57).

 The project objectives were simply stated and were expressed to address the capacity gaps of the
 institutions as the development problem and contributed toward a higher level development problem that
 would be addressed by the improved institutions, i.e., how integrated water resources management serve

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



 as a platform for economic growth using shared resources such as small river basins that cross
 borders. The project formed part of a bigger program and its objectives were limited to improving capacity
 and contributing to an outcome beyond its project activities. The project's Results Framework at appraisal
 (PAD, Annex 1) showed limited links along a causal chain between three input activities and seven
 intermediate output indicators (ICR, paragraph 51). The project inputs (activities) showed a tenuous link to
 two of the four outcomes attributed to the project interventions. These outcome indicators were related to
 sharing hydro-met forecasting information with Cambodia and the Mekong River Commission (MRC). In
 1995, the Mekong Agreement among Cambodia, Lao PDR, Thailand, and Viet Nam established this
 intergovernmental organization to foster cooperation in water resources management for the Lower
 Mekong River Basin. The two outcome indicators associated with this information sharing were not clearly
 defined. In addition, there was no activity associated with how Vietnam would share weather forecasts with
 Cambodia. Other intermediate indicators required further clarification, e.g., water quality (PDO outcome
 indicator 4) and participation (intermediate outcome indicator 7). Three intermediate outcome indicators
 only partially tracked how the 2S Regional Basin Council would be established and prepare the 2S water
 resources planning instrument. In addition, MONRE was not responsible for some decision-making
 elements that formed part of the indicators. In its January 15, 2021 email to IEG the Task Team clarified
 that these indicators were beyond the control of MONRE: (i) a signed legal agreement between Cambodia
 and Vietnam to cover the sharing of information, and (ii) the Prime Minister's approval of the Water
 Resources Plans.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MONRE PMU implemented the project’s M&E system. Delays in installing the system led to project
  progress being tracked through the World Bank mission’s Aide Memoires and briefing notes. The 2018
  restructuring clarified initially poorly defined indicators. After the 2017 MTR, the PMU hired a consulting
  firm to carry out the actual M&E work. However, due to lengthy procurement processes and internal
  approval procedures, the firm started only in January 2020. The project closed four months later.
  According to the Task Team, the consultant prepared a final M&E report, including the outcomes of the
  indicators in the Result Framework (ICR, Annex 1). The M&E consultant also assisted in completing the
  Borrower’s ICR report as input for the Bank’s ICR. Tracking the progress of the project components was
  supplemented by the World Bank mission’s Aide Memoires and the PMU mission’s briefing notes (ICR,
  paragraph 59). Methodology and protocol for field assessments, included in this M&E system, were not
  carried out due to the COVID-19 restrictions (ICR, paragraph 58).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E as designed was not fully utilized because of the late procurement of the consulting firm that
  would carry out the M&E. The project relied on findings noted in the World Bank mission Aide Memoires
  and briefing notes to inform project progress, adjust project indicators, targets, and activities. M&E use
  showed weaknesses in institutional capacity to coordinate and manage consistent quality reporting. The
  project developed analytical products to assess project performance and project achievements showing
  improvement in PMU capacity over time. There was not enough time to show that weaknesses in the
  use of M&E data were addressed. The M&E system use reflected moderate shortcomings because of
  the delays in hiring the M&E consultant, the indicators. However, restructuring redefined and
  strengthened the indicators. According to the Task Team, the M&E prepared a final M&E report to


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



  support the substantial outcome of the project in achieving its second objective (see Section 4 Efficacy
  and Section 6 Outcome, above).

  In sum, M&E design showed a weak formulation of a development objective and lacked an adequate
  mechanism to ensure quality and consistency across reports generated by various entities. Indicators
  were clarified during restructuring to better reflect the reduced scope of the project and strengthen the
  results framework but these revised indicators were not used to inform project progress because
  the M&E system was implemented only as the project was closing. The ICR noted that "there were no
  clear mechanisms to ensure quality in reporting"(ICR, paragraph 61). Instead, the Bank's mission reports
  and Aide Memoirs and PMU briefing reports were used to monitor implementation progress. With these
  shortcomings, the quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards Compliance. At appraisal, the project was determined to require a
   partial assessment (category B). The project triggered the following safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP 4.01), Indigenous People (OP 4.10), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Projects on
   International Waterways (OP 7.50).

   The project triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) because the project involved the construction of
   small hydro-met monitoring stations. The project prepared an Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) to
   manage potential environmental impacts during construction. The project did not trigger OP 4.11 (Physical
   Cultural Resources) but the ECOP included 'chance find procedures' in case physical cultural resources
   were unearthed during construction. All construction contracts complied with the environmental safety
   regulations under the ECOP.

   The project involved only small-scale community infrastructure, such as automatic monitoring stations and
   facilities for hydro-met. Most construction were on public lands managed by the Commune’s People
   Committee. About 17 of the 36 newly constructed and upgraded stations required resettlement. Small-scale
   land acquisitions were carried out. Land holders were compensated under the published Resettlement
   Policy Framework (RPF) in compliance with OP 4.11 (ICR, paragraph 64).

   The project targeted provinces in the Central Highlands that were home to Gia Rai, Ede, and Ba Na ethnic
   minority groups and the Khmer in the Mekong Delta. The project prepared a social assessment and
   consulted ethnic minority peoples. The project prepared an Indigenous People’s Development
   Framework/Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF), and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP)
   for investments. Ethnic minority people reportedly received culturally appropriate socioeconomic benefits
   complying with the EMDP.

   Project investments, which focused on water resources surveys and monitoring stations, did not alter the
   quantity or quality of water flow in the international waterway of the Mekong River. Thus, the project


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



   activities fell under the exception provided by paragraph 7 (b) of OP 7.50. No riparian notification was
   required.

   According to the ICR, the project complied with all the triggered safeguards (ICR, paragraphs 62-263).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: According to the ICR, the financial management requirements of the project were
   satisfied (ICR, paragraph 68). The implementing entity complied with all financial management legal
   covenants and submitted all interim financial reports and audit reports on time. Audit reports
   contained unqualified (clean) opinions. Initial financial issues regarding the ability of the PMU to open bank
   accounts was corrected by December 2014. According to the ICR, the financial processes faced initial
   delays because the PMU was not familiar with World Bank processes, the government adopted new
   financing policy that affected key functions of implementing agencies, and lengthy approval processes.
   These challenges were addressed by the time of the Mid Term Review.

   Procurement: At appraisal, procurement risk was rated Substantial based on the initial capacity
   assessment undertaken, and considering the nature, and size of procurement activities (PAD, Annex 3,
   paragraph 18). Initial procurement of hydro-met and other IT equipment was delayed by the PMU's strict
   adherence to technical specifications, which the Bank team considered impractical for procurement
   purposes. A World Bank procurement specialist assisted VNMHA to comply with both the government's
   and Bank's procurement policies and minimize further delays by improving specifications in bidding
   documents and adopting practical strategies. The feasibility study on river basin planning was revised two
   years after project start. Contracting of many activities, including the contracting for the river basin planning
   firm was delayed because the government finalized the regulations to guide the implementation of river
   basin plans only by the second year of the project. Activities had to be restructured to comply with the
   regulations. The government directed NAWAPI to support the 2S water resources planning only by third
   year of the project. Eventually, the PMU demonstrated improved procurement capacity and complied with
   Bank policies.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offered four lessons and recommendations informed by the project operations that teams
may consider when preparing similar multi-country operations in the future (ICR, paragraphs 81-84).
Three of those lessons, with minor edits are presented below:

      Countries that adopt a trans-boundary integrated water resources management model
       are best served by starting with national agencies that have water resources planning
       capacity to adopt the principles of integrated water resources management. In this
       project, the government passed a law to promote integrated water resources planning
       strategy. A new agency, MONRE, was assigned to oversee both the development and
       protection of Vietnam’s water resources and was immediately challenged by the complex
       processes and various stakeholders involved. The project was designed to build the capacity
       of MONRE and its line agencies using tools and methods that would establish national
       processes related to water resources monitoring, river basin WRP, and water resources
       modelling. As these systems take root, the agencies involved would then balance internal
       and external WRP needs. Specifying studies and background WRP assessments such as
       river basin profiles at design stage may help inform nascent agencies on the critical
       sequence of processes in integrated water resources planning. The project recommended
       that a visualization of four or five processes may be helpful to demonstrate the entire WRP
       process and point to capacity gaps that need to be addressed to achieve an integrated water
       resources management, first internally and then beyond its boundaries.
      An integrated water resources management project is complex and would benefit from
       clear roles and responsibilities of key stakeholders, and laying out coordination
       mechanisms. In this project, MONRE’s line agencies had unclear responsibilities. For
       example, the authority to request/sign off on budget allocations was unclear. Each agency’s
       responsibility toward river basin water resources planning and water resources modelling
       was also unclear. Clarifying the roles and responsibilities of the line agencies in data
       collection, water modelling, and water planning, among others, would allow for the effective
       use of computerized tools such as a decision support system (DSS) to support water
       resources planning. WRP. The unclear functions among the MONRE line agencies
       negatively affected the initial implementation of such a tool. Teams considering similar
       projects in the future would be best serve by adequately assessing the capacities of the
       various agencies involved in project management, data collection, water modelling, and
       water planning, among others. Coordination and sharing data among relevant agencies
       nationwide, linking water resources management, and using tools such as DSS, are critical
       considerations for sustainable water resources management.
      When choosing indicators for projects that cross boundaries or rely on decisions by
       entities other than the implementing agency, commitments at appraisal may be useful
       to achieve outcomes. In this project. the results framework included an outcome indicator
       that was eventually dropped at restructuring because it required a signed agreement

                                                                                                Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)



         between the Prime Minister and the Government of Cambodia, which was beyond the power
         of the project implementing agencies. Trans-boundary indicators, such as the project’s
         indicator on sharing of water resources data collected from the upgraded and newly
         constructed water resources monitoring stations, also included decision points outside the
         control of the implementing entities. Indicators that involve action by third parties require
         commitment from those parties before or during appraisal to achieve the proposed
         outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive record of the project in keeping with OPCS guidelines. The
narrative offered the context behind the integrated water resource management at the country level and its
contribution to the region-wide support for sustainable use of the Lower Mekong Basin. The ICR provided an
exhaustive picture behind the Bank's presence in the country and the sector (ICR, paragraphs 5,6,8, 24, 27,
footnote 8). The ICR was results oriented, with the TOC guiding the reader how the components and activities
led to achieving the PDOs (ICR, paragraph 49), and how the DSS tools and modeling capacity supported the
implementation of the Water Law (ICR, paragraph 48). The ICR also justified the effective use of reduced
resources to achieve the outcomes (ICR, paragraph 43). Table 2 was particularly helpful in guiding the
discussion around changes made to the indicators to justify the TOC at closing. The ICR was internally
consistent, cross referencing sections with the results achieved. Candid assessment acknowledged the
shortcomings attributed to early implementation delays, the initial lack of clarity with regard to roles and
responsibilities of various entities (ICR, paragraph 52) and how this lack affected achieving the PDOs (ICR,
paragraph 51). Annex 5 from the government's comments on the ICR reinforced the drawback of having 5 task
team leaders over the implementation period resulting in insufficient hands-on and tailored training in hydraulic
modeling as part of using DSS. Lessons were drawn from project challenges. There were very minor
inconsistencies such as the reference to the 2012 Water Resources Law in various places as 2012 Water Law
(ICR, paragraphs 3, 48, and 77) or the 2013 Water Resources Law (ICR, paragraphs 27, 50). The Task Team
acknowledged the typographical error.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Mekong IWRM Project- Phase II (P124942)




                                                                       Page 22 of 22
