     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0022440

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P125803                                   UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Uruguay                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82050,IBRD-87330                     30-Jun-2016                                         133,450,793.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Nov-2012                               30-Jun-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           66,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           134,450,793.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       133,450,793.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman           Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This operation used a Program-for Results (PforR) lending instrument with Disbursement-Linked Indicators
   (DLIs) for supporting the Government's Program Action Plan (PAP) for road rehabilitation and maintenance of
   the Uruguay national road network.

   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7) were:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



   "Sustain at least 35 percent of the National Road Network in good condition or very good
   condition and improve road sector management."

   Additional Financing (AF) was approved on July 6, 2017. The PDOs as stated in the AF Loan Agreement
   (Schedule 1, page 5) were:

   "To improve the condition of the National Road Network and enhance road sector management."

   Given that the changes to the PDO reflected a scale up with AF, and increasing the level of ambition from
   "sustaining" to "improving" the condition of the national road network, this assessment is not using a split
   rating for objectives. The assessment of this operation will be based on the more ambitious revised outcomes.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This operation used a Program-for-Results (PforR) lending instrument with Disbursement-Linked Indicators
   (DLIs). Additional DLIs were added with the AF for the operation on July 6, 2017. The DLIs are discussed in
   section 3b. (PAD, pages 4 -5).

   1. Road rehabilitation and maintenance works, which consisted of inter alia: (i) pavement rehabilitation; (ii)
   pavement resurfacing; (iii) shoulders rehabilitation and/or resurfacing; (iv) repairing/upgrading drainage
   systems; and (v) rehabilitation and maintenance of road vertical and/horizontal signaling.

   2. Bridge rehabilitation and maintenance works, which consisted of inter alia: (i) structure repairing of deck,
   abutments, piers and foundations; and (ii) enhancement of bridges functional characteristics (such as,
   extending bridges, deck widening and increasing bridge carrying capacity).

   3. Bridge reconstruction works, which included construction of a new structure and its contiguous road
   accesses to replace an existing bridge.

   4. Road safety investments, which consisted of inter alia: (i) investments to improve visibility; (ii)
   investments to reduce severity of road crashes; and (iii) acquisition, installation and maintenance of road
   safety equipment.

   5. Technical Assistance (TA) activities to the Road Department (DNV), the Topographic Surveying
   Department (DNTop) and Planning and Logistics Department (DINAPLO), including inter alia: (I) carrying
   out road condition surveys; (ii) training and capacity building activities; and (iii) financing studies required for
   program implementation.


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$580.0 million. The revised estimate was US$1,265.3
  million. The actual cost was US$1,661.7 million.

  Program financing. The program was financed by an IBRD loan of US$66.0 million. Additional Financing
  (AF) of US$70.0 million was approved on July 6, 20117. With this, the Bank financing for the project was
  US$136.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$133.4 million. An undisbursed amount of US$1.55 million
  (representing 2.3% of the loan amount), was cancelled from the original operation, as the operation failed
  to reach the target values for all three years for DL2 (discussed in section 3b).

  There was parallel financing for complementary activities for the program from: (1) Inter-American
  Development Bank (IADB). The appraisal estimate was US$67.7 million. The revised estimate was
  US$224.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$184.8 million; and (2) Fund for the Development for the
  Development to the Plata River Basin. The appraisal estimate was US$92.8 million. The revised
  estimate was US$169.0 million. The amount disbursed was US$159.7 million.

  Borrower contribution. The estimated amount at appraisal was US$283.5 million. The revised estimate
  with AF was US$737.9 million. The counterpart contribution was substantially more than planned at
  US$1,183.6 million.

  Dates. The project approved on November 13, 2012, became effective on April 16, 2013, and was
  scheduled to close on June 30, 2016. AF was approved on July 6, 2017. The operation closed on June 30,
  2020.

  The first restructuring on June 8, 2016, extended the project closing date by nine months from June 30,
  2016 to March 31, 2017.

  Significant changes were made through the second restructuring on July 6, 2017, following the AF for the
  project on July 6, 2017.

        The PDO was modified from "sustaining" to "improving" the condition of roads. Projections at
         preparation indicated that while the available financial resources were adequate
         for reducing degradation of the road network, they were insufficient for improving their condition
         (ICR, paragraph 8). Circumstances changed between 2012 -2017, with assessments showing that
         the program had adequate funding for improving road condition, with the increase in resources
         following the formation of the new government in 2015. Hence the PDO was changed to reflect the
         changing circumstances.
        The results framework and the original DLIs were modified and new DLIs were added: the target for
         indicators were modified with the AF for the operation. The closing date was extended by three
         years and three months from March 31, 2017 to June 30, 2020.
        US$1.55 million was not disbursed, as the program failed to reach the established target values for
         one DLI (discussed in section 3b).




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  Country and sector context. The road mode accounts for 90% of movement of freight in Uruguay. In the
  transport sector, the quality of roads was a key enabler of logistics services, given that all logistics chain
  involved at least a key road link. The Uruguay National Road Network (including international corridors within
  the national territory) constituted 8,825 kilometer (km) of total road network (estimated at 60,000 km). The
  overall condition of the network had deteriorated in the years before appraisal, with only 42% of the network
  reported to be in "good" or "very good" condition in 2011, as compared to 60% in 2004. This deterioration
  was due to a combination of factors, including significant rehabilitation backlog following budget cuts in
  the wake of the financial crisis in 2002, aging of the network, and a steep increase in road-based
  freight movement since economic recovery in 2004. Reducing degradation of the road network was important
  to the government strategy.

  Government strategy. The PDOs were consistent with the Government's Uruguay 2030 strategy. This
  strategy articulated the need for fostering sustainable economic development, improving competitiveness,
  and consolidating Uruguay's role as a logistics distribution center. The government in the years before
  appraisal created the Uruguay Road Corporation (CVU), a public concessionaire for leveraging financing
  (backed by toll revenues) for improving the management of roads. The Government had adopted a
  programmatic and result-based road rehabilitation and maintenance program for the national network since
  2010. This program was based on the Budget Law that defined programs, monitoring and evaluation
  frameworks for the programs, and allocated budgetary resources for the annual physical and quantitative
  objectives. This law had two specific lines in the Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MTOP) budget: (a)
  Program 362, targeting resources for road infrastructure (including highways and bridges); and (b) Program
  462 aimed at developing road safety strategies. A new government in 2015 prioritized transport
  infrastructure through three concrete actions: first, the government increased MOTP's budget for roads by
  20% over the 2015 -2019 period; second, the scope of the public concessionaire (CVU) was expanded in
  terms of coverage (2,600 km as compared to 1,600 km in 2013); and three, the new administration
  underscored the need for private sector participation in road financing and management.

  Bank strategy. The PDOs are well aligned with the Bank strategy. The second pillar of the Country
  Partnership Strategy (CPF) for 2010 - 2015 articulated the need for improving competitiveness and creating
  a conducive business environment, through increasing coverage of quality infrastructure. This CPF also
  supported the Government's move towards results-based operations in its collaboration with the World Bank.
  The PDOs were well aligned with the third pillar of the current Country Partnership Framework (CF) for 2016
  - 2020, Integrating into Global Value Chain, and specifically objective five under this pillar of, making logistics
  and transport networks safer and more efficient.

  The Bank financed prior road sector projects, including the Transport Infrastructure Maintenance Rural
  Access Project that closed in July 2011, aimed at supporting road rehabilitation and maintenance. This
  operation supported the Government's Program Action Plan for rehabilitation and maintenance of
  the national road network, which had been seriously degraded in the years before appraisal. Although Bank
  financing for the program was fairly modest (about 13% of the program cost), this financing would
  enable rehabilitation to be undertaken upfront and in a timely fashion, before road sections critically
  deteriorated requiring more expensive solutions. Technical assessments of the counterfactual situation

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



                       showed that the absence of Bank support would reduce program financing by about 9% and lower efficiency
                       gains on road rehabilitation and maintenance, and that implementing the program with Bank support would
                       prevent a six to seven percent road deterioration.

                       The level of ambition of the original operation, aimed at arresting the degradation of the national road
                       network was fairly modest given the financial resources. However, when circumstances provided
                       opportunities for increasing the level of ambition due to the increased allocation of resources by the new
                       government in 2015, the PDO indicators were increased to reflect the broader sectoral
                       level objectives (discussed below). The relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI

                PDO 1. Sustaining/improving the condition of the Uruguay national road network.

                Rationale
                There were two DLIs for this PDO.

                The first indicator linked disbursements to rehabilitation of roads in the national road network. Specifically, the
                disbursements were conditional on realizing the targets for the kilometer (km) of roads that were
                rehabilitated (discussed in section 4). The targets were increased with the AF for the operation.

                The second indicator linked disbursements to providing routine road maintenance (including pavement and
                drainage maintenance) on the national road network using performance-based contracts (under these
                contracts, payment to the private contractor was contingent on the level of service specified in the contract).
                Specifically, the disbursements were conditional on realizing the annual targets for the km of roads that
                were provided with routine maintenance. As indicated in section 2, the targets for the original operation
                were unrealistic, and a portion of the funds were not disbursed for this indicator. The targets for this indicator
                were adjusted (reduced) with the AF for the operation.

                The two DLIs indicators were appropriate, given that rehabilitation of roads in the national road network,
                together with routine road maintenance, were likely to arrest the degradation of the road network and improve
                their condition.



                Rating
                Substantial


                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 16
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)




            DLI 2
            DLI
            PDO2. To improve/enhance road sector management.

            Rationale
            The Disbursement-Linked Indicators were linked to undertaking 24 actions in the Government's Program
            Action Plan.

            There were four Disbursement-Linked Indicators for the original operation.

                              The Government approved the multimodal plan for Montevideo seaport.
                              The Government approved the technical solutions for pavement rehabilitation.
                              The Road Department (DNV) updated the environmental manual and trained 75% of technical staff
                               with responsibilities related to works supervision.
                              The Government approved the guidelines for expropriation and social management processes.

            Five additional DLIs were added with the AF for the project.

                              The Government completed a study assessing which areas of the National Road Network are subject
                               to climatic risks.
                              At least 20 selected bridges were to be diagnosed against climatic risks.
                              The Government adopted a contingency plan for addressing catastrophic climate related events.
                              The Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MTOPs) central laboratory for roadworks quality
                               assurance carried out asphalt, pavement and soil tests required for the works contract.
                              Road safety improvements on the national road network.

            While the DLIs for the original operation were concise and focused, too many DLIs were added with the AF
            for the project. This resulted in limited buy-ins from the Government officials for some of them (discussed in
            section four).



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategy is high.

            On the positive side, the choice of the PforR instrument was appropriate for the following reasons. The
            government in the years before appraisal had adopted a programmatic and results-based approach for
            rehabilitating and maintaining the National road network. The Bank supported the government's move
            towards a results -based approach. The Bank financing leveraged a much larger government program


                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 16
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



               (including through funding from other donors providing co financing and from counterpart funding). The scope
               of the operation was appropriately expanded with AF for the program, in the wake of prioritization of the
               sector and increased allocation of financial resources to the road sector by the new government in 2015. The
               scope of operations was expanded to addressing emerging sector issues, such as road safety and climate
               change.

               However, there were some shortcomings. The indicator associated with providing for routine road
               maintenance on the national road network for the original operation was unrealistic, and scaled back. While
               the DLIs associated with the PDO of strengthening/enhancing road sector management indicators for the
               original operation were concise, too many DLIs for the operation with the AF for the project, contributed to
               more limited buy-ins from the Government for some indicators (discussed in section four).



               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the condition of the National Road Network.

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The results framework was clear. Rehabilitation and routine road maintenance of the
               Uruguay National road network, rehabilitation of bridges, and road safety improvements on the
               highways were necessary to prevent degradation of the road network. Increasing the targets for kilometers
               that were to be rehabilitated, were likely to improve the condition of the road network. These activities,
               together with the institutional component of the project aimed at enhancing road sector management
               (discussed below), were likely to aid in improving the efficiency of transport and logistics system and thereby
               to the long term development objective of improving Uruguay's competitiveness and growth prospects.

               Outputs

                     1,854 km of the Uruguay National road network were rehabilitated at a minimum rating of 85, as
                      measured by the Pavement Surface Condition Index (IES) on December 31, 2019. This exceeded
                      both the original and revised targets of 524 km and 1,414 Km respectively.
                     3,637 km of roads were maintained through performance-based contracts when the project closed.
                      This exceeded the revised target of 3,300 km. The ICR (page 24) notes that the original annual target
                      for 2013 was met and exceeded in 2013, but not in 2014 and 2015.
                     Road safety improvements were provided on 310 km of highways, exceeding the target of 263 km.

               Outcomes


                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)




      60% of the Uruguay National road network was in "good" or "very good" condition when the project
       closed in December 31, 2019, as compared to 40% at the baseline on March 3, 2017. This exceeded
       the revised target of 55%. Given that the revised targets were met (although the original target for
       routine road maintenance was not), efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial.

Given that the targets for the rehabilitation of the Uruguay National road network and target for road
maintenance were met, efficacy is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance road sector management.

Rationale
Theory of change. The results framework was for the most part clear, and the causal links between the
operation activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. Activities aimed at addressing road safety
improvements on the national road network, the multimodal plan for Montevideo land access,
approving technical solutions for rehabilitating pavements, updating the environmental manual of the roads
network and training their staff, were aimed at strengthening/improving road sector management.
Activities added with AF aimed at addressing emerging issues on climate change were likely to reinforce the
objective of enhancing road sector management. These activities, together with the activities discussed
above, were likely to aid in the long-term objective of improving the efficiency of transport and logistics system
and thereby enhancing Uruguay's competitiveness and long-run growth prospects.

Completed as targeted:

      The Montevideo seaport planning study was completed for multimodal transport planning by the
       Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MTOP). This study identified strategic port investments that
       were needed in the coming years, for enhancing Montevideo's seaport regional competitiveness.
      The MOTP developed a national transport model (the Government's Program Action Plan (PAP)
       number two). This model, the first long term freight modelling exercise carried by MOTP nationwide,
       aimed at assessing options for increased modality (low carbon transport modes).
      The MOTP's Road Department (DNV) updated their tool for highway rehabilitation and maintenance
       planning for optimizing resource allocation for highway road maintenance and allocation. While the
       DNV had a pavement management system in the past, the system was missing updated traffic and
       pavement condition data.
      The DNV approved revised technical design for the national road network, by recategorizing
       the network and differentiated levels of service and maintenance requirements, depending on the
       characteristics and importance of the national road segments. This activity was intended to reduce
       road maintenance needs on the national road segments with lower levels of demand or criticality.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)




      The DNV adopted a Pavement Standardized Technical Solutions Model (DLI 3.2) for enhancing time
         savings (in the design phase) and inducing cost efficiency (in the construction phase). This
         manual included new cost-effectiveness technologies for road maintenance (in pavement recycling).
        The MTOP's central laboratory strengthened quality control of roadworks, through increasing the
         number of minimum external laboratory tasks, for supporting the effectiveness of public spending in
         the road sector.
        The roadworks Environmental Manual prepared under this project was adopted by Presidential
         Decree in January 2020. This manual included new clauses for Grievance Redress Mechanism
         (GRM), access to information, consultations, and works in protected areas. The roadworks
         environmental auditing procedures were conducted, with 75 environmental audits in 2017, 29 and 81
         audits in 2018 and 2019 respectively. A central database containing environmental information for
         works was updated and is to date available on construction worksites. Multiple workshops were held
         for raising environmental awareness and knowledge. 75% DNV technical staff were trained on
         environmental issues as targeted.
        The manual on Expropriations Procedures and Social Management was completed and disseminated
         (DLI 3.4). An international workshop on methodologies to establish expropriation valuation was
         organized to promote coordination with other regional agencies. The MTOP's Citizen Attention Center
         was established. This center addressed on average 50 cases per week in 2019.
        A study to assess the areas of the National road network that are subject to climatic risks was
         completed. A methodology to assess the resiliency of bridges to climate risks (flooding) was
         developed. Twenty selected bridges were diagnosed against climatic risks. A contingency plan for
         catastrophic climate-related events was completed, as targeted.
        Road safety audits on 200 km of the Uruguay National road network was completed, as
         targeted. According to the Uruguay's road safety agency (UNASEV), the number of fatalities due to
         accidents on the road network in 2019 was 422 (22% less than those registered in 2018). Parts of the
         investment financed through the project included the upgrading and effective maintenance systems of
         road drainage systems (a critical element to address climate change risks).

Not completed:

      Although the MOTP developed a diagnostics of procurement processes from bid preparation to
       contract award, for identifying bottlenecks and finding opportunities to
       improve efficiency, the recommendations of this diagnostics were not implemented for lack of internal
       support within MOTP.
      The activity associated with introducing risk-based financial audits in MOTP was not implemented,
       due to the limited buy-in within MOTP and limited number of staff within MOTP to address
       these issues.
      The activity associated with an innovative pilot on-line platform for Grievance Redress Mechanism
       was dropped in 2016, for lack of support from the administrative staff of MTOP.



Overall, 75% activities of the Government Action Plan (PAP) was completed, i.e., 18 activities of the PAP out
of 24 planned:




                                                                                                Page 9 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)




       Improving MOTP's multimodal planning for preparing Uruguay's main export gateway to upcoming
          challenges in the coming years, and assessing options for increasing multimodality (low carbon
          transport modes).
         Optimizing resource allocation for highway maintenance and rehabilitation (the primary objective of
          the Government Program), through the highway rehabilitation and maintenance planning tool (with
          updated traffic and pavement condition data).
         Enhancing cost effectiveness through reducing the resources spent on maintenance on the road
          segments with lower levels of demand or criticality.
         Enhancing efficiency through reducing the overall time for undertaking tasks associated with road
          design and construction.
         Supporting effectiveness of public spending in the road sector through better quality control.
         Improving environmental and social safeguards compliance.
         Improving road safety.
         Addressing climate resilience issues through moving discussions within MOP, from a stage of initial
          consciousness to more concrete issues.

While activities aimed at transport planning, technical, socio-environmental aspects, road safety features and
mapping of the climate-prone areas of Uruguay national road network were completed as targeted, the
following activities were not completed:

       Improving MTOP's financial performance through introducing risk-based audits.
       Improving efficiency of procurement processes.
       An innovative pilot on-line platform for Grievance Redress Mechanism was dropped in 2016, for lack
          of support from the administrative staff of MTOP.

This review concludes that the operation contributed substantially to enhancing MTOP's capacity to effectively
manage the Uruguay road network and advancing the reform agenda to new critical areas (such as, road
safety and climate resilience issues). However, there were clear gaps in addressing fiduciary areas of the
PAP.



Rating
Modest




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
The efficacy of the first objective is rated substantial as the revised targets were met. The efficacy of the
second objective is rated modest with moderate shortcomings, given that there were gaps in addressing
fiduciary areas of the PAP. But the overall efficacy rating is rated substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)




 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The overall relevance is substantial. Efficacy of the first objective - improving the condition of the national road
network- is rated substantial, given that the outcomes were realized. The efficacy of the second objective--
enhancing road sector management- is rated modest with clear shortcomings. The operation advanced the
reform agenda to new critical areas (such as, road safety and climate resilience), however, there were gaps in
addressing fiduciary areas of the PAP. Based on this, the overall outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk. The technical risk is expected to be low, given the high standard of the Uruguay highway
network, with 60% of the roads reported to be in "good" or "very good" condition.

Institutional risk. There is the risk associated with financing for maintaining the national road network. The
ICR (page 19) notes that there was a slight increase for the overall program (on average US$250.0 million)
during the 2012 -2016 period. The overall envelope for road rehabilitation and maintenance was doubled
during 2016 -2020. While this were welcome developments, it is not clear whether this level of financing can
be sustained by the government, without other sources of funding, such as through user tolling for the
national road network (including highways and funding for routine road maintenance).




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project design incorporated lessons from the prior Bank-financed Transport Infrastructure
  Maintenance Rural Access project. Lessons included moving towards a programmatic approach, and
  providing greater leeway to the Roads Department (DNV) for prioritizing/adjusting investments as
  conditions change (Program Document (PD) paragraph 12). The project was prepared in collaboration
  with other co-financiers financing complementary activities for fostering synergies and avoiding
  duplication. The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Roads Department (DNV)
  in the Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MOTP), and the Uruguay Road Corporation (DNV - the
  agency responsible for managing part of Uruguay's main road network, including highways), responsible
  for project implementation (PD, paragraph 26). Several risks (technical, fiduciary and issues associated
  with Disbursement-Linked Indicators) were assessed as low or moderate, and the project rate was rated


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



  as moderate at appraisal. Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance (discussed in section 9).

  However, there were some shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 8).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twenty implementation support missions were held during the operation lifetime of eight years, implying on
 average twice a year missions as per the norm (ICR, page 18). The support provided by the team aided in
 ensuring that the systems used by the co-financers were aligned with the systems used by the Bank and
 were in line with OP 9.0 requirements. The support provided by the supervision team aided in ensuring that
 the emerging technical issues were resolved and that the DLIs targets were for the most part met. The
 supervision team was proactive in addressing issues throughout implementation, including
 project restructurings and processing of the AF. This aided in scaling up project activities, and incorporating
 emerging new activities for driving the reform process forward (such as incorporating activities associated
 with advancing the climate change agenda). This aided in the completion of project activities, despite
 curtailment of the Ministry of Transport and Public Works activities in the final months of project
 implementation due to the COVID - 19 outbreak. The ICR (page 18) notes that the supervision team
 secured a Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) Trust Fund to develop the web-based citizen
 engagement tool, to complement the Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) that was used for
 implementing two of the Government's Program Action Plan (discussed in section 10a). The support
 provided by the supervision team aided in environmental and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section
 10).The continuity of leadership was maintained, with only one Task Team Leader (TTL) throughout the
 preparation and implementation cycle.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The operation's theory of change and results framework were clear. The selected indicators (such as the
 km of roads that were rehabilitated and road safety features were straightforward, well aligned with the
 activities of the operation, measurable, and could be verified in a relatively easy way. The targets for the
 routine road maintenance for the original operation were however unrealistic, and needed to be revised
 downwards. The disbursement-linked indicators were scalable, enabling partial disbursements based on

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



 the degree of completion of the indicator/ target. This aided in cancellation of the undisbursed balance
 following the non-realization of the target associated with the indicator on routine road maintenance
 (DLI2). The targets for the indicators were appropriately adjusted with the AF for the operation. The M&E
 systems at the Roads Department (DNV) and the Uruguay Road Corporation were deemed to be
 satisfactory for monitoring performance at appraisal.



b. M&E Implementation
  The implementation of M&E was facilitated by the clear availability of data from the Ministry of Transport
  and Public Works and the Roads Department (CVU) that could be verified by the external auditor.



c. M&E Utilization
  There was one issue regarding M&E utilization. The ICR (page 16) notes that according to the Loan
  Agreement, the Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MOTP) was expected to prepare program
  progress reports for external financing on a semi-annual basis and submit the reports to the Bank for
  review. These reports had to include all activities under the program, including contracts financed by the
  co-financiers. However, progress reports submitted by MOTP were often incomplete and had recurrent
  and significant delays. Delays in the submission of these reports limited the Bank's ability to use the
  reports as a feedback mechanism.

  In sum, M&E is rated as substantial, although there were some weaknesses.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Program Document (PD, paragraph 9) notes that road maintenance and rehabilitation works under the
   project were to be on the entire National road network, and that these works were expected to have low
   environmental or social impacts. The PD (paragraph 15) notes the program did not include activities that
   were expected to have significant adverse environmental. Land acquisition was not envisioned for the
   project activities. The ICR (page 17) notes that compliance with environmental safeguards was confirmed
   by the environmental audits although there were minor shortcomings such as noise pollution, environmental
   protection from worksite leakages, and, in some instances, shortcomings in worksite temporary
   signalization. A Bank-executed Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) was used for
   implementing for implementing two of the Government's Program Action Plan (grievance redress,
   communication with the civil society) (ICR, page 14). The Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MTPW)
   developed an environmental manual that was mandatory for all program roadworks contract.

   Although a Citizen Attention Center (CAC) was created in 2010 to manage grievances for works under the
   program, the Ministry of Transport and Public Works (MTOP) was unable to issue specific reports to show

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



   management of grievances related to works under the program, as the person responsible for submitting
   the reports had left the CAC before the operation closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment conducted at appraisal concluded that the
   financial arrangements were satisfactory and provided reasonable assurance that the project funds would
   be used for intended purposes (PD, paragraph 54). The ICR (page 17) notes that there were no major
   financial issues during implementation, although there were some delays in submission of program audited
   financial statements to the Bank. The ICR does not provide details on whether the audits were unqualified.

   Anti-corruption Guidelines (ACG). The ICR (page 13) notes that the application of the ACG
   guidelines, including possible independent investigation of the whole program was a difficult topic during
   preparation, and that there was not much discussion of the first two requirements of the ACGs (the
   reporting of credible and material allegations, and Bank's debarment and suspension list). The ICR notes
   that accepting the Bank's independent right to investigate was perceived as a sovereignty issue. After
   extensive discussions, it was agreed that: (i) as a first instance, national systems would be applied: and (ii)
   if the Bank decides to launch an investigation of its own, the process followed for the investigation would
   be coordinated between the Bank and Uruguay.

   Procurement. An assessment of the Uruguay Road Department (DNV) concluded that the procurement
   arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 51). The ICR (page 17) notes that overall procurement
   arrangements were compliant with the World Bank Policy/Directive for PforR financing. There was no
   reported case of fraud or corruption case during the implementation of this project. The identified risk that
   contracts could be awarded to firms and/or individuals debarred or suspended by the Bank during
   implementation was addressed by the eligibility verification carried by an agency within the MTOP.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

IEG uses the following lessons from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

1. The Program-for-Results (PforR) lending instrument can be useful for engagement at the
sector level. This approach provided the opportunity for the Bank to thoroughly discuss sector-level
issues to establish a better road network. This discussion committed not only the Ministry of
Transport and Public Works that would have been almost the only implementing agency in
a traditional investment lending operation, but also the Ministry of Economy and Finance - the main
financier of the program. This lending instrument proved largely superior to previous investment
lending engagements in Uruguay, in terms of institutional strengthening results.

2. The modalities of the PforR instrument need to be clarified at design. In this operation, the
flow of funds was organized in such a way that the loan proceeds were disbursed directly to the
treasury, with no earmarking to the Ministry of Transport and Public Works. While this could have
demotivated the
implementing agency, the ministry proved to be committed to meeting the targets. This issue (that is
the implementing agency does not directly receive the loan proceeds) needs to be clarified
for countries using the instrument for the first time.

3. The disbursement-linked indicators need to be selective on the government's program
action plan. In this operation, the government's program action plan was focused and concise in the
original operation. However, following the approval of Additional Financing, the disbursement-linked
indicators were too numerous, and consequently there was a limited buy-in by government officials
for some of them.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and provides a sound rationale for the Program-for-Results (PforR) lending instrument. The
theory of change articulated in the ICR is lucid; it provides clear linkages between the project activities,
outputs and intended outcomes that were measurable and verifiable. The Disbursement-Linked Indicators
(DLIs) were for the most part clearly linked to the government's program. The ICR adheres to the guidelines
and draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation and provides a good
analysis of risk at preparation.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance P (P125803)



The ICR however provides few details on why the targets for the routine maintenance activities on the Uruguay
National road network were reduced in the wake of the Additional financing for the project. It would have been
useful to include an English translation of the Borrower's ICR attached as an Annex.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
