     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022589

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132317                                    Philippine Rural Development Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Philippines                                Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84210,IBRD-88160                      31-May-2021                                        504,767,574.10

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Aug-2014                                31-May-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           501,250,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            569,820,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        499,000,115.29                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Christopher David          Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani                 Nelson




 P132424_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132424                                    Philippine Rural Development Project ( P132424 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                  5767458.81

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



 29-Aug-2014

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                    7,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                    7,000,000.00

 Actual                                                   0.00                                    5,767,458.81




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) was:

   " To increase real incomes and enhance farm and fishery productivity in the targeted areas ".

   The PDO as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5):

   "To increase rural incomes and enhance farm and fishery productivity in the targeted areas, by supporting
   smallholders and fisherfolk to increase their marketable surpluses and their access to markets".

   The Global Environmental Objective (GEO) of the project was (PAD, page vii):

   "To strengthen the coastal and marine resource base in the targeted project areas". This was to be
   achieved through: (a) enhancing institutional and planning capacities of local governments and
   communities: (b) providing support to marine protected areas with global biodiversity significance and select
   fishery co-management arrangements: and (c) sharing knowledge and best practices".

   This review is based on the PDO stated in the Loan Agreement. The PDO was not changed with the
   Additional Financing (AF) approved for the project on January 11, 2018. .

   The original project approved on August 29, 2014, and closed on May 31, 2021. AF1 for the project was
   approved on January 11, 2018, and a subsequent restructuring extended the closing date for the AF project to
   May 31, 2023. A second AF is currently under consideration. As the expected implementation of the AF2
   project would extend beyond ten years since approval of the original project, an Interim Implementation
   Completion Report (ICR) was produced in accordance with Bank requirements. This review is the
   Independent Evaluation Groups (IEGs) assessment of the Interim ICR, and is based on the outcomes realized
   as of October 31, 2018.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Jan-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 7 - 9).

   1. Local and National Level Planning. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$19.26 million. The actual
   cost was US$19.96 million. There were two sub-components:

   (a) Enhancing the Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Planning (AFMP) process through: (i)
   rationalizing the Department of Agriculture's (DA) planning, programming and budgeting processes, and
   developing AFMP as the main basis of decision making in the DA at the national, regional and local levels:
   and (b) support for natural resource planning, management and resource utilization in selected marine
   protected areas.

   (b). Supporting the implementation of AFMP, through designing technical support coordinated
   systems for implementing the sub-projects prioritized in the Provincial Community Investment Plans
   (PCIPs).

   2. Infrastructure Development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$452.13 million. The revised
   estimate with AF was US$637.13 million. The actual cost was US$669.13 million. There were two sub-
   components:

   (a) Value chain infrastructure support through: (i) developing specific sub-projects to support
   infrastructure development by Local Government Units (LGUs) in priority commodity value chains (such as,
   farm-to-market roads, communal irrigation and potable water systems, post-harvest facilities, fish
   sanctuaries, tram lines, storage facilities, and slope stabilization works).

   (b) Approaches for improving the effectiveness and sustainability of infrastructure investments
   through developing technical specifications for climate resiliency and disaster risk mitigation for local
   infrastructure.

   3. Enterprise Development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$168.64 million. The actual cost was
   US$135.94 million. There were two sub-components.

   (a) Rural Agri-Fishery enterprise and productivity enhancement through: (i) developing specific sub-
   projects to support horizontal and vertical clustering, and joint business planning and investments by
   producer groups operating within commodity value chains: and (ii) promoting biodiversity conservation and
   coastal resource co-management arrangements.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



  (b) Technology and Information for Enterprise and Market Development through: (i) technical
  assistance to producers through disseminating market knowledge and for facilitating market linkages.

  4. Project Implementation Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$30.0 million. The revised
  estimate with AF was US$57.50 million. The actual cost was US$57.49 million. This component aimed at
  proving technical assistance for day-to-day coordination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and
  audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal (including a front-end fee) of US$1.25 million) was S$670.03
  million. The revised estimate with AF was US$883.79 million. The actual cost was US$883.79 million.

  Project financing. The original project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$501.25 million and a Global
  Environment Facility (GEF) grant of US$7.00 million. The amount disbursed of the original project was
  US$376.12 million. AF of US$170.00 million was approved on December 12, 2017. The amount disbursed
  of the AF project was US$122.87 million. US$88.92 million of the original project and US$12.51 of the AF
  project was cancelled, due to the foreign exchange savings resulting from appreciation of the Philippine
  Peso vis-à-vis US$ during implementation. The amount disbursed of the GEF grant was US$5.70 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$163.04 million at appraisal. Their
  actual contribution at closure was more than planned at US$205.54 million.

  Dates. The project approved on August 29, 2014, became effective on December 31, 2014, and was
  scheduled to close on May 31, 2021. AF was approved on December 17, 2017.The AF project is scheduled
  to close on May 31, 2023.

  Other changes. There were four Level 2 restructurings and one AF for the project.

  The first restructuring on March 23, 2017, transferred US$32.00 million from component three activities
  (Enterprise Development ) to Component two activities (infrastructure Development), due to a combination
  of factors, including delays associated with implementing enterprise subprojects and the high demand from
  Local Government Units (LGUs) for infrastructure investments.

  The following changes were made with the AF approved for the project on January 11, 2018.

        The project scope was expanded for activities associated with infrastructure investments and
         capacity building and the results framework was modified.
        The road construction costs were revised due to the increase in costs for farm -to -gate road
         construction activities, following the Government's decision early during implementation that all
         roads should be concrete rather than gravel, and that they should comply with the all-weather,
         climate-enhanced standards specified in a Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH)
         Circular issued in 2014.

  US$88.92 million of the original loan, and US$12.51 million from the AF loan, was cancelled through the
  second restructuring on April 15, 2020.


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



   The GEF Grant was restructured twice during implementation.

   The grant was restructured on May 23, 2018, to include incremental operating costs as additional eligible
   expenditures.

   The grant was restructured on February 16, 2021, to reallocate US$697,021 of unutilized funds from
   component two activities to component one activities, and the closing date for the grant was extended by
   two years to May 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Over half (51%) of the Philippine population live in rural areas, and the
collective agricultural sector provides livelihoods to over 50 percent of the labor force. Despite this, key
features of the country's rural economy have included low income levels for primary producers, low levels of
rural employment, lack of food security and weak agricultural competitiveness. This is due to a combination
of factors, including poor transport infrastructure (with 50% of the rural villages lacking all-weather farm-to-
market outlets), limited use of modern agricultural technology due to a weak extension system, high post-
harvest losses, limited diversification into high value commodities by farmers due to the poorly developed
value chains. Alongside this, environmental degradation to the countryside exists as a consequence
of population pressures.

Government strategy. The Government's agriculture sector strategy (Agric Pinroy) articulated in the
Philippine Development Plan for 2011-2016, advanced the principles of staple food sufficiency, natural
resource management, and area-based development, in contrast to the previous approaches characterized
by top-down planning, and centrally managed supply-driven commodity interventions. Complementing the
Agric Pinroy strategy, the Government reoriented the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Plan (AFMP),
a process mandated through the 1997 Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act (AFMA). This
plan provided for a value-chain and market-oriented approach for helping small-scale producers diversify to
high value commodities, and supported clustering and vertical integration of small-scale producer
groups with those already involved in Agri-processing and marketing. The relevance of the PDO was further
amplified by the Department of Agriculture's (DA) recent Administrative Order (AO 27, series of 2020)
nationally establishing the "Bayanihan Farmer and Fishery Cluster and Consolidation Framework", for
supporting enterprises. Under this framework, all DA programs and partnership programs with local
government units and state universities were to be oriented towards clustering farmers and fisheries
for achieving better market access for agriculture and fishery producers.

Bank strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the World Bank strategy. At appraisal, the goal of the
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2015 -2019, was centered on achieving inclusive growth through
poverty reduction and shared prosperity. The key elements of the strategy included: (i) rapid, inclusive
economic growth through increasing agricultural productivity and creating jobs in rural areas; (ii) resilience
to climate change, environment, and disaster risk management; (iii) peace, institution building and social
and economic opportunity impacts; and (iv) improved natural resource management, particularly in conflict
areas of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). The PDOs were fully
consistent with the key focus areas of the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020 -

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



               2024. . While Focus Area two underscored the need for "competitiveness and economic opportunity for job
               creation", Focus Area three highlighted the need for "addressing core vulnerabilities by building peace and
               resilience".

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank had executed two successful rural development projects (the Mindanao
               Rural Development Projects 1 and 2). Unlike these projects, this project had a broader
               reach, with nationwide coverage, and activities implemented in all 81 provinces (including in conflict areas
               of the Autonomous Region of Mindanao). The project scope was also significantly expanded with the AF
               for the project, especially with respect to infrastructure investments (in the face of more than expected
               demand for such investments from subnational entities). Thus, the relevance of the objective is highly rated.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To increase real incomes and enhance farm and fishery productivity in the targeted areas..

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The results framework was clear. The causal links between the project activities, their
                             outputs and outcomes was logical. The intended outcomes that were attributable to the project were
                             monitorable. Using science-based instruments (Expanded Vulnerability and Suitability Analysis (eVSA) and
                             Value Chain Analyses (VCA) for prioritizing infrastructure investments and developing enterprises, developing
                             Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Plans (AFMP) as the main basis of decision making in the
                             Department of Agriculture (DA) at the national and subnational levels, and developing Provincial Community
                             Investment Plans, which were aimed at institutional strengthening of the relevant entities. Applying value
                             chain information through climate proof construction standards for infrastructure investments (such as farm-
                             to-market roads and investments for reducing post-harvest losses), and strengthening linkages between the
                             agricultural and fishery value chain through clustering of farmers and fishery enterprises, the project aimed to
                             increase the marketable surpluses of small holders. The project activities which included institutional
                             strengthening and priority infrastructure investments, were appropriate and of adequate scale to generate a
                             critical mass to be able to achieve the intended outcome of enhancing farm and fishery productivity
                             and increasing the real income of beneficiaries in the targeted areas.

                             Outputs.

                             The outputs and outcomes for this Interim ICR refer to the activities that were completed as of October 31,
                             2020. As indicated earlier, the scheduled closing date for the AF project is May 31, 2023.


                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)




      81 Provincial Commodity Investment Plans (PCIPs) were developed by provincial Local Government
         Units (LGUs). 77 provincial Local Government Units to date leveraged approximately US$985.70
         million based on these plans.
        Fifteen Provincial Investment Plans used enhanced climate risk and resilience criteria to prioritize
         investments, as compared to the target of sixty by May 31, 2023. Guidelines and templates for
         vulnerability and suitability analysis (eVSA) were provided in the operational guidelines manual and
         the Department of Agriculture (DA) and Local Government Staff were trained for using the manual.
        2,114 kilometers of all-weather access granite farm-to-market rural roads were constructed, slightly
         short of the target of 2,300 km. The average travel time due to the improved road surface reduced by
         33 percent, short of the target of 40 percent. Transport cost in the completed farm-to-market roads
         reduced by 20 percent, as compared to the target of 30 percent.
        34 solar driers and warehouses, 31 infrastructure components in sub-projects. six slope protection
         works, three tramlines and two fish landings were completed for improving post-harvest facilities. 92
         percent of the producers expressed satisfaction with the access to post-harvest services, exceeding
         the target of 50 percent.
        1,586 hectares (ha) of communal irrigation systems were completed, as compared to the target of
         2,600 ha.
        Potable water supply systems were constructed, representing 11 percent of the end-of-project target,
         but more were under construction. These are expected to be completed by May 31, 2023.
        Overall, 432 enterprise sub-projects to support start-up enterprises were completed and 203 were in
         various stages of processing. The enterprises included small, medium and large enterprises. The
         enterprises supported a wide range of agricultural. livestock and fishery-based entrepreneurial
         activities from production (fish, shellfish, seaweed, milk, coconuts and onions), to intermediate
         processing (seaweed, cacao and coffee), and end-product segments of the value chain (geo-nuts,
         coconut coir matting, dried/smoked fish, cheese and preserve products). The enterprise sub-
         projects benefitted 76,857 proponent group members, exceeding the end-of-project target of 45,000.
        127 proponent group members were operating viable enterprises, exceeding the target of 45,000 as of
         October 31, 2020. 45 percent of women directly benefitted from enterprise development as compared
         to the target of 50%.
        A range of digital tools for science-based planning, decision making and strengthening governance
         were developed. This included: (i) web-based geo-mapping for digitally and virtually accessing sub-
         projects: and (ii) Using unmanned Aerial Vehicles to aid in evaluating sub-project proposals.
        Seven PCIPs incorporated biodiversity and coastal resources co-management features in the PCIPs
         by October 31, 2020, marginally short of the target of eight.
        95 percent of the grievances were registered in the project's grievance redress system, exceeding the
         target of 90 percent.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 16 - 20) .

The outputs of the activities described above were expected to: (1) Increase rural incomes in the targeted
areas: (2) Enhance farm and fishery productivity in the targeted communities: and (3) Strengthen the
conservation and marine resource base in the targeted program areas.

The ICR (paragraph 35) notes that for this interim ICR, the outcomes were assessed based on: (i) The
Independent Mid-Term Evaluation conducted in 2018,: and (2) The results of the Rapid Assessment of
Emerging Benefits (RAEB), a tool developed under the project to obtain real-time feedback on the efficacy

                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



                            and efficiency of sub-projects upon their completion. The outcomes realized as of October 31, 2020, are
                            listed below.

                            (1) Increase rural incomes in the targeted areas:

                            A survey was conducted of 20 randomly sampled households (each representing a farmer or fisher
                            household) in both the project and non-project areas. In the project area, respondents were drawn from an
                            area accessed by a stretch of completed farm-to-market road inside the Road Influence Areas. Other
                            respondents were drawn from the same municipality, but outside the road influence Areas.

                                  The average household income grew by 36 percent in the project areas (from Philippine Peso 132,999
                                   at the baseline in 2014 to Philippine Peso180,775) by mid-term evaluation. This exceeded the end of
                                   project target of 30 percent. There is no indication in the ICR of the non-treatment group's income
                                   change, but the approach to compiling real income increases is rigorous and well designed.
                                  The average real household income of beneficiaries involved in enterprise development
                                   increased from Philippine Peso 78,628 at the baseline in 2014 to Philippine Peso 167,448), by mid-
                                   term evaluation. This exceeded the target of 30 percent increase.

                            (2) Enhance farm and fishery productivity in the targeted communities.

                                  The average real value of marketed output of beneficiaries from the completed enterprise sub-projects
                                   increased by 51 percent (from Philippine Peso 13,463 at the baseline in 2014 to Philippine Peso
                                   22,216) by mid-Term evaluation. This exceeded the target of 41 percent.
                                  There was a twenty percent increase in the number of farmers and fisherfolk with improved access to
                                   the Department of Agriculture services (371,926 beneficiaries as of this Interim ICR, as compared to
                                   the 600,000 end-of-project target).

                            (3) GEO of strengthening the conservation and marine resource base in the targeted program areas.

                                  The Management Effectiveness Assessment Tool (MEET) and a Philippine tool called the
                                   Management Effectiveness Assessment Tool (MEAT) was used for monitoring effectiveness of the
                                   GEO. Original targets were that by end-of-project, 20 Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) would achieve a
                                   MEET/ MEAT of 15 -40 points, eight would achieve 41 -65 points and six would achieve 66 -85 points.
                                   All 33 MPAs achieved MEET scores of at least 66 points, and 23 achieved MEAT scores of at least 66
                                   points.

                            Given that three of the four indicators have already been achieved and there are indications that all objectives
                            will be fully achieved or exceeded by the closing date of May 31, 2023, efficacy is rated as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Given that three of the four outcomes were achieved or achieved, and the trajectory suggests achievement
  of the PDO indicators is likely to be confirmed and exceeded in all covered regions when the project formally
  closes, overall efficacy is rated as substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. An economic analysis was done to quantify the economic impact of the completed sub-
projects (for activities associated with infrastructure investments and enterprise development
activities). This component accounted for about 92 percent of the total project costs. The project benefits were
assumed to come from: (i) improved rural infrastructure for those engaged in agriculture-related activities (such
as benefits due to savings in vehicle operating costs, savings in agricultural hauling costs, savings in hauling
cost of production inputs, savings in travel time of commuters, benefits from new agricultural areas, savings in
transport losses, increased cropping intensity and increased yield of irrigation areas due to the communal
irrigation systems); (ii) Increasing the marketable value of produce due to investments in warehouses, cold
storages and fish landings; and (iii) value-adding activities along the value chain. The Economic Internal of
Return (EIRR) was 18.6 percent, greater than the prevailing social discount rate of 10 percent. The Net Present
Value (NPV) discounted at 10 percent was about 19,989,094 million Philippine Peso, and the Benefit-Cost Ratio
was1.47 (implying a rate of return of 1.47 Philippine Peso for every peso investment of the project). A
comparison of the ex post indicators with the ex ante indicators revealed that the project exceeded its projected
impacts at appraisal. The original loan and AF1 loan indicators had EIRR of 31.2 percent, NPV of Philippine
Peso 6,492,089 Peso and Benefit-Cost Ratio of 1.27 all discounted at 15 percent discount rate.

Cost effectiveness. The cost effectiveness analysis showed that the sub-projects were implemented close to
the least-cost pathways assumed in the original and AF1 project. While the costs of farm-to-gate roads had
slight unit cost overruns of three percent (for newly constructed roads) and five percent for the rehabilitated
roads, the Communal Irrigation System, the potable water supply system and other infrastructure systems were
completed better than projected with underspending per unit of six percent, twenty percent and forty nine
percent respectively.

Administrative and operational issues. The ICR (paragraph 51) notes that the project had a rapid start due to
the existing portfolio of unfinanced sub-projects remaining at the close of the prior Bank-financed Mindanao
Rural Development Program. The hiring of incremental staff, assignment of office space and purchase of
equipment proceeded without delays due to the Department of Agriculture's (DA's) familiarity with the Bank's
fiduciary procedures, The main issue that undermined efficiency in the first three years of the project were
the delays in processing times for enterprise subprojects, due to the unfamiliarity of the DA and Local
Government Units with Business Plan preparation and evaluation. However, this was rectified in the latter years,
with improvements in processing time.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



Given the substantial ex post EIRR and the cost effectiveness analysis, efficiency is rated as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      91.00
 Appraisal                                                 31.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      92.00
 ICR Estimate                                              18.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies is highly rated. Efficacy of the PDO - to increase
real incomes and enhance farm and fishery productivity in the targeted areas- is rated as substantial, given that
three of the four outcomes were achieved or mostly achieved, and the trajectory suggests achievement of the
PDO indicators is likely to be confirmed when the project formally closes. Efficiency is rated as substantial.
Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The risk to development outcome from Government commitment is low, given
that the project focus on raising productivity and incomes of farmers and fishers through enterprise
development has to date evolved into the overarching government framework for bringing about the
transformation of the Philippine Agri-fishery sectors. Importantly, the local commitment and utilization of the
assets is also illustrative of an ongoing commitment to O&M given the benefits returned to farmers and
fisher folk.

Institutional risks. The risks associated with maintaining operation and maintenance of infrastructure
investments, given that operation and maintenance requirements, especially for farm-to-gate roads are
included in Memorandum of Understanding and implementation Management Agreements with the Local
Government Units (LGUs) and followed through a web-based monitoring tool developed under this project.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared based on the experiences from the prior Bank-financed rural development
  projects in the Philippines (Mindanao Rural Development Projects 1 and 2), and from the Bank's
  experience with similar interventions supporting agricultural development with community (bottom-up)
  participation in Brazil, India, China and Indonesia. Lessons incorporated at design, included supporting
  infrastructure investments that were based on local development plans, and entrusting Local Government
  Units (LGU) to implement project activities. The implementation arrangements were appropriate. Given
  that the project activities were implemented nationwide, the implementation arrangements, included a
  National Program Coordination Office based in the Department of Agriculture's central office and
  additional program support offices in other parts of the country, and a Provincial Program Management
  and Implementing unit (PPMU) in each of the participating Local Government Units (PAD, page
  54). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks with stakeholders, weak
  capacities of the implementing agencies and governance risks (PAD, page 15). Mitigation measures
  incorporated at design, included establishing Program Support Offices and the Regional Program
  Coordination Office, and training relevant staff on fiduciary issues. Even with the mitigation measures,
  overall project risk was rated as substantial at appraisal, in view of the nationwide coverage of the
  project. Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation (discussed in
  section nine) and safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section ten).

  There were minor shortcomings at Quality-at- Entry. The construction/rehabilitation of farm-to-market
  roads was underestimated, partly due to the Government's decision early during implementation
  that all roads should be concrete.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were held twice a year as per the norm and task team leaders were based in the
 Philippines. The support provided by the supervision team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance
 (discussed in section 10). The supervision missions included extensive field visits to discuss issues and
 this aided in resolving implementation difficulties. In the face of more than expected demand for
 infrastructure investments, the supervision team reallocated additional funding for such investments (from
 enterprise development activities) through a project restructuring. Special care was taken by the team to
 address the issues affected by the Boho earthquake (October 2013) and the Typhoon Yolanda. Despite
 COVID - 19 travel restrictions, virtual Bank oversight was maintained by the supervision team. According to
 the clarifications provided by the team, the continuity of leadership was maintained, with three Task Team
 Leaders (TTLs) during the lifetime of the project, and that for the most part, the TTLs were located in
 Philippines.


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and the key outcome indicators - increase in real incomes in the targeted
 areas, increase in incomes for the targeted beneficiaries in enterprise development, increase in value of
 marketed output and increase in the number of farmers and fisherfolk with improved access to the
 Department of Agriculture (DA) services, were appropriate and attributable to the project activities. The
 M&E framework for the project built on the system that was already in place for a previous Bank project.
 Under this framework, the Department of Agriculture's (DA) Regional Coordination Offices (RPCOs) were
 responsible for collecting information from their own subprojects and from the Provincial Project
 Management and Implementing Units (PAD, paragraph 46).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 62) notes that by the second year of implementation, a fully functional web-based
  Management and Information System (MIS) was established. The MIS - M&E Unit was complemented by
  a Geo-Mapping and Governance Unit (GGU) that contributed through various digital innovations to
  enhance the quality and timelines of feedback and evaluation on the performance of all project activities.
  The key innovative instruments were: (i) Web-based geo mapping through which projects can be digitally
  and virtually accessed, their status validated and monitored using the Geotagging tool: (ii) Application of
  Unmanned Aerial Vehicles to aid in evaluation of sub-project proposals: (iii) A Citizens monitoring
  mechanism for implementation of sub projects: (iv) A web-based grievance redressal system: (iv) A web-
  based system to monitor compliance with Operation and Maintenance of completed infrastructure
  facilities: and An Enterprise Assessment Tool (EAT) to assess the extent to which completed enterprise
  sub-projects require additional supports (such as assessing markets or financing or linkages with other
  service providers.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system provided regular management reports and a platform for real-time project monitoring of
  the project implementation from budget allocation through to execution (including operations and
  maintenance). The ICR (paragraph 62) notes that that the MIS-M&E system developed under the project
  has been of a high standard and recognized internationally as best practice both across government
  departments of the Philippines and internationally, as well as within the Bank.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)




  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank safeguard
   policies. Seven safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09): Indigenous Peoples
   (OP/BP 4.10): Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). (PAD, pages viii
   and ix). No new safeguard policies were triggered with the AF for the project.

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forests, Pest Management and Safety of Dams. The
   PAD (paragraph 46) notes that based on the experience of the Bank executed Mindanao Rural
   Development Projects, the direct environmental effects of on-the-ground activities (construction of small to
   medium-scale public infrastructure and support to agribusiness enterprises), were expected to be short-
   term, localized and reversible. The PAD notes that the environmental and social management frameworks
   of the Mindanao Rural Development Project two was updated and consolidated into an Integrated
   Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (IESSF) and publicly-disclosed to address the safeguard
   issues mentioned above.

   The ICR (paragraph 66) notes that compliance with environmental safeguards was satisfactory during
   implementation. According to the clarifications provided by the team, there was compliance with the
   safeguards on natural habitats, forests, pest management and safety of dams.

   Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 44) notes that there were
   indigenous people in some provinces of project activities. To address indigenous peoples issues, the
   Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) developed under the Mindanao Rural Development Project
   was updated at appraisal.The PAD (paragraph 45) notes that sub-projects under the infrastructure
   development component could entail land acquisition. The Land Acquisition, Resettlement and
   Rehabilitation Framework (LARRF) prepared under the Mindanao Rural Development Projects were
   updated and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address involuntary resettlement issues.

   The ICR (paragraph 88) notes that impacts on indigenous peoples were adequately managed during
   implementation. The ICR notes that Indigenous Plans (IPs) prepared for 30 sub-projects were implemented,
   in accordance with Operational Manual requirements. Regarding involuntary resettlement, some 11,845
   holdings were affected by land acquisition for activities associated with Farm to Market Road (FMR) and
   other infrastructure investments. Only about one percent of these holdings required physical displacement,
   and the affected people were compensated in accordance with operations manual procedures.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. A financial management assessment of the Department of Agriculture (DA), the
   Mindanao Program Support Office (PSO) and selected regional offices was conducted at appraisal. The

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



   financial management risk was rated as High but reduced to substantial with the mitigating measures
   (PAD, paragraphs 34 -36). The major financial risks identified at appraisal was due to the nationwide
   coverage of the project, and difficulties associated with financial management. The mitigation measures
   incorporated at design, included preparation of a financial manual to formalize the control processes
   specific to the project.

   The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that financial management was moderately satisfactory to satisfactory
   throughout implementation. The audited financial project financial statements were submitted in a timely
   fashion, and no overdue unaudited financial reports when the project closed. The team clarified that the
   consolidated audited project financial statements since inception to present (2015-2019) were mostly
   qualified. Reasons for qualifications, included errors, omissions and misclassifications. The team also
   clarified that these qualifications were reported and monitored in the succeeding audits by the Commission
   on Audit (COA).

   Procurement management. A procurement capacity assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that
   the relevant entities for the most part, had adequate procurement capacity and experience (PAD,
   paragraph 39). The assessment however identified the lack of experience of non-Mindanao Department of
   Agriculture (DA) Regional Field Offices (DFOs) and Local Government Units (LGUs). Mitigation measures
   incorporated at design, included training relevant officials during implementation, involving civil
   society organizations and procurement audits. The procurement risk was reduced from substantial to
   moderate with the mitigating measures (PAD, paragraph 41).

   The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that the implementation of procurement was satisfactory throughout
   implementation and that procurement proceeded through online activity in the wake of the COVID - 19
   pandemic.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  High                  High

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


12. Lessons

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)




The ICR draws the following lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language:

1. Reforms that are not imposed from the top, but based on the experiences of subnational
entities can aid in securing stakeholder commitment. This project departed from the earlier projects
in the Philippines in that Local Government Units (LGUs) were involved in prioritizing the
infrastructure investments that could best further their interests. This helped in securing their
commitment. Further the incentive framework through attractive cost sharing between the
Department of Agriculture was central in encouraging the participation of LGUs.

2. Having comprehensive and publicly-accessible (web-based) Operations Manuals which were
validated and understood by field level staff can be helpful in facilitating project startup. The
experience from this project technical/managerial follow up service support needs to be built into
project design to help ensure the sustainability of newly established enterprise.

3. The strict adherence to all-weather standards in the construction of farm-to-market roads and
subsequent Operations and Maintenance, while substantially more expensive to construct than
gravel roads, can be useful in countries that are vulnerable to natural disasters (such as typhoons).

In addition, IEG adds the following lesson:

1. A well-designed and implemented M&E system that produces regular meaningful results is
extremely helpful in tracking high level outcomes that determine the trajectory and priorities of
projects. Where this is done well, the justification for further funding and component priorities
becomes easier and the impact is amplified. Using multiple approaches to triangulate results
amplifies where there are successful investments and areas where changes might be made. This is
extremely useful in very large programs across multiple regions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The Interim ICR is clear, well laid out and makes a cohesive argument on the achievements of the project. The
theory of change provided in the ICR provides a good picture of the causal links between project activities,
outputs and outcomes that were attributable to the project activities. It candidly discusses the issues associated
with enterprise development activities and acknowledges the role played by the Department of Agriculture in
facilitating the outcomes. The ratings provided in the ICR are consistent with the guidelines.

Importantly, the ICR seeks to align the various threads of evidence to the performance story of the intervention.
This comes through strongly and there is an interesting and candid narrative that plays out in the section on
Bank performance and that carries through to the factors affecting project performance. The team deserves


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)



credit for the way the document holds together. Given these features and the adherence to the guidelines, the
ICR is highly rated.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
