     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022514

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P148238                                     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                             Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9820                                   31-Jul-2019                                           1,401,399.72

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jul-2014                                 30-Jun-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              4,500,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               1,774,089.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                           1,401,399.72                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7) were: "to strengthen the capacity of Information
   Communication Technology (ICT) regulatory institutions in the participating countries and enhance
   regional collaboration and knowledge sharing on ICT regulatory issues."




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 7 - 9).

   Component 1. Regional ICT capacity development and knowledge management. The estimated cost
   at appraisal was US$2.25 million. The revised estimate was US$3.50 million. The actual cost was US$1.25
   million. This component planned to finance Technical Assistance (TA) activities aimed at knowledge sharing
   and cooperation among regional regulators. Activities in this component included: (i) regional dissemination
   of knowledge products; (ii) development of regulatory best practices; (iii) improving access to sector data;
   (v) providing a central mechanism for sharing knowledge at the regional level; and (vi) hiring key staff and
   consultants.

   Component 2. Regional advisory services. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.75 million. The
   revised estimate was US$0.00 million. This component planned to finance advisory services on demand
   and training regional regulators. This component was dropped during the May 2018 level 2 restructuring
   and a new activity on cybersecurity support was added. (reasons discussed in section 2e).

   Revised: Cybersecurity support. The revised estimate of this component was US$0.5 million. The actual
   cost was US$0.0 million. This component planned to provide technical and analytical support for
   cybersecurity in the participating countries, including, inter alia, through developing cybersecurity strategies,
   policies, and incident response capabilities, technical support for establishing computer emergency
   response teams, regional and international knowledge sharing, and research on cybersecurity issues.

   Component 3. Project administration. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.5 million. The actual
   cost was US$0.16 million. This component planned to provide project implementation support in the areas
   of fiduciary management and monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.5 million. The revised estimate was US$1.7
   million. The actual project cost was US1.4 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by a regional IDA grant of US$4.5 million. The revised
   estimate was 1.7 million. The amount disbursed was US$1.4 million. An undisbursed amount of US$2.7
   million (67.5% of the IDA grant) was cancelled on June 25, 2020.

   Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution of US$0.4 million was estimated at appraisal. There was no
   borrower contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 30, 2014, became effective on September 12, 2014, and was
   scheduled to close on July 31, 2019. The project closed about a year behind schedule on June 30, 2020.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



   Restructurings. There were two Level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

   The following main changes were made through the first Level 2 restructuring on May 2018, following the
   mid-term review (MTR) on August 2017:

         The component two activity associated with regional advisory services on demand was dropped due
          to a combination of factors, including challenges associated with identifying two or more regulators
          with similar needs of regulatory services and issues with counterpart funding. Resources from this
          component were partly reallocated to financing component one activities of regional knowledge
          sharing and capacity building, and financing a new activity on cybersecurity that
          was a shared concern in the region. Following the dropping of the activity associated with regional
          advisory services, counterpart funding was no longer applicable, and the disbursement table was
          revised to reflect 100% of Bank financing for the project.

         Procurement capacity was augmented, with the recruitment of a dedicated procurement specialist
          for the project at the University of the South Pacific (USP). The overall procurement arrangements
          and project implementation structures however remained unchanged.

         The results framework was modified to reflect the changes in project activities. The intermediate
          indicator “establishment and Maintenance of Annual Regulatory Lessons Learned Section on
          Advisory Services Database” associated with the dropped component was dropped.

         The project closing date was extended by a year from July 31, 2019, to July 31, 2020, to allow time
          for completing the ongoing activities.

   The following changes were made through the second Level 2 restructuring on June 26, 2020.

         An undisbursed amount of US$2.74 million of the Bank financing that could not be utilized, was
          cancelled.

         The closing date for the project was brought forward by a month from July 31, 2020, to June 30,
          2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Reginal context. The opportunities for economic development of the Pacific Islands are constrained by
their small size. While low purchasing power, challenges of scale and distance to markets
inhibited their businesses' opportunities, geographic isolation hindered knowledge sharing between
them. Developing the ICT was seen by the Pacific Island countries as a way for addressing the challenges
associated with isolation and reducing the cost of doing business in these countries.

Sector context. The ICT sector of Pacific Island countries are at varying levels of development. While
the sector was liberalized in some countries (such as, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



Tonga and Vanuatu), the sector in some others (such as, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Palau, and Tuvalu) was
still in its infancy. The regulatory institutions likewise varied in the countries. While some had regulatory
institutions for a number of years, the regulatory ability to muster resources from license fees or levies was
limited in others. Accessing knowledge and technical support collectively to analyze market data and
information, building capacity of regulatory institutions, and building a central facility to support smaller
regulators was important at the regional level.

Alignment with the Pacific Islands ICT Regional Strategy. The project was fully aligned with the
"Framework for Action on ICT Development in the Pacific", developed in 2010 by the Secretariat of the
Pacific Community. While focus number one of the framework identified the need for regional collaboration
on ICT issues, focus number two, articulated the need for developing ICT policy and the legislative and
regulatory framework, and focus three highlighted the need for ICT human capacity building. The concept of
a regional ICT regulatory advisory committee was first raised at a meeting of regional ICT stakeholders in
2007, with the ICT ministers of Pacific Island countries requesting the World Bank, to undertake an options
study in 2008 for setting a "Pacific ICT Regulatory Resource Center" (PIRRC) for regional regulation of
the sector. Following this, the Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) mobilized resources from
the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund and set the PIRRC. In the absence of a dedicated
regional institutional/forum, the University of South Pacific (USP) was assigned a leading role for ICT
outreach and ICT development at the regional level. A two-phase implementation was envisioned for
PIRRC, with the first phase executed using Bank and ADB executed Trust Fund Resources.

Alignment with Bank Strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank's regional strategy for Pacific
Islands articulated in the Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for 2017 - 2021. This framework identified
ICT as the key infrastructure for supporting the region's development objectives, and improvements to the
ICT regulatory environment as essential for improving ICT access, adoption and affordability. The
PDOs were directly aligned with Focus Area Four of the RPF (strengthening the enablers of growth), and
objective 4.2 (increased access to basic services and improved connectivity infrastructure). The RPF also
highlighted the need for adopting a regional approach to sector development and greater regional
integration. The RPF was also fully aligned with the common themes emerging from the current national
development strategies of regional countries such as, building climate resilience, investing in human
development, improving infrastructure and fostering growth. The importance of connectivity to respond to
crisis is also underscored by the ongoing COVID - 19 pandemic. The ICR (paragraph 21) notes that while
research on the economic impact of COVID - 19 is still scarce, initial evidence indicated that countries with
advanced connectivity can mitigate up to half the negative long-term impact of the pandemic. The PDOs
were fully aligned with Pillar Four of the Bank's COVID - 19 Response Approach Paper of June
2020 (strengthening ICT policies, institutions and investments for rebuilding better).

Previous Bank Experience. This Bank-funded project was the second phase, aimed at developing
a regional approach to ICT regulatory issues in Pacific Islands. This phase was designed to be part of a
wider program, with enhanced scope and sophistication of ICT activities as compared to the first
phase. Although the level of ambition of this recipient-executed second phase (as compared to the Bank-
executed first phase) was appropriate, following the dropping of the original component, two activities
and persistent implementation challenges associated with the constraints of the financing instrument
(regional IDA grant), this project turned out to be a mere continuation of the first phase, with little value
added. The regional mechanism (the Pacific ICT Regulatory Resource Center) was already established in
Phase 1, the types of outputs remained largely the same for the two projects, and the networks




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



               developed between ICT regulators of the region were already in place, prior to preparation and approval of
               this project. The relevance of objective is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To strengthen the capacity of ICT regulatory institutions in the participating countries.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical. Given
                             the limited ICT regulatory capacities in the Pacific Island countries, their varying levels of development, and
                             lack of adequate scale in individual markets to finance sophisticated ICT products, technical assistance
                             activities aimed at regional capacity building and knowledge management, were likely to strengthen the
                             capacities of regulatory institutions in the participating countries. These activities were aimed at the long-
                             term development objective of a regional approach to IT sector regulation in Pacific Islands.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 32 - 35).

                                        Knowledge portal was established when the project closed as targeted. An online website that
                                           provided access to an advisory services database was maintained by the Pacific ICT Regulatory
                                           Resource Center (PIRRC) as targeted. The ICR (page 33) notes that while the knowledge portal at the
                                           PIRRC was established and active at the time of project closing, it is currently not active and
                                           unavailable online.
                                          Eleven working papers on priority regulatory topics (such as, spectrum management, open access
                                           and national emergency telecommunication plans) were completed when the project closed. This
                                           exceeded the target of five.
                                          Gender-disaggregated data on ICT market penetration was not maintained as targeted when the
                                           project closed. The ICR (page 32) mentions that this indicator was to be revised at first project
                                           restructuring, but erroneously was not. An inventory of gender specific existing ICT programs in the
                                           region were not developed as targeted at project closure.
                                          Five training programs with fifteen regulatory staff were trained per program per year when the project
                                           closed. This was short of the target of twenty.
                                          Five regional sharing events were held annually, short of the target of twelve.

                             Outcomes


                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)




      The project activities were expected have a favorable impact on the telecommunications sector of the
       participating countries. This impact was measured through sector-specific standard indicators
       developed by the Bank's Sustainable Development Network to measure the impact of technical
       assistance to the sector. These indicators were expected to show the impact of the project on: (i)
       making the legal and regulatory framework more effective at delivering sector performance; (ii)
       improving the capacity of the regulatory institutions to deliver on their mandate; (iii) increasing the
       level of competition in the ICT sector; (iv) improving the ICT policy environment in the country; and (v)
       reforming state-owned assets in the ICT sector (PAS page 22). The indicators were measured by
       composite scores ranging from one (low) to five (high)). The score reached when the project closed
       was two as compared to the target of four.

In the absence of any evidence of implementation of regulatory or policy actions by participating countries
that can be attributed to the outputs produced by the project, aimed at strengthening the capacity of ICT
regulatory institutions in the participating countries, efficacy is rated negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To enhance regional collaboration and knowledge sharing on ICT regulatory issues.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear. Given the
limited collaboration and knowledge sharing between ICT sector regulators, activities aimed at regional
advisory services on cybersecurity issues were aimed at enhancing regional collaboration and knowledge
sharing on ICT regulatory issues, and these were expected to contribute to the long-term development
objective of regional approach to ICT sector regulation in Pacific countries. The two development indicators
may be considered inter-related intermediate outcomes of project activities, synergizing to achieve the
development objectives measured by the PDO indicators.

Outputs (ICR, pages 35-36).

It should be noted that no activities were implemented under the original (regional advisory services) and
revised (cybersecurity support) component two.

      The set of tools and templates for developing a Pacific model to assist the development of a National
       Cyber Security Master Plan, were not delivered as targeted.
      No regional cyber security capacity development workshop was held annually when the project
       closed. This was short of the target of three.

Outcomes



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



                            As discussed above, the project activities were expected have a favorable impact on the Information
                            Technology/Information Technology Enabled Services (IT/ ITES) sectors of the participating
                            countries. This impact was measured by composite scores as discussed above. The score reached when the
                            project closed was two as compared to the target of four.

                            Given that none of the outputs were produced and outcomes not realized, efficacy of the objective of
                            enhancing regional collaboration and knowledge sharing on IT regulatory issues is rated as negligible.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            In the absence of any evidence of implementation of regulatory or policy actions by participating countries
                            that can be attributed to the outputs produced by the project, overall efficacy is rated as negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. There was no economic or financial analysis at appraisal, given that the impact of
   improving regulatory capacity could not be easily quantified. The potential economic project benefits from
   improving regulatory capacity was assumed to come from improved service delivery of ICT services at the
   regional level. This in turn was expected to facilitate private sector participation in the sector and aid in efficient
   provision of telecommunication services. There was no economic analysis at closure.

   This project was far less efficient as compared to the Phase 1 project executed by the Bank/ADB, in terms of the
   accepted norms of value of money such as, implementation time frame, cost, and outputs produced. While
   the prior project was implemented in two years, this project had a time frame of six years. Both projects cost
   US$1.4 million (although this project had an envelope of US$4.5 million, over two-thirds (67.5%) of this
   amount could not be utilized and was cancelled at closure). While the number of technical notes, knowledge
   products, and knowledge sharing events were the same for both projects, no ad hoc advisory services were
   recorded under this project, as compared to 31 under the phase 1 project.

   Administrative and operational shortcomings. There were significant administrative and operational
   shortcomings. There were delays in (i) hiring a Project Director (a legal covenant); and (ii) preparation of the
   Project Operations Manual. Also, the lack of effective coordination between the University of South Pacific
   (USP) and the Steering Committee contributed to implementation delays. Project progress up to the mid-term
   review was quite slow, with less than a third of the Bank financing disbursed till them. This was partly due to the

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



lack of familiarity of the USP with the Bank's procurement processes. The USP further took the decision (since it
was responsible for project administration as per the financing agreement) not to renew the contract of the
Project Director and scale down the role to that of a Project Manager (ICR para 49). This exacerbated the
already tense relationship between the USP and the Steering Committee. At closure, there was no progress on
activity associated with cybersecurity, and over two-thirds of Bank financing that could not be utilized were
cancelled.

In sum, efficiency is rated as negligible given that the recognized norms of value for money were not met and
there were significant administrative and operational shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO is substantial. Overall efficacy was negligible, given that there is no evidence
of regulatory or policy actions by the participating countries that can be attributed to the project
activities. Efficiency is rated negligible, given that the recognized norms of value for money were not met and
there were significant administrative and operational shortcomings. Taking these ratings into account as per the
Bank ICR IPF guidance (Appendix H), outcome is rated highly unsatisfactory, reflecting severe shortcomings in
the project's achievement of its objectives and in its efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Stakeholder risk. The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that the ICT agenda still remains a priority in the region and
that although the Pacific ICT Regional Resource Center (PIRRC) is not currently active and financed, the
notion of adopting a regional approach to ICT regulation is still valued by regulators. However, there is a lack

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



of technical leadership in the region without a regional organization taking a leading role for addressing ICT
regulatory issues.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared on the experience from the phase one of the project and the Bank's
  experience of similar regional initiatives undertaken in other sectors in Pacific Islands (such as the
  aviation sector aimed at establishing Pacific Aviation Security Office as a regional provider of additional
  security to national authorities on aviation safety and security). Lessons incorporated at appraisal
  included, active involvement of the steering committee and continued presence of the Project Director
  with financial management expertise during project execution. Several risks were identified at appraisal
  including, substantial stakeholder risk. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included a stakeholder
  consultative mechanism at appraisal. With mitigation measures, project risk was rated as moderate at
  appraisal; it was not adequate, as pointed out by the ICR, since the project involved the same
  stakeholders as Phase 1, but in different capacities. The ICR (paragraph 67) points to the fact that the
  risks of coordination and counterpart financing were the main reasons for component 2 ’s activities not
  being implemented, and these were not identified at appraisal. The arrangements made at appraisal for
  fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10b). There were weaknesses in M&E
  design (discussed in section 9a).

  In addition to weak risk identification and mitigation measures, there were major shortcomings at Quality-
  at-Entry:

         The phased implementation approach was to enhance scale and sophistication, but the project
          turned out to be a mere continuation of phase 1 activities at the regional level, with little value-
          added.

         A regional IDA Grant used as the lending instrument, excluded certain (non-IDA) Pacific Islands
          and members of the Pacific ICT Regulatory Resource Center (PIRRC) from being direct
          beneficiaries of the project on account of not being eligible for IDA financing (although the non-
          IDA countries were retained as members of the Steering Committee). There were challenges
          associated with direct exclusion of non-IDA countries from the project (ICR, paragraph 41).
          According to the clarifications provided subsequently by the team, the implementation challenges
          stemmed from the constraints of the regional IDA grant that led to the selection of USP as the
          grant recipient. This effectively created a gap between the financing and project beneficiaries.
          The team further clarified that this was a critical element that impacted the Project's performance
          as compared to the more successful first phase of the program.

         In the absence of a sector-focused regional institution in place, the University of South Pacific
          (USP), was selected to implement the project. The Project design did not consider the lack of
          incentive for USP to implement the Project on behalf of the beneficiaries represented by the
          Steering Committee. The USP, a higher education institution, did not have the related technical or


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



         fiduciary capacities for Bank financed operations. The limited oversight from USP contributed to
         implementation delays.

        The project was not ready for effectiveness, given that of the four legal covenants, only two
         covenants were complied with, and there were delays in appointment of a Project Director (a legal
         covenant). Further, at closure this covenant was not complied with due to the non-renewal of the
         Project Director's contract and implementation challenges leading to the non-recruitment of
         a Project Director not being recruited for the remainder of the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Ten Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRRs) were filed over a project implementation time frame of
 six years (implying on average twice a year supervision missions as per the norm). Following the mid-term
 review, the supervision team made the required changes, given that component two activities had
 changed. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10b).

 There were significant shortcomings in supervision:

       Following the first restructuring only one mission was held in 2019, for which no aide memoire was
        transmitted (ICR, paragraph 73).

       The supervision team did not sufficiently address key issues, such as the lack of engagement by
        the USP following the first restructuring, the sources of tension between stakeholders, and non-
        renewal of the contract for the Project Director (a legal covenant). The ICR (paragraph 72) notes
        that despite multiple attempts to engage with the client including efforts to meet with USP by
        members of the task teams visiting Fiji on missions for other ongoing engagements, there was lack
        of responsiveness from the recipient following the first project restructuring in 2018.

       The ICR provides no information on the continuity of leadership during implementation, but notes
        that there was a change in leadership after the first project restructuring, at a time when greater
        engagement was needed.

 Given the very limited progress after the first project, the Bank could have proactively closed the
 project earlier. The quality of supervision is rated as moderately unsatisfactory.

 Overall, the Bank performance is rated as unsatisfactory, in view of the major shortcomings at quality-at-
 entry that could not be overcome.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The impact of the project was measured through sector-specific standard indicators developed by the
 Bank's Sustainable Development Network to measure the impact of technical assistance to the sector. The
 indicators were measured by composite scores ranging from one (low) to five (high)). The USP was in
 charge of monitoring project performance.

 While the indicators were appropriate, given that the project activities aimed at addressing ICT regulatory
 issues at the regional level, there were no indicators aimed at measuring progress on regional
 collaboration. That is, demonstrating the benefits of adopting a collaborative approach on ICT regulatory
 issues. Furthermore, the PDO level indicators lacked adequate detail in terms of methodology and data
 sources to measure progress.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 55) notes that the USP's reporting of results was sporadic, with limited supporting
  evidence. The ICR further reports that the mid-term review noted that USP expressed data collection
  issues and suggested a revision in the Results Framework. However, the UPS proposal was not shared
  with the team. There were no adequate supporting materials for demonstrating progress after project
  restructuring and that there were data entry errors in the Results Framework throughout the
  implementation period (ICR paragraph 56).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 59) notes that data collection was limited and there was no evidence of utilization of
  the M&E data. There was no evidence of any follow-up being conducted on outputs and their
  downstream impacts. There was no evidence that any participating country used the outputs produced
  under the aegis of this project to take policy or regulatory action. Likewise, there was no evidence of
  knowledge sharing at the regional level.

  In sum, M&E is rated negligible primarily on account of shortcomings in the M&E implementation and
  utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)




a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category C project under the World Bank safeguard policies. No safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal (page 16). No safeguard policies were triggered during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. A financial management assessment of the University of South Pacific
   (USP) conducted at appraisal, concluded that their financial arrangements were satisfactory. The financial
   management risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 6.08).

   The ICR (paragraph 65) notes that financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory during the
   implementation period. However, the project did face issues relating to recovering administrative costs
   incurred by USP, delays in establishing online disbursement processing arrangements and financial
   reporting issues during implementation. However, there were no major compliance issues or outstanding
   financial reports when the project closed. The ICR provides no information on the quality of audits.

   Procurement. An assessment of the procurement arrangements was conducted at appraisal. The risks
   identified at appraisal included lack of clarity on who would be accountable for procurement decisions and
   inadequate procurement staff. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included preparation of a
   detailed procurement plan at appraisal and clarification of the role of USP as the entity in charge of
   procurement. With these measures, procurement risk was rated as moderate (PAD, paragraph 6.09).

   The ICR notes that there were significant procurement delays during implementation, the quality of
   procurement documentation was low, and materials were often returned for improvement. The ICR reports
   no case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  In line with the Bank ICR IPF
                                                                                  guidance, 2020 (Appendix H),
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory           Highly Unsatisfactory    with substantial relevance,
                                                                                  negligible efficacy and efficiency,
                                                                                  the overall outcome rating is HU.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)



                                Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Negligible               Negligible

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following lessons from the experience of implementing this project, which are
presented below with some adaptation of language.

1. Technical leadership is critical for regional activities. This project demonstrated the
importance of regional championship and ownership of the agenda. A lack of technical leadership on
the agenda limits the ability of the institution to coordinate the necessary expertise and inputs to
effectively implement projects in that field. While the University of South Pacific was given the
mandate for ICT development in this project, it was not aligned with its core function as a tertiary
education institution and lacked the necessary technical capacity to execute a Bank-financed
project.

2. Multi-stakeholder projects require clearly defined roles and responsibilities for stakeholder
coordination. This entails a greater level of engagement, consultation, and stakeholder
coordination during project preparation. Documents such as the project operation manual and
implementation agreements between participating stakeholders need to be prepared early on and
stakeholders sensitized ahead of project effectiveness to reduce stakeholder coordination risk and to
avoid potential misunderstandings that may lead to downstream challenges.

3. Procurement capacity building should be complemented with technical assistance, if need
be through support firms. While procurement is central to any project’s implementation, the
experience from this project highlights the criticality of the processes around the execution of
procurement itself. This includes many areas that require much more subject matter expertise than
procurement process familiarity, such as designing terms of reference, conducting market analysis,
carrying out technical evaluation of proposals/bids, and contract management, among others. The
lesson from this project is that in technical assistance projects such as those pertaining to ICT, the
availability of adequate technical capacity becomes more critical. In this project, the University of
South Pacific did not clearly have the capacity to address procurement issues.

4. Developing regional approaches requires long-term engagement. Regional approaches to
economic development has advantages, particularly for small-states. The regional IDA Grant was
potentially the only Bank financing instrument to continue this long-term engagement. The lesson
from this project is that the Bank's existing financial instruments may not be best suited to respond
to such needs, particularly in low-capacity regions where long-term engagement require sustained
technical assistance, technical and implementation capacity building, and grant financing to continue
operations till long-term sustainability options are realized.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pacific Reg ICT Regulatory Dev. Project (P148238)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR candidly discusses the issues associated with the regional dimensions of the project, especially when
there is no regional forum with a clear mandate. It also discusses candidly the issues associated with the
monitoring and evaluation of the project. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

However, there were some shortcomings. With relevance of objective rated high and efficacy and efficiency
negligible, the overall outcome is highly unsatisfactory as per the Bank ICR IPF guidance, instead of
unsatisfactory as reported in the ICR. The ICR provides no information on the continuity of leadership and the
quality of financial audits. The ICR is also excessively long, with the main text at 30 pages (double the
recommended length of 15 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
