     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022496

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P146328                                 Pap-Angren Railway

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                              Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84650                              31-Mar-2019                                         60,915,313.51

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Feb-2015                             31-Mar-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       195,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          60,915,313.51                                              0.00

 Actual                                      60,915,313.51                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Peter Nigel Freeman         Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) were:

   "To reduce transport costs and to increase transport capacity and reliability through the construction
   of a railway link between the Uzbek part of the Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan".



                                                                                               Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



   This assessment is based on the three sub-objectives:

         To reduce transport costs through the construction of a railway link between the Uzbek part of the
          Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.
         To increase transport capacity through the construction of a railway line between the Uzbek part of the
          Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.
         To increase transport reliability through the construction of a railway line between the Uzbek part of
          the Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were six components (PAD, pages 5 - 6).

   1. Railway main Infrastructure. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1,438.8 million. The actual cost
   was US$1,475. 6 million (this component was not Bank financed). It planned to construct a new railway line
   (including embankments, ballast, bridges and a tunnel) between the Ferghana valley and the rest of
   Uzbekistan.

   2. Rail Electrification, signaling, track maintenance and railway video surveillance system. The
   estimated cost at appraisal was US$152.0 million. The actual cost was US$44.5 million (this component
   was fully Bank financed). This component planned to finance four investments: (i) installation of a
   microprocessor- based train control signaling system; (ii) new traction substations and a Supervisory
   Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system; (iii) track maintenance equipment; and (iv) a railway
   surveillance and broadcasting system. A US20.0 million contingency was included in this component to
   cover for possible technology changes.

   3. Power distribution Line. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$35.0 million. The actual cost was
   US$10.7 million (this component was fully Bank financed). This component planned to finance three
   investments: (i) dismantling overhead power lines; (ii) new power lines; and (iii) expanding the Obihayot
   power station and new power distribution lines.

   4. Technical Assistance (TA) to the Uzbekistan Railway (UTY) for supporting railway construction.
   The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.5 million. The actual cost was US$0.5 million (this component
   was fully Bank financed). This component planned to provide TA to UTY activities for: (i) strengthening their
   financial and asset management capacities; (ii) modernizing their marketing arrangements; and (iii) capacity
   development.

   5. TA to UTY for improving railway logistics. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.5 million. The
   actual cost was US$1.0 million (this component was fully Bank financed). This component planned to
   prepare a logistics plan for the rail line.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



   6. Implementation Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$6.0 million. The actual cost was
   US$4.5 million (this component was fully Bank financed). This component planned to
   provide implementation support in the areas of monitoring and evaluation and fiduciary management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1,633.7 million. The actual cost was US$1,536.5
   million.

   Financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$195.0 million. The amount
   disbursed was US$60.9 million. US$73.0 million of the financing was not utilized and cancelled (discussed
   below). There was financing for constructing the rail line from the China Export - Import Bank. The appraisal
   estimate was US350.0 million. This amount was provided as planned.

   Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding was estimated at US$1,088.7 million at appraisal.
   Their contribution was more than planned at US$1,125.6 million.

   Dates. The project approved on February 13, 2015, became effective on September 15, 2016, and was
   scheduled to close on March 31, 2019. The project closed one year behind schedule on March 31, 2020.

   Other changes. The project was formally restructured twice during its lifetime.

         The first restructuring on September 12, 2015 changed the legal covenants. Specifically, a condition
          of project effectiveness regarding the Resettlement Audit and Social Action Plan (RASAP) was
          deleted, and replaced with a dated covenant to implement the RASAP and the Livelihood
          Restoration Plan (LRP).

   Substantial changes were made through the second project restructuring on February 3, 2019.

         A Bank-financed activity - installing the automated signaling system - was cancelled in 2018, due
          to misprocurement (discussed in Section 5), and the project closing date was extended by one year
          from March 31, 2019, to March 20, 2020, for completing the ongoing works. This restructuring also
          stipulated that no new activities would be initiated during the extension period and that the balance
          of uncommitted IBRD funds would be cancelled. As a result, the net loan commitment was reduced
          to US$70.3 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Uzbekistan is strategically located in Central Asia (borders with Afghanistan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan). Uzbekistan is double landlocked (requiring
crossing of at least two national territories to reach a coast line), and its connectivity is hampered by the
legacies of a transport system from the Soviet era. Following the dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (USSR) and establishment of new national boundaries, Uzbekistan and its neighbors found that

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



               many of their transport links crossed into adjacent countries, before crossing back into their territories.
               Ferghana valley, the easternmost region of Uzbekistan, with 30% of the country's population, is one of the
               poorest regions of Uzbekistan. Prior to the construction of the PAP-Angren Railway line, the region was
               largely isolated from the rest of Uzbekistan, with limited air service and only two transport routes between
               the valley and the capital, Tashkent: (i) via rail through Tajikistan on a route 90 kilometer (Km) longer than
               the PAP - Angren line; and (ii) via road through a four lane highway through mountainous region. The PAP -
               Angren rail route was a direct route from the Ferghana that allowed Uzbekistan to bypass Tajikistan for
               reaching the rest of Uzbekistan.

               Government strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were consistent with two development goals
               of the Government's medium term strategy - Industrial Modernization and Infrastructure Development
               Program - for 2011 - 2015: (i) increasing infrastructure efficiency; and (ii) enhancing competitiveness
               of industries. The PDO was relevant to the Government strategy for 2017 - 2021, which articulated the need
               for accelerating economic development and reducing regional disparities through: (i) modernizing transport
               communications; and (ii) reducing regional disparities. The PDOs were relevant to three of the five focus
               areas of the "Reform Roadmap" adopted in 2019: (i) accelerating transition to a market economy; (ii)
               transforming government's role in the market economy; and (iii) preserving environmental sustainability.

               Bank strategy. The PDOs were well aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Country Partnership
               Strategy (CPS) for 2012 -2015 articulated the need for improving service delivery for
               Uzbekistan's competitiveness and diversification agenda. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               2016 -2020 highlighted the need for alleviating poverty and reducing income inequality. The Bank realigned
               its program for Uzbekistan in June 2018 to respond to the Government's new agenda through a
               Performance and Learning (PLR) of the CPF. The Bank's revised program placed less emphasis on
               physical infrastructure and more on factors such as institutional development.

               This project was the first Bank railway project in Uzbekistan. The Bank was willing to accept a small role in
               a large civil-works project to establish an entry point for longer-term involvement in the sector. Although
               Bank-financing for the project was limited to 12% (US$195.0 million out of US$1,633.7 million), the Bank's
               value added was seen as bringing global experience to applying competitive procurement processes, social
               and environmental safeguards, modernizing technical and quality control standards, and bringing new
               approaches for asset and logistics management.

               Although the activities would reduce transport costs and reliability between the Ferghana valley and the rest
               of Uzbekistan, the PDOs did not specifically mention institutional reform outcomes, the Bank's revised
               priorities for Uzbekistan. Given that the level of ambition was fairly modest, the relevance of the PDOs
               is rated as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective

To reduce transport costs through the construction of a railway link between the Uzbek part of the Ferghana
Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.

Rationale
Theory of change. The PAP - Angren railway line that bypassed Tajikistan (along with the tunnel, tractor
substations, power lines, and the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to optimize
electricity supply on the line and maintenance equipment) was likely to reduce transport cost for
moving passengers and freight between the Ferghana valley and the rest of Uzbekistan. The causal links
between activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, pages 29 -37)

The PAP -Angren railway line was constructed (with embankment, ballast, rail bridges and a tunnel), as
targeted through UTY funding.

These activities were completed as targeted using IBRD funding.

      The railway line was electrified. The two tractor substations were completed, and the SCADA system
       was installed.
      The overhead power lines were dismantled. New power distribution lines were installed.
      TA was provided to the UTY for implementation support.

This IBRD funded activity was not completed.

      The automated signaling system that was to be financed by the Bank was not completed, when the
       project closed (discussed in section five).

Outcomes (ICR, page 12)

The project outputs were expected to reduce transport cost from the Ferghana valley and the rest of
Uzbekistan.

      The passenger transport cost declined by 33% (from US$15/passenger at the baseline to
       US$10), exceeding the target of US$16.0). The baseline was based on the transport cost per
       passenger in a private taxi or minibus, and the target was the cost of a rail trip per passenger. The
       target was higher than the baseline due to a factored annual rate of increase of 10% (historical rate of
       increase for the period from 2009 -2014).

Three indicators were used for the cost of moving freight through new rail line: oil and oil products per tank
and fertilizers and automobiles per wagon.

      The freight cost for moving oil and oil products declined from US$3,596.0/tank at the baseline to
       US$1,057.0 at closure and further to US$974.0 by November 2020. This was slightly short of the

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



       target of US$930.0 (The baseline was based on the cost of moving foil and oil products through the
       existing rail link via Tajikistan. The baseline was high because Tajik Railways (TDJ) charged premium
       rates for transporting oil tanks).
      The freight cost for moving fertilizers declined from US$979.0 at the baseline to US$368.0, exceeding
       the target of US$980.0.
      The freight cost for moving automobiles declined from US$979.0 at the baseline to
       US$568.0, exceeding the target of US$604.

Given that outcomes were realized for the most part, efficacy is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase transport capacity through the construction of a railway line between the Uzbek part of the
Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.

Rationale
Theory of change. Installing rail line power supply transmission lines, together with the activities described
above, were likely to increase transport capacity for movement of passengers and freight between the
Ferghana valley and the rest of Uzbekistan. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were
logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, page 37)

In addition to the outputs described above, these activities were relevant to this objective:

      The manual microprocessor-based train control system was installed by UTY as targeted.

This activity was completed with IBRD funding as targeted.

      TA was provided to UTY on topics such as logistics plan, marketing, asset management and financial
       accounting systems.

This IBRD funded activity was not completed.

      The video surveillance system that was to be financed by the Bank was not completed (discussed in
       section five).

Outcomes

The project activities were expected to increase transport capacity between the Ferghana valley and the rest
of Uzbekistan.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)




      There were on average three passenger trains between the Ferghana valley and the rest of
       Uzbekistan. This exceeded the target of two.
      There were on average eight freight trains as targeted. The ICR (paragraph 27) notes that there
       is substantial capacity for meeting future growth in demand, as capacity was designed for 1,000
       wagons per day, as compared to the current demand for 550 wagons per day.

Given that the outcomes were realized, efficacy is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

To increase transport reliability through the construction of a railway line between the Uzbek part of the
Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.

Rationale
Theory of change. Acquiring track maintenance equipment, together with the activities discussed above,
were likely to increase transport reliability between Ferghana valley and the rest of Uzbekistan. The causal
links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs (ICR, page 37)

In addition to the outputs discussed above, the following outputs were relevant for this objective:

      The track maintenance equipment was acquired as targeted.
      A grievance response mechanism was set up and 67% of the grievances were addressed, short of the
       target of 90%.
      Two railway safety trainings were held during implementation.

Outcomes

The transport reliability between the Ferghana valley and the rest of Uzbekistan was monitored through the
percent of trips that was delayed by more than a day.

      Ten percent of rail services on the PAP Angren rail line were delayed by over a day, short of the target
       of five percent (the baseline for this indicator was the percentage of delays on the existing link through
       Tajikistan). The ICR (paragraph 28) notes that the target shortfall could be due to factors such as the
       lack of a permanent automated signaling system or logistical limitations.
      744,929 beneficiaries expressed satisfaction with the service quality on the PAP-Angren line, as
       compared to the target of 611,740.




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



                            Given that the outcomes were realized for the most part, efficacy of this sub-objective is substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Although the activities associated with the automated signaling system and the video surveillance equipment
                            were not completed, overall efficacy is substantial, given that the outcomes were realized for the most part.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis of project activities (accounting for 99% of the total cost) was
   conducted. The benefits were assumed to come from direct user benefits (for moving passengers and freight),
   benefits to generated traffic, benefits to road users from reduced congestion, and reduced Greenhouse
   Gas (GHG) emissions. The Net Present Value (NPV) at a 12% discount rate was US$558.0 million at closure,
   as compared to the NPV of US$722.0 at appraisal. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
   slightly higher at 16%, as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 15%, due to a combination of factors, including
   reduced construction cost, increased freight demand in the early part of the evaluation period, and relatively
   rapid construction period which caused benefits to flow 18 months earlier than assumed at appraisal. The ICR
   (paragraph 32) notes that the cost of the signaling system and video surveillance system, which could have
   contributed significantly to the efficiency of rail operations, was not factored in the ex post economic evaluation.

   Administrative and operational shortcomings. The construction of the PAP-Angren rail line financed by UTY
   was fairly advanced at appraisal in 2014, and the line was complete nine months after project
   effectiveness. The Bank financing for the project (12% of the cost) was intended for financing some civil
   works and limited institutional strengthening activities. In addition to providing financing, the Bank's main
   contribution was to be in improving safeguards and fiduciary compliance. There were significant administrative
   and operational shortcomings with respect to all of these, as discussed below.

   One, the Bank-financing for activities included the installation of automated signaling and video surveillance
   equipment. The ICR (paragraph 50) notes that the Government and the Bank had agreed at negotiations on the
   use of retroactive financing, but this was not applied. Although the selection process for signaling equipment
   was initiated twice during implementation, the procurement for this activity was subject to delays. Eventually this
   activity was not completed, with the Bank declaring misprocurement for this activity on October 29, 2019, and
   cancellation of Bank financing for this activity. The procurement for the activity associated with installing video

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



surveillance equipment had not started by December 2018 - nearly four years into project implementation and
only three months before the project closing date, and eventually Bank financing for this activity was cancelled
as well.

Two, the activities associated with institutional strengthening of UTY were limited (less than US1.5 million) of
the project cost. The ICR (paragraph 47) notes that the Bank team had envisioned a much larger TA component
of US$8.0 million, but in the end the Government limited the project's TA components. The ICR (paragraph 46)
notes that UTY was strongly resistant to using the Bank loan for institutional development. The institutional
strengthening activities completed under the aegis were moreover of limited use to this project, as these
activities were only delivered in January 2020, shortly before closure.

Three, given that the Bank financing was approved after work on the rail line had already begun, the Bank's
safeguards policies were to be applied retroactively to the project. The retroactive application
of safeguards proved to be problematic. The construction of the rail line entailed resettlement of houses and
livelihoods. Prior to Bank's involvement, resettlement was under national laws. There was limited ownership for
the Bank's safeguard policies among middle and lower-level officials of the Government, UTY and local
authorities, as the policies were perceived to be either complicated or excessively generous. There was a lack
of coordination on resettlement and compensation between the PAP and Angren districts. The ICR (paragraph
67) notes that in April 2016, the Bank issued a letter to the Government warning of suspension of
disbursements, if measures were not taken to resolve pending resettlement issues. Although social safeguards
compliance was achieved, as reported, a year after completion of civil works in 2017, the Livelihood Restoration
Plan remained incomplete, as there was no data to determine if the targeted people were better or worse off
compared to a pre-project level. According to the information provided subsequently by the team, 16 project
affected people - 14 in the PAP region and 12 in the Akhangaran region - were compensated to date with better-
off conditions.

Four, the design overestimated the cost of Bank-financed activities, with the actual cost considerably lower than
estimated at appraisal. The savings realized from the IBRD loan were not ploughed back for expanding project
activities, due to the Bank's concerns about procurement delays, low disbursements, and eventually the shift in
2018 of the Bank's program away from physical infrastructure investments and towards institutional
strengthening activities in Uzbekistan.

As a result of these shortcomings, over a third (37%) of the IBRD financing was cancelled, the Bank
disbursed US$60.9 million out of an US$195.0 million loan, and the project closed a year behind schedule.

In sum, efficiency is rated modest, in view of the administrative and operational shortcomings, and the limited
contributions made by the Bank for this project.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



                                                                                       99.00
Appraisal                                                   15.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       99.00
ICR Estimate                                                16.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the Government and Bank strategy is substantial. Efficacy of the three sub-
objectives - to reduce transport cost, to increase transport capacity and reliability, through the rail link between
the Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan is substantial, as the outcomes were realized for the most part.
Efficiency is modest, in view of the administrative and operational shortcomings with the Bank-financed project
activities. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is assessed as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that the PAP - Angren rail line that is entirely
within Uzbekistan, is important for its population, economy and interregional connections. As described,
there are no indications that could seriously undermine the government's commitment to the rail line.

Technical risk. There is a technical risk, given that the UTY has not replaced the manual signaling system
with a permanent automated one, and is yet to install the video surveillance system.

Natural events risk. There is a risk associated with seasonal landslides or avalanches in the Kamchik pass.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was the first railway project executed by the Bank in Uzbekistan. To assist in preparation, the
  preparation team mobilized a grant of US$700,000 from the Europe and Central Asia Capacity
  Development Trust Fund, for aiding in the project's safeguards documents and monitoring, conducting a
  Poverty and Social Impact Analysis and a baseline survey (ICR, paragraph 36). The implementation
  arrangements were appropriate, with the two Project Implementation Units (PIUs) located in the premises
  of the two implementing agencies (Uzbekistan Railways (UTY) and Uzbekenergo (UE - the state Joint
  Stock Company) (PAD, paragraph 31).



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



  There were shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. As analyzed by the ICR (para 73), the Bank underestimated
  the risks of applying its safeguards instruments, procurement rules, and M&E plans. In particular, (i) it
  proved challenging and costly in terms of Bank staff effort to retroactively implement the project’s
  resettlement instruments to the bulk of the civil works (the rail line and tunnel) that had started long
  before the Bank’s involvement and were near completion when the Bank loan became effective. (ii) The
  Bank’s appraisal of procurement capacity failed to take into account the complex country authorizing
  environment for procurement of large contracts. (iii) The Bank’s expectation of a project impact
  evaluation—mentioned in the PAD and initiated with the ex-ante PSIA- was not fulfilled, as the Bank was
  unable to persuade the Borrower to carry out the ex post survey.

  In addition, institutional strengthening was not part of the PDO, and there were no key outcome indicators
  for assessing the extent to which the activities contributed to the institutional strengthening of UTY. As
  indicated in section five, the actual cost of Bank-financed activities was overestimated, with the actual
  cost of these activities well under the appraised cost. Finally, the lack of coordination between the two
  implementing agencies caused significant delays during implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Ten Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were filed over the project lifetime of five years, implying twice a
 year supervision missions. The ICR (paragraph 43) notes that the local presence of Bank fiduciary sector
 specialists aided in resolving many time-sensitive operational questions. The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that
 the threat to suspend disbursements was effective in expediting the correction of faults in the funding and
 implementation of resettlement work. According to the information provided by the team, there were four
 Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime, with three of them based in Washington DC. The
 final TTL based in the country office in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, was a project co-TTL from the beginning of
 project implementation.

 There were shortcomings in supervision. It is not clear if the Bank made serious efforts to motivate the
 Government or UTY in institutional strengthening activities (although the Bank urged the client to give more
 attention to institutional strengthening activities). It is unclear if the Bank made serious efforts to make to
 the client to carry out the Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) at closure. The mitigation measures
 for addressing procurement issues were inadequate, and these led the Bank to declare misprocurement
 and part cancellation of Bank loan. Implementation during the first two years was very challenging to obtain
 the client's full safeguards compliance. The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that the mid-term review (MTR) if
 held as scheduled in 2017, could have helped in taking corrective action for the issues encountered during
 implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDOs were narrowly focused on users of the new rail line, with the quantitative key outcome indicators
 pertaining to transport cost, transport capacity and reliability due to the rail link. The key indicators and
 targets were simple and unambitious, as described by the ICR (para 60). The results framework did not
 include any key indicators aimed at institutional strengthening of UTY.

 The M&E design envisioned an impact evaluation of the project to capture the project's impact on welfare,
 human development, labor market outcomes, the bottom 40% of the population, unemployment of youth
 and female headed households, before and after the operationalization of the rail line (PAD, paragraph
 33).

 The UTY's PIU was responsible for data collection for monitoring performance.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that the data for monitoring project performance was collected by UTY
  during implementation. One intermediate indicator aimed at the working ratio of UTY (the ratio of
  operating cost to operating revenue) was not monitored as envisioned at design. Likewise, while the
  impact evaluation was undertaken at preparation, a second survey was not conducted after the rail
  line became operational. This precluded data on assessing the project's impact on poverty reduction.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 59) reports that although values for user satisfaction were reported by UTY, these
  were based on informal feedbacks, not rigorous surveys. The ICR also notes that key outcome
  indicators of transport costs, transport capacity and reliability, were collected and reported, even before
  the Bank-financed components had been implemented. The ICR (paragraph 60) notes that the M&E
  played a limited role in decision making.

  In sum, M&E is rated modest, in view of the shortcomings at design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as a Category A (Full Assessment) project under World Bank safeguard policies.
  Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Physical
  Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, page iv).

  Environmental assessment. The key environmental issues identified at appraisal included: (i) pollution of
  streams and rivers during construction; (ii) radioactivity while constructing the tunnel; (iii) the risks of
  landslides and rockfalls; and (iv) locating sites for waste/excess material, borrow pits and construction
  staging. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was conducted at appraisal, and an Environmental
  Management Framework (EMF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed (PAD, paragraph 65).

  The environmental issues during implementation included: (i) absence of site-specific Environment
  Management Plans (EMPs); (ii) inadequate workplace safety and health, especially in cases of rock bursts
  in the tunnel construction; (iii) deposits of solid waste rocks in riverbeds; (iv) improper storage and disposal
  of waste materials; and (v) inadequate treatment of wastewater discharges. The retroactive application of
  safeguards proved to be problematic (ICR, paragraph 47). These issues were however addressed by the
  Government and UTY at project closure.

  Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (paragraph 68) notes that the some project sites were of historical
  and archeological importance to the Ferghana valley, Uzbekistan and the entire Central Asia Region, as the
  rail line alignment went through the historic/cultural heritage "Settlement Chihudzhra", near PAP. The ICR
  (paragraph 68) notes that prior to Bank's involvement, the works of the rail alignment caused damage to the
  site. The ICR notes that the Bank halted the works in this area and required UTY to prepare an action plan
  for physical cultural resources, as part of the EMF. The ICR does not mention of any problems with the
  historic site during implementation.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 59) notes that involuntary resettlement was expected. A
  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for addressing site-specific
  impacts was prepared and publicly-disclosed by UTY at appraisal.

  The ICR (paragraph 66) notes that there were several resettlement issues during implementation. The UTY
  did not fulfill the loan effectiveness condition on implementing thee Resettlement Audit/Social Action Plan
  (RASAP) by July 2015. The project effectiveness deadline was extended twice, and in September 201, the
  effectiveness condition regarding the RASAP was dropped and converted into a dated covenant, and a
  Livelihood Restoration Plan was added as an addendum to the RASAP. As indicated in section 5, there was
  a lack of coordination between the PAP and Angren districts on the modalities of the resettlement process.
  According to the information provided subsequently by the team, the Livelihood Restoration Plan
  was completed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. A financial management assessment of the Uzbekistan Railways (UTY) was
  conducted at appraisal. UTY had prior experience in executing International Financial Institutions (IFIs), it




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



   was adequately staffed, and its financial arrangements were deemed to be satisfactory at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 46).

   The ICR (paragraph 69) notes that there were minor issues with financial management during
   implementation. Although the UTY regularly submitting Interim Financial Reports, the second implementing
   agency was not doing so. However, this was resolved by closure. According to the information provided by
   the team, the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement management assessment of the
   implementing agencies conducted at appraisal concluded that the arrangements were deemed to be
   satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 51).

   As indicated in section 5, there were procurement issues, with the Bank declaring misprocurement for the
   contract associated with automated signaling equipment for the rail line. The contract associated with
   installing the video surveillance equipment was subject to procurement and cancelled. These led to the
   cancellation of a third of the IBRD-financing for the project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Efficiency is rated as modest in
                                                                              view of the administrative and
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   operational shortcomings
                                                                              associated with Bank-financed
                                                                              project activities.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG uses the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with some
adaptation of language.

1. The difficulties associated with Bank engagement in project activities, where it has limited
financial leverage, need to be carefully assessed at appraisal. The leverage of the Bank in this

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)



project was limited, in view of its relatively low contribution to project activities. The lesson from this
project is that, while the Bank must take some risks in order to enter new areas of engagement, it
should assess the institutional and sectoral engagement more attentively at appraisal.

2. Sufficient time to train stakeholders in the required Bank instruments such as
Resettlement Policy Framework and Resettlement Action Plan is especially required
in situations, where the application of safeguards is complex. In this project, the implementation
of resettlement depended on a government approach that was disjointed, inadequately funded, and
hampered by weak capacity. The Bank’s resettlement rules were retroactively applied to a major rail
line that had been mostly completed. This did not leave sufficient time to train the stakeholders in the
Bank's resettlement policies and procedures.

3. Post impact evaluations could be especially of high value for projects of a large financial,
geographic, and socio-economic magnitude. In this project, while an evaluation was conducted
at appraisal, there was no ex-post evaluation once the new rail line became operational. This
precluded the extent to which the project contributed to socio-economic benefits and alleviating
poverty.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and candidly discusses factors associated with the lack of leverage of the Bank over the
project. It also candidly discusses the resettlement, given that these activities were to be completed
retroactively over the project. The ICR also candidly discusses the procurement issues that led the Bank to
declare misprocurement and cancellation of the loan for the activity associated with the automated signaling
equipment for the rail line. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this
project.

There were minor shortcomings. The ICR provides no information on the continuity of leadership and the quality
of audits (information was subsequently provided by the team). The main body of the text is at 23 pages, as
compared to the recommended length of 15 pages. The ICR could have benefitted from editing.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)




                                                                  Page 16 of 16
