     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022333

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P133327                                     PAMP II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Tajikistan                                  Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56970,IDA-D0810,IDA-H8230,TF-           28-Feb-2018                                         56,389,047.10
 13997

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Nov-2012                                 28-Feb-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            18,000,000.00                                    27,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             57,899,547.24                                    27,900,000.00

 Actual                                         56,462,038.10                                    27,900,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the Project are to: (i) provide employment to food-insecure people through the rehabilitation
   of irrigation and drainage infrastructure; (ii) increase crop production in response to improved irrigation and
   drainage infrastructure; and (iii) support the development of policies and institutions for water resource
   management, as a means to improve food availability and food access for low-income people in poor rural
   areas supported by the project. (Schedule 1 of the Financing Agreement dated February 5, 2013).


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



   For the ICRR, the PDO are parsed into the following:

   Objective 1: To improve food availability and food access to low-income people in poor rural areas supported
   by the project.

   Sub-Objective a: To provide employment to food-insecure people through rehabilitation of irrigation and
   drainage infrastructure in the areas supported by the project

   Sub-Objective b: To increase crop production through rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage in the areas
   supported by the project

   Sub-Objective c: To support the development of improved policies and institutions for water resource
   management in Tajikistan

   Under a Level 1 restructuring in June 2015, a substantive change made in the PDO was the withdrawal of the
   part pf the original PDO "as a means to improve food availability and food access for lower-income people in
   poor rural areas supported by the project". The PDO were revised as follows: "The objectives of the project
   are to: (i) provide access to temporary employment to food-insecure people through rehabilitation of irrigation
   and drainage infrastructure; (ii) increase yields of selected crops in response to improved irrigation and
   drainage infrastructure; and (iii) strengthen the capacity of Tajikistan to undertake integrated water resource
   management. " (Schedule 1 of the Financing Agreement dated June 22, 2015).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  22-Jun-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   (Reference - PAD, paras. 22 to 30).

   Component 1: Public Works and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure (estimated cost
   US$35.82 million; actual cost US$44.35 million)

   Subcomponent 1a: (Employment Generation for Food Insecure Households through Public Works): This
   subcomponent was to support the employment of food-insecure people from the project districts to be
   employed for manual cleaning of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals.

   Subcomponent 1b: (Mechanized and Other Works): This subcomponent was to support rental and purchase
   of machinery (excavators, bulldozers, flushing equipment, etc.); purchase and installation of irrigation gates,

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PAMP II (P133327)



  irrigation canal and structures repair works; pipeline network repairs; strategic pump station and drainage
  repairs.

  Subcomponent 1c: (Flood Channel Emergency Works): This subcomponent was to support emergency
  restoration of a flood channel that traverses and protects the city of Kulyab, and reduces risks for
  agricultural land and irrigation systems supported by the project in Vose district.

  Component 2: Assistance in Water Resource Management, including Technical Assistance for Policy and
  Institutional Reform (estimated cost US$8.07 million; actual cost US$9.14 million).

  This component was to provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Amelioration and Water Resource
  Management (MAWRM) and other relevant institutions for reform of Water Resource Management (WRM).

  Subcomponent 2a: (National Level Policy, and Legislative and Institutional Formulation): This
  subcomponent was to support the Government of Tajikistan (GoT) to: (i) further develop the legal basis for
  Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) and Water Sector Reform (WSR); (ii) transform MAWRM
  into a Ministry for Water Resources (MWR); (iii) prepare a National Integrated Water Resource
  Management Strategy for Water Resource Management (WRM): and (iv) establish a Water Information
  Center (WIC).

  Subcomponent 2b: (River Basin Planning): This subcomponent was to assist the GoT to implement river
  basin management in the Kofernihon river basin.

  Subcomponent 2c: (Develop and Strengthen Drainage Institutions): This subcomponent was to assist the
  GoT to: (i) build independent, financially autonomous irrigation and drainage service providers responsible
  for management and maintenance of off-farm irrigation and drainage infrastructure and water delivery to
  water user associations; (ii) support the transformation of existing region and district level institutions into
  the new institutional framework; and (iii) establish and strengthen the capacity of these institutions through
  provision of technical assistance, goods, works, and training.

  Component 3: Project Management (estimated cost US$2.01 million; actual cost US$2.90 million)

  This component was to provide support to the Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for project
  implementation and coordination, financial management, procurement, communication and awareness
  programs, environmental management and safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$45.90 million. With the Additional Financing
  approved in 2015, the project scope was scaled up and the estimated cost was increased to
  US$57.90 million. The actual cost at completion was US$56.46 million (ICR Data Sheet).

  Project Financing: At appraisal, the financing approved was an IDA grant of US$18.00 million and a GAFSP
  (Global Agriculture and Food Security Program) grant of US$27.90 million for a total of US$45.90 million.
  Under the 2015 Additional Financing, an additional IDA credit of US$6.60 million and an IDA grant of


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PAMP II (P133327)



US$5.40 million, were approved. At completion, actual disbursements were: IDA credit and
grants US$28.56 million (95% disbursement) and GAFSP grant US$27.90 million (100% disbursement) for
a total of US$56.46 million (ICR Financing table in ICR Data Sheet).

Borrower Financing: There was no contribution from the Borrower in regard to project financing.

Co-financing: The project was supported by a CAEWDP (Central Asia Energy and Water Development
Program) grant of about US$318,000 which was used to provide technical assistance to MAWRM, MEWR
and ALRI. This amount was not reflected in the project cost and project financing as stated in the ICR data
sheet.

Dates: The original closing date was February 28, 2018. Under the June 2015 restructuring, It was
extended by 24 months to February 28, 2020 to allow for completion of the scale up activities after the
Additional Financing.

Restructurings: The project underwent three restructurings. There was one substantive change in the PDO
under the first restructuring in 2015. The changes did not affect the original theory of change (TOC)..

First Restructuring (June 22, 2015 - amount disbursed US$15.09 million - Restructuring Paper dated June
22, 2015): This was a Level 1 restructuring. The purpose of the restructuring was to provide Additional
Financing (AF) in the amount of US$12 million through an IDA grant. The AF was in response to a request
from the GoT for assistance in dealing with a downturn in the Tajikistan economy. The AF was to be used
to enable the scale-up of the Public Works component to support measures to create employment for low-
income and food-insecure people in an additional six districts in Khatlon province and Districts of
Republican Subordination (DRS). The closing date was extended by 24 months from February 28, 2018 to
February 28, 2020 to allow time for completion of the activities added under the AF. In addition, to reflect
changes and experience during implementation, changes were made in the PDO, PDO Indicators, and
Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) as follows:

Reformulation of the PDO: One substantive change in the PDO was the withdrawal of the part of the
original PDO "as a means to improve food availability and food access for lower-income people in poor rural
areas supported by the project". ) The revised objectives (as stated in Schedule 1 to the Financing
Agreement dated June 22, 2015 for the Additional Financing) were to: (i) provide access to temporary
employment to food-insecure people through rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure; (ii)
increase yields of selected crops in response to improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure; and (iii)
strengthen the capacity of Tajikistan to introduce Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM). " (The
underlining indicates the changes as compared to the original PDO).

Changes in PDO and Intermediate Results Indicators: The rationale for changes in project indicators was
to: (i) better align them with the revised PDO; (ii) adjust project outcomes to the new Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) that had been approved; and (iii) reflect the impact of the Additional Financing on project
targets (Restructuring Paper, para. 35).

PDO Indicators: To reflect the scaling-up under the AF, targets were increased for the following indicators:
(i) direct project beneficiaries; (ii) number of person-days worked by participants in public works programs;
(iii) increase in wheat and vegetable yields on rehabilitated irrigated land; (iv) number of water user
associations (WUAs) created and/or strengthened; and (v) number of WUA members. In regard to the
National Strategy for IWRM and the Kofarnihon River Basin Plan, changes were made to reflect the
organizational changes in the concerned ministries/agencies. These were: the Ministry of Amelioration and

                                                                                                Page 4 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



   Water Resource Management (MARWM) was replaced by a newly formed Ministry of Energy and Water
   Resources (MEWR). The Agency of Land Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI) was made responsible for
   irrigation and service delivery (Restructuring Paper, para. 35). The proposal to create a Water Resources
   Information Center was replaced by a more decentralized Water Information System (WIS). (Restructuring
   Paper, para. 35).

   Intermediate Result Indicators: To reflect the scaling-up under the AF, targets were increased for the
   following indicators: (i) public works beneficiaries disaggregated by gender and vulnerable groups; (ii) area
   provided with irrigation and drainage services; (iii) water users provided with irrigation and drainage
   services; (iv) length of canals cleaned; (v) length of drains cleaned; (vi) key hydraulic installations, controls
   and structures renovated. To reflect changes in the organizational structure of concerned ministries and
   agencies, changes were made in regard to the concerned indicators, including deletion of the indicators
   referring to "mirobs" - the agencies intended to support off-farm maintenance and management in regard to
   irrigation and drainage. The indicator in regard to establishment of a Water Resources Information Center
   (WRIC) was replaced by establishment of a Water Information System (WIS).

   Changes in Components/Costs: There were no changes in components. Costs were increased to reflect
   the Additional Financing.

   Second Restructuring (November 6, 2015 - amount disbursed US$18.42 million - Restructuring Paper dated
   November6, 2015): This was a Level 2 restructuring. The rationale was to respond to the GoT's request for
   support in financing additional flood emergency works outside of the Kulob district that were necessitated by
   new flood emergencies in 2015. This was done through a reallocation in the amount of US$4.2 million
   between components. Associated changes were made in the the Results Framework (RF) and project
   components/costs including dropping of the reference to Kulob City..

   Third Restructuring: (July 23, 2018 - amount disbursed US$49.22 million - Restructuring Paper dated July
   23, 2018): This was a Level 2 restructuring. It was made to carry out reallocations between disbursement
   categories to enable utilization of un-committed amounts under the IDA and GAFSP grants.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Tajikistan, with a population of 7.6 million, remains one of the smallest and
poorest countries among the Central Asian economies. Despite periods of economic growth, at the time of
project appraisal in 2012, an estimated 46% of the population lived below the poverty line. The agricultural
sector accounted for 21% of the GDP and 64% of the employment in the country. Severe limitations on
employment opportunities led to migration of labor to Russia. An estimated 77% of the poor segments of
the population were dependent on agricultural activities. Tajikistan's economy is highly vulnerable to
external shocks. It has a high dependence on imports of oil and cereals which leads to rising prices for the
commodities. The economy also has a high exposure to risks of natural disasters including droughts,
floods, and landslides, making agriculture a significantly vulnerable sector After the land reforms carried
out by the GoT, the agricultural sector has over 60,000 mainly small-scale private farms. At appraisal, an

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



estimated 50% of the rural population lived in poverty while 30% were considered food-insecure. Out of a
total of about 880,000 hectares (ha) of arable land, about 720,000 ha was irrigated, but only about 515,000
ha were in use due to the low performance of the irrigation sector. Issues included (i) severe deterioration
of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure due to lack of public funds; (ii) irregular maintenance of
secondary and tertiary irrigation canals due to lack of clear responsibility assigned to agencies; (iii) low
access to rural finance; and (iv) slow progress with land reform and water resource management. (ICR,
paras. 1 and 2).

Alignment with National Priorities: The project development objectives were aligned with the national
priorities at the time of appraisal, and the original and subsequently revised objectives continue to remain
so under the current priorities. At the time of appraisal, the GoT launched an Agrarian Reform Program for
2012 to 2020 which recognized farm productivity as Tajikistan's major domestic food security
challenge. This was also recognized under the GoT's National Development Strategy (NDS) for 2006 to
2015 (ICR, para. 6). The original and subsequently revised objectives continue to be consistent with the
development priorities under the GoT's NDS for 2016-2030 that is currently in effect, including (i)
development of human capital, ensuring food security, and people's access to good quality nutrition, and (ii)
strengthening the country's institutional capacity (CPF FY2019-2023, Table 3).

Alignment with Country Partnership Framework (CPF): The project development objectives were aligned
with the CPF in effect at the time of appraisal, and both the original and subsequently revised
objectives continue to remain so under the current CPF for FY2019-2023. The CPF calls for a strong
emphasis on a preventative approach to addressing the country's identified fragility risks, including specific
interventions proposed to strengthen resilience in regions most at risk from unemployment and poverty
(CPF, para. 45). The PDO are consistent with Pillar 1 (investing in human capital and building social
resilience) and Pillar 2 (improving effectiveness of public institutions for sustainability (CPF, Executive
Summary, para. vi). The CPF includes Objective 3: Improving Resilience of Residents in Local
Communities. This is to be implemented in GBAO and Khatlon provinces through operations targeting
selected socially and economically marginalized groups (CPF para. 61). .

Prior Bank Experience: The project is a successor project to the Public Employment for Sustainable
Agriculture and Water Resources Management Project (PAMP I) which was implemented in 2010-2011 to
address emergency food security. The current project (PAMP II) builds on the results and experience under
the earlier project. The project focuses, in particular, on the more vulnerable districts, and places greater
emphasis on improvement of irrigation and drainage infrastructure as well as on policy and institutional
reform.

The Original Objectives: The overarching original objective of improving food availability and food access to
food-insecure people in the poor rural areas supported by the project was highly relevant in the context of
the national priorities and those supported under the CPF currently in effect. The PDO was pitched at the
right level and it adequately reflected a solution to a development problem aiming at improved food
availability and improved access to food. The means identified to achieve this objective (increase in
temporary employment, increase in crop production, and strengthening of Tajikistan's capacity for water
resources reform) were also appropriate to the achievement of this objective.

The Revised Objectives: In the restructuring of the project, the PDO was revised to: "(i) provide access to
temporary employment to food-insecure people through rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage
infrastructure; (ii) increase yields of selected crops in response to improved irrigation and drainage
infrastructure; and (iii) strengthen the capacity of Tajikistan to undertake integrated water resources


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PAMP II (P133327)



               management. " (Schedule 1 to the Financing Agreement dated June 22, 2015). This left the project without
               a PDO that would address a development problem, as the remaining sub-objectives, which in the original
               objective had correctly been identified as a means to achieve the development objective, are all at a lower
               level in the logical chain and none of them reflect a potential solution to a development problem.

               However, while there still was clear alignment between the project's development objectives and the
               country- and World Bank- strategies, the relevance of the revised objectives is pitched at a level that does
               not adequately reflect a potential solution to a development problem. A significant shortcoming here is the
               lack of clarity in the PDO formulation around what development outcomes would be achieved through the
               achievement of the objectives. "Provision of temporary employment" is at an input level in the logical chain
               in that it may be regarded as a project activity. Focusing on "provision of temporary employment" alone is
               not outcome focused and does not help in understanding what development outputs were expected as a
               consequence of the project. Temporary increased access to food (due to temporary increased income)
               would be a potential and logical outcome of this, but it is not reflected in the PDO formulation. The objective
               "increase in yields of selected crops" is an intermediate level indicator which could potentially contribute to
               improving food availability and food security for low-income people in the project area, but, again, this was
               not articulated in the PDO. The objective "strengthen the capacity of Tajikistan to introduce integrated water
               resource management "is an intermediate level indicator in the logical chain and not outcome focused in
               regard to delivering the outcome of increased food availability and food security or other relevant outcome
               (increased resilience to natural disaster risks). Increased income and improved health are longer term or
               higher level targets, but identifying them and tracking them is an important aspect of a successful
               development operation, which the revised PDO do not do.

               Based on the above, the relevance of the original objective was in line with the intended development
               impact and thus could be rated High while the revised objective is limited in scope and unlikely to
               sufficiently respond to the development challenge. Thus, it is rated Modest. In line with the guidelines
               agreed between IEG and OPCS, that the PDO formulation which is used at the end of the project is the one
               to be rated, the relevance of objectives is rated Modest.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve food availability and food access to low-income people in poor rural areas supported by the
                             project.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC); A TOC was not articulated in the PAD. The ICR (para. 7) provides a TOC which
                             indicates that the combination of measures to be taken under the project would improve food security and

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



enhance rural development and livelihoods. In the short term, investments in public works programs (inputs),
including manual cleaning of drains, would provide employment to food-insecure people (outputs) which
would increase their income and improve access to purchased food (outcomes). In the medium-term,
investments in rehabilitation irrigation and drainage infrastructure and flood emergency works (inputs) would
increase and improve the areas equipped with irrigation and drainage services, and thereby enable increased
crop production (outputs). This would increase food availability to to the people in the project-supported areas
(outcomes). In the longer-term, the provision of technical assistance and capacity building to the GoT and
MAWRM for water sector policy reform, including development of an IWRM strategy, and to water user
associations (WUAs) and other institutions (inputs), would result in improved policies and strengthened
institutions for undertaking sustainable water resources management (outputs). This would improve
sustainability of irrigated agricultural land and help increasing agricultural production, thereby improving food
security and enhancing rural development and livelihoods (outcomes). Although food availability and food
access were the principal outcomes to be achieved, no relevant PDO level indicators were included to enable
an assessment of achievement of these intended outcomes.

The efficacy of Objective 1 is assessed on the basis of the following sub-objectives

Sub-Objective a: To provide employment to food-insecure people through rehabilitation of irrigation and
drainage infrastructure in areas supported by the project.

The TOC was that the project would finance investments (inputs) for carrying out of public works
programs, including manual cleaning of on-farm irrigation canals, that would result in providing employment to
food-insecure people (outputs). This would provide additional income to the participating households, thereby
increasing their access to purchased food (outcome). However, no outcome level indicators were included
under the project for tracking increase in household incomes and improved access to food.

The outputs and outcomes listed below in this section and in following sections are based on the ICR Results
Framework and paras. 30 to 33).

Outputs:

1.Number of project beneficiaries from public works (baseline 0; original target 22,000; achieved at
restructuring 4,372; actual achievement 30,005; achievement level 136%)

Outcomes:

1. Number of person-days worked by participants in public works programs (baseline 0; original target
880,000; achieved at restructuring 148,850; actual achievement 1,062,927; achievement level 121%) of
which:

      female participants (baseline 0; original target 132,000; achievement at restructuring 29,770; actual
       achievement 253,561; achievement level 192%)
      severely food-insecure participants (baseline 0; original target 176,000; achievement at restructuring
       9,904; actual achievement 211,517; achievement level 120%)

Assessment: The original output targets in regard to the public works activities and the number of
beneficiaries were increased under the first restructuring (AF) undertaken in June 2015 to reflect the increase
in project scope by adding six more districts. Consequently, the original targets were overachieved at project

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



closing. However, it should be noted that the outcome indicator (number of person days worked) does not
indicate the degree of achievement of the intended outcomes (increased household income, improved access
to food). The project's M&E system did not include relevant indicators for measuring these intended
outcomes. Some relevant data have been provided in the Final Report on Impact Assessment (dated
February 2020) prepared by the Project Management Unit (PMU) at the end of the project. These indicate
that, based on beneficiary surveys for a sample of the beneficiary population, on average, the households
reported an additional income equivalent to about US$197 or about 1/8th of the average household income
during the year. The Report indicates that, after increasing between 2013 and 2016, the ability to purchase
food items seemed to decline since 2016, and this could be correlated to rising food prices and non-food
expenditures, and decline in remittances from abroad. The Report also indicates that, based on the World
Food Program's (WFP) Food Consumption Score (FCS), the FCS improved between 2016 and 2019, but
remained below the baseline level of 2013. The results were similar across both project and non-project
districts. Overall, there is a lack of clarity as to the project's impacts in regard to food availability and food
access.

 Sub-Objective b: To increase crop production through rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure
in areas supported by the project.

The theory of change (TOC) was that project outputs, including the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage
infrastructure, manual and mechanical cleaning of irrigation canals and drains, together with carrying out of
works to address flood emergencies, would improve the level of irrigation and drainage services in the project
supported areas. These activities would be supported by strengthening of the agencies and institutions
involved in the process of maintenance and management of the infrastructure, including the water user
associations. Together, this would enable an increase in agricultural productivity resulting in increased crop
production (intermediate results indicator - but treated in the project as an outcome). This would contribute to
increased food availability (outcome) for which the project did not have relevant PDO level indicators.

Outputs:

1. Length of canals cleaned (baseline 0; original target 5,200 km; achieved at restructuring 1,280 km; actual
achievement 8,571 km; achievement level 165%)

2. Length of drains cleaned (baseline 0; original target 1,300 km; achieved at restructuring 242 km; actual
achievement 1,112 km; achievement level 86%)

3. Key hydraulic structures, installations, and rehabilitation equipment provided (baseline 0; original target
5,800 items; achieved at restructuring 988 items; actual achievement 5,441 items; achievement level 94%)

4. Area provided with improved drainage services (baseline 0; original target 190,000 ha; achieved at
restructuring 48,457 ha; actual achievement 251,528 ha; achievement level 132%

Outcomes:

1. Increase in crop production - (original target 10%; actual achievement - greater than 10%; achievement -
greater than 100%).




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



2. Number of direct project beneficiaries (baseline 0; original target 772,000; achieved at restructuring
308,607; actual achievement 1,393,276; achievement level 180%)

Assessment: The outcome indicator used was the increase in cereals/food/fodder crops yields on
rehabilitated irrigated land. This indicator is more appropriately an intermediate results indicator. The targeted
increase in yields was 10%. The ICR (para.35) reports that, between 2010-2012 (baseline) and 2017 to 2018
(final), based on a sample of 10 districts supported under the project, yields for all cereals increased by about
25.2% (including for wheat by 22.3%); for all vegetables by 15.1%; and fodder crops by 22.3%. Yields for
cotton declined by 12.6%. According to the Final Impact Assessment Report, 57% of households in the
project area (and 54% in non-project areas) reported that the amount of irrigation water increased. In 9 out of
the 17 project districts, households reported that access to, and availability, of irrigation water was a principal
reason for the increase crop production. The ICR reports that beneficiary surveys have indicated that not all
the increase in yields can clearly be attributed to the project since farmers stated that availability of other
inputs like fertilizers and seeds also played a significant part. However, based on this and other information,
the ICR assesses that, overall, the increase in yields for crop production was higher than 10% and exceeded
the target of 10%. The original outcome target in regard to the number of direct project beneficiaries was
increased at the June 2015 restructuring (AF). the original target was overachieved at project closing.
However, there were no PDO level indicators to assess achievement of this outcome.

Sub-Objective c: To support policies for improvement of water resource management in Tajikistan.

The theory of change (TOC) was that provision of technical assistance (input) to the GoT and
ministries/agencies concerned with policy development and implementation, including assistance for
formulation of a legal basis for water sector reform and Integrated water resource management (IWRM), and
assistance for related training and capacity building, would result in improved legislation and regulatory
framework, supporting water sector related policies, and strengthened institutions and agencies involved in
water resource management (outputs). The main institutions involved were MEWR, ALRI, the River Basin
Organizations (RBO), River Basin Commissions (RBC), and water user associations (WUAs). The
combination of measures would contribute to improved water resource management, and the expansion and
sustainability of irrigation infrastructure and services, leading thereby to increased crop production and
improved food availability and security (outcome).

Outputs:

1. Amendments to water legislation were drafted including two key items: Water Code of the Republic of
Tajikistan and Law on Water User Associations. Both drafts were finalized in 2019 and adopted by
Parliament in 2020, thereby exceeding the targets (ICR para. 42)

2. A National Water Information System (NWIS) was established. Responsibilities for data collection and
information-sharing between different agencies were set under a Water Information System (WIS) Concept
Paper. (ICR para. 44).

3. Training in IWRM was provided to concerned staff in MEWR/ALRI/WUAs (original target 50; revised target
50; actual achievement 316; achievement level 632%).

Outcomes:



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



1. A National IWRM strategy for the period 2017 to 2025 was prepared and agreed with MEWR (original
target - yes; revised target - yes; actual achievement - yes; achievement level 100%). The IWRM strategy is
expected to contribute to the development of a National Water Strategy up to 2030 by the GoT. (ICR para.
43)

2. A Kofernihon River Basin Management Plan (RBMP) was prepared and agreed with MEWR (original
target- yes; revised target - yes; actual achievement - yes; achievement level 100%). This RBMP is the first
of its type in the country and is expected to serve as a model for similar other RBMPs to be prepared in
future. (ICR para. 43).

3. Operational water user associations (WUAs) were created and/or strengthened (original target 95; revised
target - 135; actual achievement 130; achievement level 96%) of which:

      WUAs created (original target 20; revised target 30; actual achievement 20; achievement level 67%)
      WUAs strengthened (original target 75; revised target 105; actual achievement 110; achievement level
       105%)

Assessment: The output targets in regard to strengthening of Tajikistan's capacity for water management
were achieved. In the context of the project's PDO, the outcome targets set were more appropriately output or
intermediate results indicators and did not capture the intended outcome of improved food availability and
food access. After early delays, the targeted amendments to water legislation were completed and adopted.
Training was provided to strengthen capacities at the key agencies (MEWR and ALRI). The capacities of the
WUAs were strengthened through required changes in their legal status and definition of
responsibilities. However, despite a reported improvement in fee-setting and collection performance, the ICR
reports that, on average, the WUAs are able to cover only about 50% to 60% of their operations &
maintenance costs (ICR paras. 47 and 86).

Overall assessment of efficacy of Objective 1: As discussed above, targets in regard to outputs and
intermediate results indicators were achieved or substantially achieved under each of the three sub-objectives
under Objective 1. However, a significant shortcoming in design of the PDO indicators was that the outcome
indicators used were more appropriately output or intermediate results indicators. There was no indicator that
specifically addressed the issue of improved food availability and food access to food-insecure people in poor
areas supported by the project. Two core indicators related to the GAFSP grant had been included at the
start of the project: (i) increase in household incomes for project beneficiaries; and (ii) reduction in the
proportion of the target population below the minimum level of dietary energy. These indicators were dropped
due to difficulties in measurement (ICR paras. 51 and 52). The lack of relevant indicators precluded the
assessment of achievement of the overarching objective under this PDO. The ICR ((para.30, Table 2)
acknowledges that achievement of this objective was Modest pre-restructuring. The objective was dropped in
the revised PDO under the June 2015 restructuring. The efficacy for Objective 1 is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
                                                                                               Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



There was no revised Objective 1. The PDO changes led to three separate objectives building from the
previous sub-objectives.

Revised Rationale
N/A



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
There was no Objective 2 under the original PDO which had a single objective with three sub-objectives.

Rationale
Not applicable since there was no Objective 2 under the original PDO.




Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The original Objective 1 was dropped under the June 2015 restructuring for Additional Financing and
replaced by three separate objectives. The revised Objective 2 is "To provide access to temporary
employment of food-insecure people through rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure in poor
rural areas supported by the project".

Revised Rationale
Under the June 2015 restructuring, a change made to the original objective was to replace the term "to
provide employment to food-insecure people" by the term "to provide access to temporary employment for
food-insecure people". The theory of change (TOC) was that the project would finance investments (inputs)
for carrying out of public works programs, including manual cleaning of on-farm irrigation canals, that would
result in providing temporary employment to food-insecure people (outputs). This would provide additional
income to the participating households, thereby increasing their access to purchased food


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



(outcome). However, no outcome level indicators were included under the project for tracking increase in
household incomes and improved access to food.

Outputs:

1.Number of project beneficiaries from public works (baseline 0; original target 22,000; revised target 32,000;
actual achievement 30,005; achievement level 94%)

Outcomes:

1. Number of person-days worked by participants in public works programs (baseline 0; original target
880,000; revised target 1,255,000; actual achievement 1,062,927; achievement level 85%) of which:

      female participants (baseline 0; original target 132,000; revised target 188,250; actual achievement
       253,561; achievement level 135%)
      severely food-insecure participants (baseline 0; original target 176,000; revised target 251,000; actual
       achievement 211,517; achievement level 84%)

Assessment: The output indicator in regard to number of beneficiaries as well as the outcome indicator
regarding number of person-days - both overall and also in relation to the disaggregated categories - gender
(female) and vulnerable groups (severely food-insecure people) - were achieved or substantially achieved. As
discussed in Section 3 on relevance of objectives, the outcome indicators used in the project were more
appropriately intermediate results indicators and did not capture the project's impacts in regard to
achievement of additional income, and the higher level outcomes of improved food availability and food
access, for low-income households in poor rural areas supported by the project. However, given the
achievement or substantial achievement of the targeted outputs and outcomes, the efficacy for Revised
Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
There was no Objective 3 under the original PDO which had a single PDO with three sub-objectives.

Rationale
Not applicable as there was no Objective 3 under the original PDO.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)




Revised Objective
The revised Objective 3 was added under the June 2015 restructuring (AF) as follows: "To increase yields of
selected crops in response to improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure in areas supported by the
project."

Revised Rationale
Under the June 2015 restructuring, the original formulation of the objective was changed from "to increase
crop production" to " to increase yields of selected crops". The change was based on experience during
implementation that farmers realized higher value from some crops than from others. The theory of change
(TOC) was that project outputs, including the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, manual
and mechanical cleaning of irrigation canals and drains, together with carrying out of works to address flood
emergencies, would improve the level of irrigation and drainage services in the project supported
areas. These activities would be supported by strengthening of the agencies and institutions involved in the
process of maintenance and management of the infrastructure, including the water user
associations. Together, this would enable an increase in agricultural productivity resulting in increased crop
production (intermediate results indicator - but treated in the project as an outcome). This would contribute to
increased food availability (outcome) for which the project did not have relevant PDO level indicators.

Outputs:

1. Length of canals cleaned (baseline 0; original target 5,200 km; revised target 8,820 km; actual
achievement 8,571 km; achievement level 97%)

2. Length of drains cleaned (baseline 0; original target 1,300 km; revised target 1,300 km; actual achievement
1,112 km; achievement level 86%)

3. Key hydraulic structures, installations, and rehabilitation equipment provided (baseline 0; original target
5,800 items; revised target 5,800 items; actual achievement 5,441 items; achievement level 94%)

4. Area provided with improved drainage services (baseline 0; original target 190,000 ha; revised target
260,000 ha; actual achievement 251,528 ha; achievement level 97%)

5. Length of flood channels rehabilitated along Tebalai river (baseline 0; original target - none; revised target
- 5 km; actual achievement 5 km; achievement level 100%)

Outcomes:

1. Increase in crop production - (original target 10%; revised target - greater than 10%; actual achievement -
greater than 10%; achievement - 100%).

2. Number of direct project beneficiaries (baseline 0; original target 772,000; revised target 1,385,000; actual
achievement 1,393,276; achievement level 101%)

Assessment: The outcome indicator used was the increase in cereals/food/fodder crops yields on
rehabilitated irrigated land. This indicator is more appropriately an intermediate results indicator. The targeted
increase in yields was 10%. The ICR (para.35) reports that, between 2010-2012 (baseline) and 2017 to 2018
(final), based on a sample of 10 districts supported under the project, yields for all cereals increased by about
25.2% (including for wheat by 22.3%); for all vegetables by 15.1%; and fodder crops by 22.3%. Yields for

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



cotton declined by 12.6%. According to the Impact Assessment Report, 57% of households in the project
area (and 54% in non-project areas) reported that the amount of irrigation water increased. In 9 out of the 17
project districts, households reported that access to, and availability, of irrigation water was a principal
reason for the increase crop production. The Impact Assessment Report indicates that, overall, crop
production increases in project areas were higher than in non-project areas. The ICR reports that beneficiary
surveys have indicated that not all the increase in yields can clearly be attributed to the project since farmers
stated that availability of other inputs like fertilizers and seeds also played a significant part. However, based
on this and other information, the ICR assesses that, overall, the increase in yields for crop production was
higher than 10% and exceeded the target of 10%. The original outcome target in regard to the number of
direct project beneficiaries was increased at the June 2015 restructuring (AF). The revised target was
substantially achieved at project closing. Given the lack of clarity in regard to the degree of attribution of the
increases in yields to the project interventions, the efficacy of Revised Objective 2 is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
There was no Objective 4 under the original PDO which had a single objective with three sub-objectives.

Rationale
Not applicable as there was no Objective 4 under the original PDO.




Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 4 was added at the June 2015 restructuring.(AF) as follows: "To strengthen the capacity of
Tajikistan to introduce Integrated Water Resource Management".

Revised Rationale
Under the June 2015 restructuring, the formulation of the objective was changed from the existing "to support
the development of policies and institutions for water resource management" to "to strengthen the capacity of
Tajikistan to introduce integrated water resource management'. The change was in response to the desire of
the GoT to emphasize IWRM as a main feature in water resources management. The theory of change (TOC)
was that provision of technical assistance (input) to the GoT and ministries/agencies concerned with policy

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PAMP II (P133327)



development and implementation, including assistance for formulation of a legal basis for water sector reform
and Integrated water resource management (IWRM), and assistance for related training and capacity
building, would result in improved legislation and regulatory framework, supporting water sector related
policies, and strengthened institutions and agencies involved in water resource management (outputs). The
main institutions involved were MEWR, ALRI, the River Basin Organizations (RBO), River Basin
Commissions (RBC), and water user associations (WUAs). The combination of measures would contribute to
improved water resource management, and the expansion and sustainability of irrigation infrastructure and
services, leading thereby to increased crop production and improved food availability and security (outcome).

Outputs:

1. Amendments to water legislation were drafted including two key items: Water Code of the Republic of
Tajikistan and Law on Water User Associations. Both drafts were finalized in 2019 and adopted by
Parliament in 2020, thereby exceeding the targets (ICR para. 42)

2. A National Water Information System (NWIS) was established. It assigns responsibilities for data
collection and information-sharing between different agencies (ICR para. 44).

3. Training in IWRM was provided to concerned staff in MEWR/ALRI/WUAs (original target 50; revised target
50; actual achievement 316; achievement level 632%).

Outcomes:

1. A National IWRM strategy for the period 2017 to 2025 was prepared and agreed with MEWR (original
target - yes; revised target - yes; actual achievement - yes; achievement level 100%). The IWRM strategy is
expected to contribute to the development of a National Water Strategy up to 2030 by the GoT. (ICR para.
43)

2. A Kofernihon River Basin Management Plan (RBMP) was prepared and agreed with MEWR (original
target- yes; revised target - yes; actual achievement - yes; achievement level 100%). This RBMP is the first
of its type in the country and is expected to serve as a model for similar other RBMPs to be prepared in
future. (ICR para. 43).

3. Operational water user associations (WUAs) were created and/or strengthened (original target 95; revised
target - 135; actual achievement 130; achievement level 96%) of which:

      WUAs created (original target 20; revised target 30; actual achievement 20; achievement level 67%)
      WUAs strengthened (original target 75; revised target 105; actual achievement 110; achievement level
       105%)

4. Registered members of WUAs (original target - not included; revised target 22,000; actual achievement
45,163; achievement level 205%) of which: female (original target - not specified; revised target 10%; actual
achievement 15%; achievement level 150%)

Assessment: The output targets in regard to strengthening of Tajikistan's capacity for water management
were achieved. In the context of the project's PDO, the outcome targets set were more appropriately output or
intermediate results indicators and did not capture the intended outcome of improved food availability and
food access. After early delays, the targeted amendments to water legislation were completed and adopted.

                                                                                                Page 16 of 27
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 PAMP II (P133327)



                              Training was provided to strengthen capacities at the key agencies (MEWR and ALRI). A pilot project was
                              carried out in the Lower Kofernihon River Basin involving collaborative action between ALRI, River Basin
                              Organizations (RBOs) and WUAs. The Impact Assessment report indicates that the results were positive and
                              confirmed by beneficiary surveys in regard to improved quality of irrigation services. This could provide a
                              model for similar projects in other river basins. The project supported the introduction of Tajikistan's first
                              cashless user fee billing and collection system for provision of irrigation water and services. This is expected
                              to be rolled out to other agricultural districts. The capacities of the WUAs were strengthened through required
                              changes in their legal status and definition of responsibilities. However, despite a reported improvement in
                              fee-setting and collection performance, the ICR reports that, on average, the WUAs are able to cover only
                              about 50% to 60% of their operations & maintenance costs (ICR paras. 47 and 86). Based on the substantial
                              achievement of the targeted outputs and outcomes, the efficacy of Revised Objective 3 is rated Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original Objective 1,
                            For Sub-Objective a the output targets in regard to provision of temporary employment and infrastructure
                            rehabilitation were achieved. The targeted outcome in regard to the number of person-days worked was also
                            achieved, both overall and also in regard to the disaggregated categories of gender (female) and vulnerable
                            groups (severely food-insecure).

                            For Sub-Objective b, the ICR (para. 35) reports that the targeted increase of 10% in crop production yields
                            was exceeded, but also reports that it is not clear to what extent this can be attributed to the project. The ICR
                            (para. 72) further reports that there were significant shortcomings in measurement of some of the related
                            indicators.

                            For Sub-Objective c, the targeted outputs and outcomes were substantially achieved. However, for lack of
                            relevant indicators, the achievement of the overarching objective of improved food availability and food
                            access to food-insecure people in poor rural areas supported by the project is not clear.

                            Based on the foregoing, the overall efficacy for Objective 1 is rated Modest.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Insufficient evidence
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1

                                                                                                                               Page 17 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PAMP II (P133327)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  For Revised Objective 1, efficacy is rated Substantial. The output targets in regard to provision of temporary
  employment and infrastructure rehabilitation were substantially achieved. The targeted outcome indicator -
  number of person-days worked was substantially achieved, both overall and also in relation to the
  disaggregated categories - gender (female) and vulnerable groups (severely food-insecure people). For
  Revised Objective 2, efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The ICR (para. 35) reports
  that the targeted increase of 10% in crop production yields was exceeded, but also reports that it is not clear
  to what extent this can be attributed to the project. (ICR para. 72). The ICR) further reports that there were
  significant shortcomings in measurement of some of the related indicators (ICR para. 72). For Revised
  Objective 3, efficacy is rated Substantial. The targeted outputs and outcomes were largely achieved.

  On balance, for the revised PDO, the overall efficacy rating is Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency


Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Project Cost: The project was completed within the allocations made at appraisal and Additional
Financing. Output and outcome targets as set under the project were achieved or substantially achieved
(although there were deficiencies in regard to measurement of achievement of the main intended outcome of
improved food availability and food access). The estimated project cost, including Additional Financing, was
US$57.90 million; the actual cost at completion was US$56.46 million.

Project Duration: The originally planned project implementation period was extended by 24 months to allow for
completion of the increased project scope and new activities included under the Additional Financing in June
2015.

Economic and Financial Efficiency

Cost-Effectiveness: The planned project outputs were overachieved or substantially achieved. Thus, cost
effectiveness, in terms of output delivered per US$ of project cost met or exceeded the expectations at appraisal
and Additional Financing.. No cost-effectiveness analysis was carried out at appraisal.

Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the key indicators of economic efficiency adopted were Economic Net Present
Value (ENPV), Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR)., and the Benefit-Cost Ratio (B-C R).

The ICR (paras. 54 and 55 and Annex 7) provides a post-completion re-estimation of the project's economic
benefits, summarized in the following table:



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PAMP II (P133327)



                       Comparison of Appraisal vs Post-Completion Economic Indicators
                                                Appraisa Additional      Post-
                           Indicator
                                              l          Financing       Completion
                    Area rehabilitated (ha) 190,000 236,600              251,433
                  Net increase in crop yields
                                              10%        10%             >10%
                              (%)
                      ENPV (US$ million)      30.2       27.2            21.9
                           EIRR (%)           26.1%      27.0%           41.5%
                      Benefit-Cost Ratio      5.82       7.14            2.83
                  Investment benefits per ha 158         110             87
                    Investment life (years) 12           12              12
                       Discount rate (%)      12%        12%             12%


Assessment: The reported post-completion indicators, although lower in some cases than the
appraisal estimates (eg. EIRR and B-C R), are still substantial in relation to the discount rates of 6% to 8%
indicated under the Bank's Guidelines for Economic Analysis of Investment Projects. However, the estimates
are based on underlying estimates of project results that, in some cases (e.g. crop production and yields) that
cannot clearly be attributed to the project. The weaknesses in the project's M&E system (see Section 9) cast
some doubt in regard to the extent of the efficiency achievements. Therefore, the project's efficiency is rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

A split evaluation was carried out based on the project results pre-restructuring and post-restructuring following
the Additional Financing in June 2015. The results of the split rating are provided in the table below.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PAMP II (P133327)




                 Pre-Restructuring          Post-Restructuring
Relevance of PDO N/A                        Modest
                                            Substantial with moderate
Efficacy             Modest
                                            shortcomings
Objective 1          Modest                 Not rated
Revised Objective
                     Not rated              Substantial
2
Revised Objective                           Substantial with moderate
                     Not rated
3                                           shortcomings
Revised Objective
                     Not rated              Substantial
4
                     Substantial with
                                            Substantial with moderate
Efficiency           moderate
                                            shortcomings
                     shortcomings
                     Moderately
Outcome rating                              Moderately Satisfactory
                     Unsatisfactory
Numerical value of
                     3                      4
outcome rating
Disbursement         US$15.09 million       US$41.37 million
Share of
                     27%                    73%
disbursement
Weighted value of
                     0.81                   2.92
outcome rating
Final outcome        Moderately
rating               Satisfactory
                     0.81+2.92=3.73
                     rounded to 4.00




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Policy Risks (Moderate): The project provided temporary employment to vulnerable groups, including food-
insecure people, in some of the most affected agricultural districts in the country. There is a risk that the
benefits may not be sustained unless the GoT continues to address the needs of the agricultural sector,
including providing social safety nets. (ICR, para. 88).


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PAMP II (P133327)



Administrative Risks (Moderate): Implementation of the IWRM strategy would call for coordination and
collaboration among central, regional and local levels of government. There is a risk that adequate
resources may not be available in at timely and sufficient manner to ensure effective implementation of the
strategy.

Institutional Risks (Moderate): Institutions such as the River Basin Organizations (RBOs) and WUAs would
have an important role in ensuring success of the IWRM strategy. There is a risk that may not be provided
the necessary resources to carry out their work effectively. (ICR para. 86).

Legislative risks (Moderate): Implementation of the legislation already put in place will require timely and
adequate completion of the necessary by-laws and supporting resolutions at the regional and local levels.
There is a risk that delays in putting in place the supplementary regulations would limit the effectiveness of
the changes. (ICR para. 85)

Financial Risks (Moderate): There is a risk that funding constraints could adversely affect the functioning of
various agencies (ALRI, RBOs, RCOs, WUAs) essential for sustaining the benefits initiated under the
project. Sustaining of the improvements made through rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure
would require adequate financial resources for covering operations and maintenance costs. (ICR paras. 86
and 87).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was well aligned with GoT and World Bank priorities and strategies for Tajikistan's
  agricultural sector. The project design benefited from the experience under the the preceding project
  (Public Employment for Sustainable Agriculture and Water Resource Management). In particular, greater
  emphasis was laid on rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure to increase prospects of
  sustainability of the benefits. The capacity of the Project Management Unit (PMU) to undertake project
  implementation activities was assessed and assistance provided to strengthen its capacities in regard
  to fiduciary aspects - financial management and procurement. One area where there were significant
  shortcomings was in regard to the design of the Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) system (see Section
  9 below). In particular, while the PDO were framed adequately, many of the outcome indicators included
  under the Results Framework were more appropriately output or intermediate results indicators. There
  were no relevant indicators provided to measure the achievement of the principal intended outcome,
  namely, improved food availability and food access to food-insecure people in poor rural areas supported
  by the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)




b. Quality of supervision
 Project supervision was carried out regularly over the implementation period. A total of 11 implementation
 support missions were carried out. The supervision teams were adequately staffed, including fiduciary,
 environmental and safeguards specialists. The project benefited from the task team leader (TTL)
 being continuously based in Tajikistan. There was only one change in the TTL which provided continuity.
 International experts were included where judged to be necessary. The supervision team was proactive
 in seeking timely restructuring of the project and in securing grant financing under the CAEWDP Trust
 Fund to support capacity building in MEWR and ALRI - the main GoT agencies involved in the project
 implementation. A notable shortcoming was the formulation of the PDO and related indicators at the first
 restructuring in June 2015 (deficiencies have been discussed earlier in Section 3 on relevance of
 objectives). The supervision team was not able to address satisfactorily the significant shortcomings in the
 project M&E system which persisted over the course of project implementation. These persistent
 deficiencies in the M&E system led to a downgrading of the project's rating to Moderately Satisfactory in
 the last ISR (2019) before project closing. The ICR (para. 73) acknowledges that the evaluation of
 outcomes in the ICR is based on data from the national statistical agency rather than the project's M&E
 system (ICR para. 73). Further, the ICR reports (para. 80) that procurement performance was affected by
 low capacity i the PMU which led to substandard bidding documents and evaluation procedures.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design of the project's M&E system built upon the system that was put in place under the predecessor
 project (PAMP I). The original PDO (prior to the June 2015 restructuring) were appropriately defined in
 terms of the intended outcome - improved food availability and food access for food-insecure people in
 poor rural areas supported by the project. A significant shortcoming was the specification of PDO indicators
 that could capture the achievement of the intended outcome. Since the outcome impacted food-insecure
 households/individuals, well-designed and regularly executed beneficiary surveys could have helped in
 monitoring progress in achievement of the outcome. The output and intermediate results indicators in the
 Results Framework were relevant and measurable. One exception was in regard to increase in crop
 production and yields in areas supported by the project. The M&E system did not address the issue of how,
 and to what extent, the achievements could be attributed to the project interventions.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was affected by significant weaknesses. Early during implementation, these
  included low capacity of M&E staff and significant delay in the operationalization of the Project

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



  Management and Monitoring Information System (PMMIS). This adversely affected progress monitoring
  and reporting. The ICR (para. 74) reports that M&E data on agricultural production was included for only
  two out of the seven years of project implementation. Other weaknesses which remained were: (i)
  progress reporting was not always timely and consistent; (ii) inadequate information in regard to
  achievement of outcome indicators - importantly, outcome evaluation in the ICR in regard to crop
  production was based largely on data from the national statistical agency; and (iii) inadequate design and
  execution of the end-line survey in 2019 the results of which were found to be inconclusive (ICR para.
  73). Well-designed and regularly executed beneficiary surveys could have added to better monitoring and
  evaluation of project progress and impacts. The ICR (para. 73) indicates that one of the reasons that the
  project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory rating was the deficiencies in the project's M&E system.




c. M&E Utilization
  The project team was constrained to utilize the project's M&E system for monitoring project
  implementation and progress. The shortcomings indicated above led to the team having to draw upon
  other sources e.g. the national statistical agency, to supplement the deficiencies in information. Delays
  in regular updating of the system and incompleteness of data affected the quality of monitoring and
  evaluation during implementation and the adequacy of information for preparation of the ICR.

  A useful supplement to the project's M&E system was the Impact Assessment (IA) referred to earlier.
  The IA provided some relevant information on the project's achievements in regard to providing
  additional income to households participating in the public works program under the project which
  improved their access to purchased food. The IA also reports that crop production increased more in
  project-supported than in non-project-supported areas which indicates an increase in food availability
  attributable to the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social: The ICR (paras. 76 to 78) reports that the project was implemented in
   compliance with applicable World Bank policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered - Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project was
   assigned Category B - Partial Assessment. A Generic Environmental Management Plan, prepared for the
   predecessor project, was updated for this project. Site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
   were prepared and disclosed. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established in 2015 under the
   June 2015 restructuring. 1,039 grievances were recorded of which 45% related to delays in payments and
   36% to disputes regarding soil volumes excavated by participants. 96% of the grievances were responded
   to within the stipulated service standards against the target of 95%. Regarding projects on international



                                                                                                   Page 23 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PAMP II (P133327)



  waterways, an exception to notify was granted by the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) Region Vice
  President in May 2015 (ICR para. 54).

  The ICR does not report on the ratings in regard to safeguards in the last ISR posted before project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR (para. 79) reports that FM arrangements were generally acceptable
  to the Bank. There were early delays due to weaknesses in the PMMIS as a result of which FM
  performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory. This improved over time and reporting was timely and
  acceptable. Annual audit reports were timely and acceptable. In calendar year 2015, there was a qualified
  opinion from the auditors but the issue was resolved. In 2017, the FM rating was downgraded to
  Moderately Satisfactory because of blocked funds at TajikSodirotbank (TSB). The project team informed
  IEG that this was due to a banking crisis in Tajikistan that resulted in serious liquidity problems for some
  banks, including TSB. As a result, TSB could not make timely and adequate transfers of funds to the
  PMU. The issue was finally resolved with the intervention of the Ministry of Finance (MoF). The ICR
  reports, that mainly because of this issue, the FM rating was Moderately Satisfactory in the last ISR posted
  before project closing.

  Procurement: The ICR (para. 80) reports that, early during implementation, the rating for procurement was
  Moderately Satisfactory due to low capacity of the PMU staff. After two years, the rating was upgraded to
  satisfactory. However, starting 2018, the rating was downgraded again to Moderately Satisfactory and
  remained so until project closing. The ICR reports that there were significant shortcomings including
  substandard quality of bidding documents mainly due to weak procurement planning and processing
  capacity in the PMU. The rating for Procurement was downgraded to MS in 2018 and remained so at
  closing (ICR para.80). These issues contributed to a downgrading of the DO and IP ratings to MS in the
  last ISR before project closing (ICR Data Sheet)..




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  There were no significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
  Gender: The project paid special attention to participation of women in the project supported activities. The
  ICR reports (para. 60) that, in comparison to the predecessor project under which the female participation
  rate was 11%, the rate increased to 25% under this project. The project assisted women in obtaining valid
  identity (ID) cards to be able to participate in formal employment. Attention was paid to allocating less
  demanding work to women. The pay rate for female participants was the same as for male participants.

  Poverty Reduction and Food-Insecurity: The ICR reports (para. 61) that the project contributed to effective
  targeting of food-insecure individuals and households to reduce poverty in the project area. It supported the
  development of a methodology to identify the most vulnerable households and involve them in the public

                                                                                                 Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



   works (PW) program. Participants received additional temporary income under public works program but
   also gained potential access to mid- and long-term benefits. The project facilitated official personal
   registration and documentation processes that enabled people to access social assistance programs.
   However, the ICR does not provide information to enable an assessment of the adequacy and effectiveness
   of these activities.

   Anti-Corruption and Transparency: The project contributed to increasing transparency and accountability,
   thereby helping increase trust between stakeholders. It supported the development and deployment of
   Tajikistan's first cashless billing system. This enabled farmers to make direct payments of membership fees
   and irrigation service fees, based on regular measurement of water volumes received, into the accounts of
   the servicing WUAs and ALRI. The ICR reports that the ALRI intends to roll out the system to other areas in
   Tajikistan (ICR para. 62)..



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              The ICRR assesses pre-
                                                                              restructuring efficacy as Modest
                                                                              due to insufficient evidence in
                                                                              regard to the achievement of the
                                                                              objectives, and post-
                                                                              restructuring efficacy as
                                                                              Substantial with moderate
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings due to lack of
                                                                              clarity in regard to attribution of
                                                                              achievements to the project
                                                                              under Sub-objective b.
                                                                              Relevance is also rated Modest
                                                                              given the limited alignment to an
                                                                              outcome based solution to the
                                                                              given development problem.
                                                                              The ICRR assesses Quality-at-
                                                                              Entry as Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              due to weaknesses in design of
                                                                              appropriate PDO indicators and
                                                                              Supervision as Moderately
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              Satisfactory due to continuing
                                                                              inability to address weaknesses
                                                                              in the project's M&E system
                                                                              through the implementation
                                                                              period.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PAMP II (P133327)



12. Lessons

The ICR lists a number of useful lessons. The following are highlighted by IEG with some
modification to the language:

1. The inclusion of relevant technical assistance in the project design could enable
enhancement of farm productivity. Surveys under the project revealed that irrigation related
interventions need to be clearly linked to agricultural on-farm support and improvement of the food
value chain. The feedback indicated that farmers need to be trained to use water efficiently and to
switch to better farming methods. Further gains could be realized from providing support for
improving the value chain and providing a linkage to markets.

2. The project demonstrated that public works programs to counter periods of high
unemployment and negative effects of economic shocks can prove successful, but cannot
serve as a social safety net as some groups may be excluded from the benefits from these
programs, like for example, people with disabilities or those unable to undertake heavy labor. The
government needs to supplement such programs with other means directed to the target population.

3. A lack of appropriate project level indicators to measure increase in crop yields may lead
to difficulties in attributing a potential increase in crop yield to the project. Under this project,
yield increases could not be attributed to the project, not only for lack of relevant indicators but also
as factors beyond access to irrigation may affect crop yields, such as for example weather and
climate conditions and the farmers’ access to farm inputs and technology.

4. Without a flexible design and implementation approach it may proved difficult to effectively
deal with emergency situations. This project needed to deal with an emergency situation under
the second restructuring, and it then became apparent that a somewhat more flexible design and
implementation approaches would have enabled better responsiveness.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written, concise, candid, and follows Bank guidelines for preparation of ICRs. It provides a
clear theory of change and the reporting is outcome-based. The analysis is evidence-based but constrained to
some extent by the weaknesses in the project's M&E system. The ICR commendably compensates by drawing
upon other sources of information, including the national statistical system, but acknowledges some resulting
shortcomings including problems of attribution of the results in some cases (e.g. increased crop yields). The
ICR also draws upon beneficiary surveys (to the extent available) to support some of the conclusions. The ICR
lists a number of lessons learned which are relevant for projects implemented in similar environments. One
area where more information could have been provided is regarding the impacts of the two key items in the



                                                                                                       Page 26 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PAMP II (P133327)



institutional strengthening component - the National IWRM Strategy and the Kofarnihon River Basin
Management Plan.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 27 of 27
