     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022256

1. Project Data



 Project ID                             Project Name
 P083813                                GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN

 Country                                Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of          Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H8980                              31-Dec-2018                                         21,613,132.04

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Dec-2013                            31-Dec-2019

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          3,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           3,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                       2,762,488.76                                             0.00




 Prepared by              Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa             Christopher David           Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                          Nelson




 P127437_TBL
 Project ID                             Project Name
 P127437                                GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN ( P127437 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                              18864614.92

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                              Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



 02-Apr-2009

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                  18,916,363.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                  18,864,614.92

 Actual                                                  0.00                                  18,864,614.92




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the PAD (page 5), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was as follows: “enhanced ICCN
   capacity for management of targeted protected areas.” The Global Environmental Objective (GEO) was the
   same.

   According to the Financing Agreement signed on February 1, 2014 (Schedule 1, page 6), the objective of the
   project was “to enhance the Project Implementing Entity's capacity to manage targeted Protected Areas.”

   The above two objectives were identical as the Project Implementing Entity was the Congolese Institute for
   Nature Conservation (Institut Congolais pour la Conservation de la Nature: ICCN) being responsible for
   nature conservation and rehabilitation of protected areas under the Ministry of Environment, Nature
   Conservation and Tourism.

   IEG adopts the formulation of the objective in the Financing Agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components, of which Components 1-3 were designed at appraisal and Component 4
   was added by the additional financing. The planned, revised, and actual costs for components are based on
   the ICR (para. 14-17 and Table 1, page 13).

   1: Support to Institutional Rehabilitation (Planned: US$1.3 million. Revised: US$3.59 million. Actual:
   US$5.12 million, which was 143 percent of the revised cost). This component consisted of the provision
   of equipment, technical assistance and training, and financing of operating costs to support the long term
   capacity rehabilitation of the ICCN by: (i) rebuilding functional financial and administrative management


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



  capacity, including procurement; (ii) strengthening its capacity for coordination among conservation
  stakeholders, communication and awareness campaigns, monitoring and evaluation, and social impact
  management; and (iii) contributing to the development of a sustainable funding strategy.

  2: Support to National Parks (Planned: US$4.5 million. Revised: US$8.65 million, Actual: US$8.19
  million, which was 95 percent of the revised cost). This component consisted of the provision of
  equipment, technical assistance and training, financing of operating costs, and carrying out of works, to
  support rehabilitation of the Garamba National Park and the Virunga National Park’s Mikeno sector by: (i)
  restoring the Project Implementing Entity’s site-level basic human and material capacity; (ii) strengthening
  partnerships with non-governmental organizations; (iii) protecting and stabilizing the populations of key
  flagship species; (iv) supporting local consultations, participatory processes, and increased local
  participation in income generating activities, such as hunting zone management and ecotourism, as well as
  other community development activities; and (v) monitoring of safeguards and implementation of mitigation
  measures under the project. The additional financing extended support to a third PA in Kahuzi Biega. There
  was also a parallel financing of US$26 million from Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) (ICR, para. 15).

  3: Technical Studies and Consultations (Planned: US$1.2 million. Revised: US$0.5 million. Actual:
  US$0.44 million, which was 88 percent of the revised cost). This component consisted of the provision
  of equipment, technical assistance and training, and financing of operating costs, to strengthen ICCN’s
  capacity to identify potential new PAs by: (i) technical studies, data analysis, stakeholder consultations and
  participatory mapping at the national level; and (ii) in consultation with national and international NGOs as
  well as university organizations, studies, consultations, and participatory mapping in two pilot areas. The
  additional financing supported technical studies and initiatives needed for the ICCN to continue efforts to
  manage and extend the protected area network, particularly to the Lomami and Itombwe parks.

  4: Okapi Fund Establishment and Capitalization (Planned: 0. Revised: US$8.9 million. Actual: US$7.8
  million, which was 88 percent of the revised cost). This new component was introduced under the GEF-
  5 Additional Financing (AF) for the establishment of the Conservation Trust Fund, the “Okapi Fund,” in order
  to ensure long-term sustainable financing of the country’s park network. There was also a parallel financing
  of US$19.2 million from KfW (ICR, para. 17).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The estimated project cost was US$13.5 million (PAD, page 60). The revised cost at AF
  restructuring was US$21.64 million (ICR, Table 1, page 13). The actual project cost was US$21.63 million
  (99 percent of the revised cost) (ICR, page 2).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was expected to be financed with the GEF financing of US$7 million
  and the Government contribution (in-kind) of US$6.5 million (PAD, page 60). During implementation,
  Additional Financing (AF) of an IDA grant of SDR2.0 million (US$3.0 million equivalent) and a GEF-5 grant
  of US$11.64 million were approved by the Board of the World Bank in November 2013, expanding activities
  under Components 1 and 2 as well as establishing the new Component 4. At project closing, the actual
  project cost was financed by GEF financing of US$18.87 million and IDA financing of US$2.76 million (ICR,
  page 2).

  Dates: The project was approved on April 2, 2009, and became effective on September 25, 2009. The Mid-
  Term Review (MTR) was completed on February 20, 2012. The Additional Financing (AF) for the project

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



   was approved on December 12, 2013, and became effective on June 30, 2014. The project was closed on
   December 31, 2019, one year after the AF’s original closing date of December 31, 2018.

   Restructuring: There were four restructurings. The first two restructurings were conducted in 2013 to
   institute Additional Financing, reallocate funds between disbursement categories, revise the PDO Outcome
   Indicators, and add Intermediate Result Indicators. The third restructuring was conducted in 2018 to amend
   the required conditions for capitalization of the Okapi Fund in the legal agreement. The project duration
   was also extended to enable the ICCN to support the operational costs of the Okapi Fund. The final
   restructuring was conducted in 2019 to remove unnecessary disbursement conditions for the capitalization
   that persisted in the legal agreement due to the lack of time in the restructuring in 2018.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Known as the most biologically rich country in Africa, the Democratic Republic
of Congo (DRC) ranked fifth in the world for plant and animal diversity, and first in Africa for numbers of
mammals and birds. However, poor governance, armed conflict, and political turmoil caused economic
decline, leading to insufficient management of natural resources. The government agency responsible for
administering the Protected Areas (PAs) was the Congolese Institute for Nature Conservation (ICCN).
They faced challenges to secure a budget and an investment and were in need of support to ensure they
could deliver against their mandate. There were 7 national parks and 57 nature and hunting reserves, most
of them were considered as “paper parks” which existed in policy, but lacked effective management in the
field due to inadequate facilities or infrastructure (ICR, para 2). To address the issue and contribute to more
sustainable and equitable management of forests, the government established a multi-donor sector-wide
program, called a National Forest and Nature Conservation Program. The Bank supported the program in
coordination with other donors, through a series of initiatives including this project. The objective of
the project sought to address the country’s main issues on biodiversity conservation under anticipated
pressures on the environment following post-war economic development. Specifically this involved: (i) the
government agency responsible for administering PAs lacked institutional capacity at all levels; (ii) priority
PAs faced threats to ecological integrity by human activities that had to be addressed in the short and
medium term (i.e. poaching, collecting fuel woods, and hunting for bushmeats); and (iii) the PA system and
its coverage were insufficient (ICR, para 9).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project aligned with the Country Assistance
Strategy (CAS) 2008-2011. The forest reform agenda, which included the rehabilitation of protected areas
and support to indigenous peoples, was an integral part of the CAS. The project was consistent with key
elements of the CAS, with respect to natural resource management, community-driven development, and
improved governance and institutional strengthening. At project closing, the project remained relevant to the
Country Partnership Framework 2019-2024, which aimed to improve the management of forests and other
natural resources for sustainable growth and increased resilience.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective was in line with the Government’s
reform agenda for the forest and nature conservation sector published in 2002. This agenda aimed at
removing the legacy of past mismanagement and at setting the stage for sustainable management of its
natural resource endowment. It was reflected in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) adopted in

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



               2006. It was also an important pillar of the Government’s Reconstruction and Recovery Program (2004) and
               Governance Contract (2007). At project closing, the project objective remained relevant to the government
               strategies and programs.

               Prior Sector Experience. The previous biodiversity projects in the country mainly focused on emergency
               support, aiming for lowering the rate of biodiversity erosion until security and financial conditions improve.
               This project was designed to enable the ICCN to establish a longer-term management strategy in the post-
               war environment.

               Clarity of the Objective. The meaning of “enhanced capacity to manage targeted Protected Areas” in the
               objective was unclear, as it was not fully articulated which specific institutional capacity of the ICCN was
               targeted by the project. There was only a brief description in the PAD (para 25) which implied links between
               the original three components and the objective. Particularly, in the field level, what capacity of the ICCN
               was targeted with an aim to improve the management of the national parks could have been described
               more in detail, in order to clarify the logical link between the planned activities and the intended
               intermediate outcome under Component 2.

               Institutional Capacity and Realism. The Project Implementation Entity, the ICCN, had no previous
               experience with a Bank project. The PAD (page 16) assessed that there was a risk of implementation
               delays due to the lack of capacities of the ICCN on procurement and financial management. To mitigate the
               risk, the Central Coordination Office (Bureau Central de Coordination: BCECO) of the Ministry of Finance
               provided oversight and training to the ICCN’s procurement unit until the project's mid-term, while
               Component 1 aimed to rebuild the ICCN’s financial and procurement directorate. Nevertheless, the
               mitigation measures were insufficient and the project experienced implementation delays.

               The project objective aligned with the country and sector context and the strategies of the government and
               the Bank. On the other hand, the objective was vague in its' logical link between the planned activities and
               the intended outcome, as described in Section 4. The objective was also not fully aligned with the
               institutional capacity and realism of the targeted institution, which affected efficiency (as described in
               Section 5) and the risk to development outcome (Section 7). In addition, the presumption that it was
               possible for the ICCN to ensure protected areas were maintained was overly ambitious given the limited
               resources and capacity of the organization. The small envelope of funds was intended to have a catalytic
               effect on change and this seems unrealistic given the huge needs of the organization and its ability to
               operationalize protection of PAs. Thus, the relevance of objective is rated modest.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Modest


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



To enhance the Project Implementing Entity’s capacity to manage targeted Protected Areas

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change had three paths which were aligned with the three original
components and the three issues on biodiversity conservation. The first path was focused on strengthening
institutional capacities of the ICCN for financial management and administration at the central level. This was
intended to assist the ICCN to secure basic budgets for post-project activities, and to develop a strategy on
sustainable financing mechanisms for the national PA system. These outputs aimed to achieve an
intermediate outcome of the institutionally strengthened ICCN to better manage the park network. The
second path was about providing infrastructure, equipment, and training to the three key PAs and engaging
communities in the buffer zones to ensure their support to improve outcomes. The expectation was
improvements in the PAs’ Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) scores, access to community
infrastructure and social services by local people, and implementation of environmental and social
safeguards. Supporting two botanical gardens would enhance ecotourism, contributing to the financial
sustainability of the ICCN. These outputs were intended to achieve an intermediate outcome of improved
management of selected national parks. Critical assumptions here included: (1) competencies of the
conservation NGOs which were contracted to implement the field activities would be transferred to the ICCN,
and (2) monitoring by the ICCN would be carried out on schedule. The third path was to support technical
studies and consultations that would support the ICCN to identify new protected areas and achieve an
intermediate outcome of strengthened national PA systems. In addition to the three path improvements,
the additional financing supported the Okapi Fund, in terms of its legalization and capacity building. This was
intended to lead to intermediate outcomes of the establishment and capitalization of the Okapi Fund.

The critical overall assumption here was that there was a strong will within the government and the ICCN for
change. The outcome would contribute to the long-term outcomes of establishing a national parks system
adequate to preserve biodiversity with active participation of local stakeholders, and enabling the Okapi Fund
to cover shortfalls in government budgets allocated for biodiversity protection.

Outputs / Intermediate Outcomes:

Component 1: Support to Institutional Rehabilitation

Financial Management

      The ICCN’s management agreements were not published, not meeting the target. According to the
       monitoring manual, the ICCN was expected to publish all agreements, contracts and protocols
       concluded with its public and private partners for the financing of all centralized and decentralized
       operations of the ICCN. The ICCN circulated key documents to the Bank and development partners,
       but did not disclose them to the public.
      The internal audit unit was strengthened with the support from the audit consultant.
      New systems for computerized accounting and asset management were installed, accompanied by
       training (ICR, page 42).

Administration

      ICCN staff at the national and the field level were evaluated on the basis of their job descriptions,
       but the target was only met between 2015 and 2016. Training on the adoption of personnel
       performance management tools was provided by the project to human resources managers in the

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



      ICCN. The staff evaluations were conducted to receive performance bonuses that were financed by
      KfW. After the financial support was ended in the second quarter of 2016, no evaluations
      were conducted. To what extent and how sustainably the HR capacities of the ICCN was improved
      through the project remains uncertain with little evidence illustrating changes in capacity.

     An administrative manual was developed for the first time.

Component 2: Support to National Parks

Management of the National Parks

     The METT scores for project PAs were increased from the baseline of 50 to the achievement of 61,
      exceeding the target of 59 (ICR, page 37). The Virunga National Park (Mikeno Sector) increased its
      METT score from the baseline of 39 to the achievement of 58, meeting the target of 58 (Ibid). The
      Garamba National Park increased its METT score from the baseline of 39 to the achievement of 68,
      exceeding the target of 60 (Ibid).
     No area was brought under enhanced biodiversity protection, therefore the target was not met. An
      enhancement in biodiversity protection in a protected area was to be measured by an upward
      transition between the METT categories (ICR, page 38), but there is no evidence that this occurred.
      No PAs were able to make the transition.
     The two targeted botanical gardens (Botanique de Kisantu and Kinshasa) produced annual reports
      and business plans that were deemed satisfactory to the Bank, though no descriptions on the
      implementation of the business plans was provided.
     Infrastructure, vehicles, equipment, and training required to operate the national parks and the
      botanical gardens were provided by the conservation NGOs that were contracted to implement the
      field activities (ICR, Annex 1.B., pages 42-43). The logical link between these outputs and the
      intermediate outcome of improvement in management of the national parks was not clear and thus
      while there were additional resources, it is not clear how these were aligned to the designated
      theory of change in driving PA improvements and reform to the ICCN.

Community Engagement

     In Virunga, the project supported the construction of 23 houses for the pygmy community around the
      national park. However, the houses were partially occupied due to the pygmy community’s
      dissatisfaction with the houses (ICR, para 67). Equipment and uniforms were provided for 300
      community guards. School tuition fees were paid for 176 pygmy children as well as uniforms provided.
      The project helped with the legal requirements for the creation of the Nyabirehe Pygmy Association,
      completion of the boundary work on the acquired land, and registration of legal documents (cadastres
      and land titles). The project provided medical equipment to a health center, which will benefit both the
      local community and the pygmy population.
     In Garamba, the project strengthened the capacities of the Community Conservation Committees to
      better monitor, document, and produce and disseminate reports on governance of natural resources,
      local development, and conflict management. Environmental education was also provided to 8,000
      people from the community. The project provided support to the running of a dispensary for the benefit
      of the local community and the families of the park staff.



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)




      In Kahuzi-Biega NP, the project financed a process to amend the conflicts in the area and seek
       compensation for the hardships experienced by the indigenous peoples due to the creation of the
       park, which contributed to the Presidency’s Bukavu declaration to restore security in the area.
      The project engaged rural populations to increase participation in decision-making processes, access
       to community infrastructure and social services, and alternative livelihoods (ICR, para 63). The original
       intermediate result indicator on the increased use of community infrastructure by local people in
       targeted protected areas was dropped due to measurability issues (ICR, page 59).

Environmental and social safeguards

      There was no achievement on an improvement in implementation of environmental and social
          safeguards by the project that was measured or recorded.

Component 3: Technical Studies and Consultations

      Technical studies for the two new protected areas were made, meeting the target. The following
          studies were prepared: (i) Resettlement Action Plan for the population of Obenge in Lomami National
          Park and (ii) socio-economic study at the Itombwe National Reserve. Both of them were formally
          established by decrees (ICR, para 50).

Component 4: The Okapi Fund Establishment and Capitalization

      No disbursement programmed by the Okapi Fund Board was made, thus not meeting the target. The
          delay in legalization of the Okapi Fund affected implementation of the subsequent planned activities.
          At project closing, it was expected that, after the Fund accumulated sufficient return on its investments
          in several years, it would start making disbursements to additional protected areas, such as the
          national parks in Lomami and Itombwe.

Overall

      Direct project beneficiaries were 8,410, not meeting the target of 13,511 (62 percent of the target). Of
          which, female beneficiaries were 25 percent, not meeting the target of 35.5 percent.

Outcomes:

Referring to the theory of change above, the intermediate outcome on the ICCN’s overall institutional
capacity strengthened at central level was partially achieved with direct support from the external partners,
which is likely to be unsustainable. While the intermediate outcome on the management of national parks
improved, it i unclear whether and to what extent the project activities improved the management of PAs.
The achievement of the intermediate outcome on the strengthened national PA network was not fully
reported, as the utilization of the technical studies and consultations conducted under the project was
uncertain. The intermediate outcome on the establishment and capitalization of the Okapi Fund was
achieved just before the end of the project, but no disbursement from the Fund nor ODA funding to the Fund
was made.

Achievements of the four intended outcomes were as follows:



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



1. The ICCN institutionally strengthened to better manage the park network

      The ICCN’s annual internal audits were not published, not meeting the target. Some internal audits
       were conducted and sent to the Bank and other key partners such as KfW and the European Union.
      No improvement on institutional capacities for administration, coordination, advocacy, and monitoring
       and evaluation was measured. During implementation, the ICCN’s capacity was increased by external
       support, with an uncertainty on its sustainability after project closing (ICR, para 64). The outcome
       showed modest achievement, as indicated in the interviews and evidences provided by the ICCN
       (ICR, para 39).

2. Selected national parks better managed

      Populations of bio-indicator species (i.e. rhino, elephant, giraffe, hippo, and gorilla) were not fully
       stable in Garamba and Mikeno, not meeting the target. The poaching by armed guerrilla groups was
       the main driver of declines in populations of elephants and hippos. In Garamba, the poaching caused
       the elephant population to be declined to less than one third in 10 years (from 3,696 in 2007 to 1,181
       in 2017), and the hippo population to be declined by half in 5 years (from 2,814 in 2012 to 1,400 in
       2017) (ICR, page 35). The populations of giraffe in Garamba and that of elephant and gorilla in
       Mikeno were relatively stable. The inventories of species in savannah like Garamba and Virunga
       (Mikeno) were carried out by using planes. The relevance of the PDO indicator to measure the
       outcome could be questionable. The stability of the population of bio-indicator species did not
       contribute to increasing the ICCN’s capacity for management of protected areas, but rather to the
       METT score (ICR, para 81). To what extent the results were attributable to the project was also
       uncertain.
      No improvement on financial and operational management of the PAs attributable to the project was
       measured. Though there were elements related to financial and operational management of the PAs
       included in the METT, no disaggregated data was provided.

3. The national PA network strengthened

      The Lomami National Park and the Itombwe National Reserve were formally established by decrees,
       based on the technical studies conducted under the project (ICR, para 50).

4. The Okapi Fund established and capitalized

      No ODA funding for conservation was directed to the Okapi Fund, not meeting the target of 25 percent
       of the overall conservation ODA for the country to be directed to the Fund. The legalization of the
       Fund was delayed until the end of the project due to the prolonged political procedures. On the
       positive side, the Okapi Fund showed a potential as a tool to mobilize and leverage private sector
       financing to the national parks, especially Virunga (ICR, para 65).

The expected outcomes on the ICCN’s capacity building at the national and field level were not achieved. The
outcome on the expansion of the national PA network was progressed to some extent. The outcome on the
Okapi Fund was not achieved, though it suggested an unintended potential for resource mobilization in the
future. Overall, the achievement of objectives is rated negligible.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)




                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed above, the overall efficacy is rated negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis:

   At appraisal, no efficiency analysis was conducted due to insufficient data to assess economic benefits from
   improved management of protected areas and conservation of biodiversity (ICR, para. 56). At approval of the
   Additional Financing (AF), the project’s Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) over a 20-year period was
   estimated at 18 percent, with an NPV of US$8.67 million using a discount rate of 10 percent (ICR, para. 57). At
   project closing, the EIRR over a 20-year period was estimated at 11 percent, with an NPV of US$0.96 million
   using a discount rate of 10 percent (ICR, para. 57). The estimates of the EIRR and the NPV at closing were
   lower than those at approval of the AF mainly due to the delay in the operationalization and capitalization of the
   Okapi Fund as described below.

   When a discount rate of 6.5 percent was used, the NPV at closing became US$7.23 million, closer to the NPV
   estimated at the AF approval (ICR, para. 57). The discount rate of 6.5 percent was in line with the World Bank
   Guidance for discount rate for Economic Analysis, as well as based on the Ramsey formula in welfare
   economics, which stated that the discount rate could be taken as twice the expected long-term average growth
   rate in per capita income. The latest available data on annual growth rate of the DRC’s real GDP per capita was
   3.25 percent from 2014 to 2017 (ICR, para. 58).

   Aspects of Design and Implementation that Affected Efficiency:

   The operationalization of the Okapi Fund was delayed from September 2014 to December 2017, due to a
   confusion regarding which authority should issue the decree to establish the fund and the delay in the general
   election. The capitalization of the Okapi Fund happened on December 31, 2019, the same date of project
   closing. Due to the delay, the Okapi Fund was unable to financially support the two National Parks (NPs) from
   2015 as expected. This lowered the PV of the two NPs in the NPV calculation at closing and the foregone
   opportunity of other contributions expected to be directed to the fund. The project duration was over 10 years, as
   it faced challenging implementation conditions such as armed conflicts and Ebola outbreaks.




                                                                                                                           Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



There was no cost overrun for the overall cost. The cost for Component 1 on strengthening institutional
capacities at ICCN was more than 40 percent higher than the revised cost at AF (ICR, para 60). The ICCN
received abundant external support on Component 1 regarding monitoring and evaluation, procurement,
safeguards, and financial management. Nevertheless, there were delays in signing procurement contacts. The
increased costs were covered by the reduced expenditures for setting up the Okapi Fund, which was more than
75 percent lower than the estimate (Ibid).

The EIRR and NPV at project closing were lower than those estimated at the AF approval due to the
inefficiencies caused by the design and implementation aspects. The delay in establishing the Okapi Fund
resulted in the project duration extension and costed the project in revenues and forgone opportunities for donor
funding, ultimately affecting the development outcome of the project. Overall, efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             11.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective was modest, as the alignment of the objective with the strategies of the government
and the Bank assistance in a superficial manner did not fully consider the objective's relevance to the
development problems and the institutional capacity and realism. The efficacy was negligible, as three of the
four outcomes were not achieved and one outcome only showed marginal progress. The efficiency was modest,
as the EIRR and NPV at project closing were lower than those estimated at the AF approval due to the
inefficiencies caused by the design and implementation aspects. Thus the overall outcome rating is
unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



Institutional capacity risk: The degree of improvement in the capacity of the ICCN at project closing remains
a concern, as the external support which upscaled the capacity was discontinued after the project. The
ICCN’s lack of funding issues remains a problem and the intention to institute new financing streams is
unlikely to reach fruition. On the positive side, Virunga, one of the targeted Protected Areas, has obtained a
stable flow of private funds to carry out its operations due to the Okapi Fund. However, with continuing
conflict from rebel groups and periodic emergence of viral diseases, the gains at the national parks remains
precarious.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strategic relevance was well considered to align with the strategies of the government and the Bank
  assistance. The development issues of the sector were identified, but the objective and the results
  framework did not fully illustrate the logical link to achieve the intended outcome. The issue related to the
  legal and political procedure to operationalize the Okapi Fund was not identified during the preparation of
  the additional funding.

  The arrangement to entrust the management team in the ICCN General Directorate and not a separate
  PMU to be responsible for the implementation and M&E was inappropriate given the low levels of
  commitment by the government and the ICCN at appraisal. The ICCN relied on 91 percent of its budget
  being drawn from external sources due to the weak budgetary support from the government (ICR, para
  72). In addition, weak government support also meant continuing problems with low salaries and poor
  morale amongst ICCN employees, which resulted in delays in monitoring and evaluation in the early
  years of the project implementation. Moreover, the low level of government commitment at appraisal
  caused the project to reallocate the project funding to supplement the ICCN’s core operational funding by
  tagging its support to strengthen financial sustainability of the ICCN in the long term.

  Strategic relevance was ensured, while the technical and fiduciary aspects were not adequately
  considered at entry. The level of commitment by the government and the implementing agency could
  have been more comprehensively assessed and integrated into the project design. Overall, the quality at
  entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team’s supervision to ensure the project’s compliance with safeguards were not adequate. The
 monitoring of safeguards faced challenges due to the lack of human resources in the ICCN, as described in
 Section 10 a. While the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions, the Bank’s safeguards
 specialists were not always available to participate in missions to provide guidance. The field visits were
 also limited given conflict in the area of the North Kivu province, which negatively impacted the efficiency of

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



 support. The MTR mission, which was undertaken in November 2012, identified fundamental capacity gaps
 in the ICCN. Following the MTR, the restructuring was conducted to reallocate resources between
 components and improve the indicators, but it is not clear whether this actually improved the goals of the
 project or simply instituted a different set of targets. However, the restructuring was not sufficient to fully
 address the implementing agency’s issues with staffing adequacy and quality.

 The implementation was affected by a number of factors outside of the control of the Bank, including the
 armed conflicts and the Ebola outbreak. Even considering those factors, the supervision by the Bank was
 not sufficient to address the issues at the design stage on fiduciary arrangements and safeguards
 compliance. Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The vagueness regarding which institutional capacity was targeted in the objectives affected the focus on
 the development outcome. No theory of change was presented explicitly in the PAD (ICR, para 9), thus it
 was not clearly reflected in the results framework. The theory of change in the ICR (page 9) did not
 thoroughly explore the logical links between the inputs, the outputs, and the outcomes. The logical
 flow from the intermediate results indicators to the PDO indicators were not explicit, except for PDO
 indicator 1. Institutional capacity enhancement and behavior change under the project was not measured
 by the designed indicators. The results framework and the indicators were revised at the first restructuring
 and at appraisal of the additional financing, as summarized in Annex 7 of the ICR. However, the above
 design issues were not fully addressed.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICCN’s M&E reports were not adequate in terms of the timing of production and the quality. The
  M&E matrix was not developed until one year after the project start. The first proper monitoring report
  was received in February 2014, covering progress up to June 30, 2012 (ICR, para 82). The monitoring
  manual for the project with detailed indicator tracking sheets was completed only in June 2015, causing
  poor reporting on monitoring indicators (ICR, para 76). An M&E consultant was hired by the ICCN in
  2017, two years before project closing. The original PDO indicator on the regular production of the
  ICCN’s M&E reports with data on social impacts was dropped at the first restructuring without any
  alternative (ICR, page 57). Security threats posed a challenge in obtaining data from the field, which
  might have been addressed by using local NGOs, drones, and/or videoconferencing solutions (ICR, para




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



  97). Data collection in these FCV environments is always difficult, but there is little evidence of creative
  approaches being instituted to fill data gaps.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was not used in a meaningful way to foster change or provide course corrections. The project
  had difficulties measuring the progress towards the achievement of objective. On top of that, the lack of
  operational budget and weak institutional buy-in posed challenges to utilization of M&E data.

  Due to the shortcomings with the design of the results framework and indicators, as well as the
  inadequate implementation and utilization of monitoring over several years of the project, the quality of
  M&E is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized Category A at appraisal and project closing. Six safeguard policies were
   triggered throughout the project: OP/BP/GP 4.01 (Environmental assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural
   Habitats), OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement), and OP/BP 4.36 (Forests).

   Environmental safeguards: In line with OP/BP/GP 4.01, a socio-environmental impact assessment was
   carried out, and a social-environmental management plan was integrated into the project design. The
   project was expected to have a positive impact in relation to OP/BP 4.04 and OP/BP 4.36 upon successful
   completion, and no mitigation measure was identified at appraisal (PAD, para 86, para 93). Environmental
   safeguards were monitored closely only when an environmental specialist was in position from the end of
   2015 to early 2017. The absence of the environmental specialist negatively affected project’s environmental
   risk, as the potential environmental risk was not minimized when the project constructed and rehabilitated
   infrastructure under Component 2.

   Social safeguards: To mitigate OP 4.10, OP 4.11, and OP/BP 4.12, a Stakeholder Participation Plan, an
   Indigenous Peoples Development Plan, a Resettlement Policy Framework, and a Resettlement Process
   Framework were prepared. The implementation of the mitigation measures was not adequate due to
   difficulties in recruiting and retaining a social specialist. For OP/BP 4.12, upgraded safeguard frameworks
   were developed more than one year after the project start.

   Grievance: The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was requested by the ICCN only in 2017 (ICR, para
   86). No comprehensive list of complaints and their resolution was submitted by the ICCN, though the
   indigenous people and local communities reported to have contacted the ICCN regarding grievances in
   Lomami, Kahuzi-Biega NP, and Virunga. The resolution of a complaint communicated by United Nations
   Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO: Mission de

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



  l'Organisation des Nations unies pour la stabilisation en République démocratique du Congo) in 2010 was
  not documented clearly in the ISRs. Human rights abuses by park rangers were not detected by the
  commission set up by the ICCN, while the abuses were pointed out by the American Bar Association. After
  following up on the issue, the task team concluded that it was not a direct consequence of the project nor
  within the project boundary, thus no resolution was prepared. Another incident of a fatality of a Pygmy in the
  Kahuzi-Biega was concluded as not being linked to the activities of the project, as a result of an
  investigation.

  According to the ICR (para 86), although there were no known breaches in environmental and social
  safeguard compliance by the project, unreported cases might have existed, considering that the FCV
  contexts and the shortcomings in monitoring the safeguards especially regarding the GRM.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The financial management unit for the project was set up in the ICCN, whose
  performance was low in terms of the responsiveness and the quality of reports. The ICCN also relied on
  the support from the firm contracted under the project funded by KfW. Recruitment of internal and external
  auditors, however, were concluded almost two years after the approval of the project. Low staff morale
  caused by the salary differences between the government staff and the consultants, as well as the
  availability of motivation payments for ICCN staff.

  Procurement: The Central Coordination Office of the Ministry of Finance was responsible for an oversight
  of procurement for the project until the procurement responsibility was transferred to the ICCN’s new
  procurement unit in the mid-term. A procurement specialist was engaged in the ICCN in January 2013. The
  ICCN struggled to carry out procurement tasks in a timely manner due to lack of organization, which led to
  delays in signing contracts and affected the implementation efficiency.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Positive:

  The Okapi Fund showed a potential as a tool to mobilize and leverage private sector financing to the
  national parks, especially Virunga (ICR, para 65).

  Negative:

  The ICR mission observed that the 23 houses constructed for the pygmy community around the Virunga
  National Park were only partially occupied, and several pygmies voiced dissatisfaction with the houses,
  specifically the inside temperature and the concrete floors (ICR, para 67). The houses were owned by a
  pygmy association, which was able to lease empty houses to other local community members or use them
  for other purposes, such as schools, shops, and pharmacies. As the houses were more attractive to the
  non-indigenous community, the houses may have created possibilities of conflicts between the pygmy
  community and the other local community.


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)




d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The relevance of objective was
                                                                               modest. The efficacy was
                              Moderately                                       negligible, as three of the four
Outcome                                            Unsatisfactory
                              Unsatisfactory                                   outcomes were not achieved
                                                                               and one outcome showed only
                                                                               modest progress.
                                                                               The supervision by the Bank
                                                                               was not sufficient to address the
                                                                               issues at the design stage on
                                                                               fiduciary arrangements and
                              Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                               safeguards compliance. There
                              Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                               were also clear shortcomings in
                                                                               the supervision and response to
                                                                               the project's challenges during
                                                                               implementation.
Quality of M&E                Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The lessons that may be used for the future interventions are excepted from the ICR and presented
below with editions.

1. Adopting the Project Management Unit (PMU) model with mechanisms to transfer capacity
to the implementing agency can ensure sustainability of a project in fragile and low-capacity
environment. Instead of the PMU model, the project entrusted the project management to the
ICCN General Directorate with technical support from consultants funded by development partners.
Such arrangements ended up in disruptions in cohesion and skills transfer due to the salary gap
between the consultants and the government staff.

2. Engaging communities around protected areas needs to align with the theory of change, in
order to induce behavior changes for biodiversity conservation. The PAD (page 52) indicated
that fuel wood cutting by local communities as one of the challenges for the protected areas.
Awareness raising and behavior changes to reduce stresses to the protected areas were not clearly



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GEF Financing for DRC PREPAN (P083813)



indicated in the theory of change for the project (ICR, page 9). It caused the project to attempt to
address community needs which might not contribute to biodiversity conservation.

3. Ensuring strong government buy-in from the beginning can support smooth establishment
of a Conservation Trust Fund (CTF). Though the Okapi Fund was set up in the United Kingdom as
a registered charity in late 2013, the decree to establish the fund was not issued until late 2017
due to the prolonged political processes for legislation. In future projects that might carry a CTF
component, ensuring that there is strong buy-in from the beginning might ensure a more seamless
transition to the new conservation model.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence.
It is candid, concise, and focused on the development results. The quality of evidence and analysis is generally
aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. The ICR provided clear lessons based on evidence outlined in the
ICR. On the other hand, the relevance section could have provided more details on what development problem
the project sought to address, where this development problem sat with the Bank's contribution, and how this
problem was specifically addressed through the project. To that end, the project’s theory of change could have
more thoroughly provided logical links between the outputs/intermediate outcomes, the outcomes, and the
project development objective. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 17
