     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022493

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P121152                                     NI Second Land Administration Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52250,IDA-60870                        31-Dec-2018                                            51,686,484.11

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2013                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             53,664,747.25                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         51,686,484.11                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Kavita Mathur               Fernando Manibog             Victoria Alexeeva                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to: (a) strengthen the property rights of the population in
   the project area through improved regularization, titling, and registry services; and (b) improve the Recipient's
   capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency (Financing Agreement page 5 and
   Project Appraisal Document para 11).




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Consolidation of the Institutional and Policy Framework (appraisal cost US$7.3
   million, revised cost (2017 AF) US$9.3 million, actual cost US8.4 million). This component would help
   consolidate the land administration system by strengthening the capacity of key agencies and
   participating municipalities, promoting inter-institutional coordination, and furthering the decentralization of
   services. Main activities included, inter alia, preparing and updating procedures and manuals, training,
   systems updates for the Property Information System (SIIPRO) and development of the Cadastral
   Information System (SILEC), as well as upgrading the Municipal Cadastre System (SISCAT) and linking it
   with the national database. It included three sub-components: (i) strengthening of cadastral services and
   land regularization capacity; (ii) strengthening of municipal land administration services; and
   (iii) strengthening of data collection and evaluation capacity.

   Revised Component 1. The Additional Financing (AF) would contribute to further strengthening the
   partnership between additional municipalities and Nicaraguan Institute for Territorial Studies (INETER's)
   national database and strengthening local capacity to ensure that all municipalities would meet
   INETER's standards.

   Component 2. Strengthening of Property Registration and Alternative Conflict Resolution Capacity
   (appraisal cost US$3.7 million, revised cost (2017 AF) US$14.9 million, actual cost US$8.2 million). This
   component was expected to strengthen the capacity of the regional property registries for systematic titling
   and registration, consolidating the integration of cadastre and property registry information by supporting the
   Integrated Cadastre-Registry Information System S(IICAR 1.0) and developing SIICAR 2.0, and facilitating
   mediation of land conflicts and disputes through, for instance, training and certification of mediators.

   Revised Component 2. The AF would expand SIICAR 2.0 to a new department "Esteli" and provide
   additional support to Managua (original was the department of Chinandega) in addition to Chinandega
   which was completed under the original credit. The AF would also finance further development of SIICAR
   such as: (i) migrating and reconciling cadastral and property registry data, (ii) adding more options for
   various types of land transactions, (iii) a data mining function, and (iv) creating a digital folio for the cadastre
   linked to the parcel’s registry history and cadastral regulations.

   Component 3. Titling and Regularization Services (appraisal cost US$17.8 million, revised cost (2017
   AF) US$25.2 million, actual cost US$29.9 million). This component was expected to support systematic
   cadastral surveying, titling, and land regularization activities. It included three sub-components:
   (i) demarcation, titling, and registration of two complementary areas of two Indigenous territories of


                                                                                                         Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



  Mayanga Sauni Bu (MSBU) and Miskitu Indian Tasbaika Kum (MITK); and (ii) demarcation of protected
  areas.

  Revised Component 3. To enhance social impact, the AF would support cadastre surveying, regularization,
  and land titling to additional seven indigenous communities living within the original Project area (i.e.
  indigenous communities living in the Pacific, North, and Central regions were included in the project).
  Moreover, on demand land regularization was expanded to include small agricultural producers outside the
  "reformed sector".

  Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (appraisal cost US$3.2 million, revised
  cost (2017 AF) US$4.5 million, actual cost US$3.7 million). This component would support project
  administration, including fiduciary and safeguards requirements, and monitoring and evaluation activities.

  Revised Component 4. An additional subcomponent was added under the AF to include land
  administration studies. These studies may cover, among other, the legal and institutional framework,
  environmental and social issues related to land tenure, and consolidation of geospatial information.

  Component 5. Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (appraisal cost US$8.00 million,
  revised cost (2017 AF) US$0.0 million, actual cost US$1.5 million). This component would
  provide immediate response to an eligible emergency, as needed.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$51.9 million, compared to US$58 million which includes the
  appraisal cost estimate (US$40 million) and the Additional Financing (US$18.0 million).

  Financing. The original IDA financing was US$40.0 million. An Additional Financing (AF) of US$18.0 million
  was approved in June 2017. The total actual financing was US$51.9 million The Bank financed 100 percent
  of project costs (ICR para 18).

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, no Borrower contribution was planned. There was no subsequent
  Borrower contribution until project closing.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 26, 2013 and became effective on July 12, 2013. It closed on
  June 30, 2020, 18 months after the original closing date of December 31, 2018 to allow sufficient time to
  complete all Additional Financing activities.

  Restructurings and Additional Financing.

        The first restructuring was approved on March 3, 2016, to introduce changes to the focus area of
         SIICAR 2.0. Since no eligible emergency had occurred since project approval, the government
         requested reallocation of CERC funds to support more ambitious SIICAR 2.0. According to the Task
         Team, the second PDO was not dropped because the government recognized the vulnerability to
         the country. It still wanted to keep the CERC window for potential financing - with zero
         allocation. The project team further mentioned that several years into the project the government
         wanted to have access to the Catastrophic Insurance Risk Facility (CRIF) that the Bank had
         established for Central American countries. The Bank cancelled US$4.0 million from this project and

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



          used it for financing the premium and the initial fee to access the membership to the CRIF. This was
          a priority and had been useful for Nicaragua with hurricanes. Nicaragua got the payout of US$50
          million through the CRIF. Next priority was to increase the scope of the development of the
          Integrated Cadastre-Registry Information System (SIICAR) to Managua province, which is the main
          area of the country with the highest number of transactions, but it was a little bit more expensive.

         The second restructuring was approved on November 10, 2016, to revise the Results Framework.
          The Intermediate Result Indicator "SIICAR consolidated in Chinandega and expanded to at
          least three more departments" was revised to "SIICAR is (i) redesigned satisfactorily in terms of
          operations security, business objectives, and policies and procedures; and (ii) implemented on a
          pilot basis to incorporate at least 15% of registry and cadastral data in the Department of Managua".
          These changes were incorporated to enhance the focus on the adequacy of the SIICAR 2.0 and the
          integration of cadastral and registry data, and the refocusing of SIICAR to the department of
          Managua. In addition, the Intermediate Result Indicator "At least 30% of agreements on conflicts
          resolved by Directorate for Alternative Conflict Resolution (DIRAC) are formalized by the Property
          Registry" was revised to "At least 60% of conflict resolution agreements, pre-qualified as registrable,
          are formalized in the Property Registry." This was done to obtain more accurate documentation of
          conflict resolution/mediation agreements and their legalization in the Property Registry (Registro
          Público de la Propiedad, RPP), and to correct that the original indicator did not measure adequately
          the efficiency of the DIRAC since not all the resolved conflicts could be registered in the RPP
          (registration depends on the category of conflict and whether there is a previous registration).

         An Additional Financing (AF) and third Restructuring on June 26, 2017 resulted in:
          (i) adjustments to project targets; (ii) extension of the project closing date from December 31,
          2018 to June 30, 2020. As discussed above under components the AF focuses on: (i) expanding the
          Integrated Cadastre Registry Information System (SIICAR) in Managua and Estelí; (ii) scaling-up
          cadastral, titling, and regularization services; (iii) strengthening municipal cadastre capacity; and (iv)
          and supporting land administration studies. To allow sufficient time to complete all AF activities, the
          project’s closing date was extended by 18 months, from December 31, 2018 to June 30, 2020. The
          results framework was also updated to reflect the expanded scope of investments and additional
          implementation time.

         A fourth Restructuring was approved on December 12, 2018, to reallocate US$1.04 million from
          the disbursement Category 3 (Project Preparation Advance) to Category 1 (all Project components),
          to adjust for the shortfall in dollars due to the fluctuations in Special Drawing Rights (SDR) exchange
          rate.

   Split Rating. The PDOs and all five PDO-level indicators remained the same throughout the project's life.
   However, changes were made to the end targets of three PDO-level indicators. The split rating will not be
   conducted as the Additional Financing revised the results framework to reflect the scaled-up activities and
   increased targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Nicaragua is one of the poorest countries in Latin America, with 42% of the
population living below the poverty line and one out of seven living in extreme poverty (PAD para 1).
Agriculture is a key economic sector, employing 31% of the labor force.

In the land sector, Nicaragua had experienced years of inconsistent legal and administrative decisions that
contributed to tenure insecurity and social tension and undermined the people’s confidence in state
institutions. Land tenure insecurity hinders potential investments, land market transactions, and generates
disputes. Therefore, securing property rights and modernizing land administration institutions are critical for
improving Nicaragua's productivity as about one third of parcels were held without a clear title, which
particularly affects small and poor agricultural producers (PAD para 6).

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The PAD noted (para 10) that the project intended to support
the implementation of the government programmatic strategy on land administration reform (PAD para 10).
The strategy's goal was (and remains) to strengthen property rights and promote sustainable land
governance, focusing on poor and vulnerable populations while ensuring gender equity and resolving
historical land claims of Indigenous Peoples.

The project objectives were aligned with the National Plan for Human Development (PNDH), whose
objective was to reduce inequality by increasing poverty-related spending and boosting investment in social
sectors and rural infrastructure. The PNDH recognized land tenure security as a strategy for economic
development by improving productivity through expanded access to credit and facilitating free land
regularization services at the local level (PAD para 10). The PNDH also emphasized the importance of
disaster risk management and climate adaptation for the overall sustainability of Nicaragua’s development
efforts. It notes that the government needs to ensure that disaster vulnerability and climate change issues
are appropriately considered as it moves forward with its land agenda.

Alignment with the Bank Strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the Bank strategy throughout
the life cycle of the project. At appraisal, the Project was consistent with the second objective of the Bank’s
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2013-2017 which aimed to deepen the impact of operations in rural
infrastructure and land through land administration modernization. At completion, the project objectives
were aligned with the third pillar of CPS for the period 2018-2022, namely, “Improving Institutions for
Resilience and Sustainability”. The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), underpinning the CPS identified
the importance of the strengthening of property rights through land administration modernization as critical
to increasing productivity, especially in the agricultural sector

Prior Bank Experience. This project is the second Land Administration Project. The first Land
Administration Project (P056018) was designed as a pilot effort and contributed to two outcomes: (i) a more
solid and clearer land administration framework; and (ii) a proven methodology for systematic land
regularization. The implementation of the methodology for systematic land regularization benefited over
110,000 rural and urban, mostly poor, households with titles to their land. The project also strengthened the
capacity of key land agencies (PAD para 4) and assisted in the development of a pilot Integrated Cadastre
Registry Information System (SIICAR 1.0). However, by project closure about one third of parcels were still
held without a clear title, which particularly affects small and poor agricultural producers (PAD para 6).

The second project was conceived to expand efforts to new areas of the country and into regions with no
previous cadastre and outdated property registry records. Strengthening of municipalities was also needed
to promote decentralization, territorial planning, disaster risk management (DRM), and to promote the

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



               updating of cadastral information. Promoting women's land rights was critical to continue advancing gender
               equity. This project was built on the progress achieved while seeking to consolidate institutions and policies
               and to further improve land administration services, by developing a more advanced Integrated Cadastre
               Registry Information System (SIICAR 2.0).

               Development Problem. The project sought to improve agricultural productivity by strengthening land
               administration and management systems. The project objectives were aligned with Nicaragua’s CPS and
               the government strategy. These activities are aligned with the first PDO. However, the second PDO was
               pitched too ambitiously in terms of improving emergency response capacity even though the intent was to
               support an effective and rapid response to a defined emergency, through a contingency financing
               mechanism (CERC). Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the property rights of the population in the project area through improved regularization, titling,
                             and registry services.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change (ToC). Based on the ICR’s own construction of the ToC, the link between the overall
                             project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The project activities such as strengthening the capacity
                             of key land agencies and participating municipalities, supporting cadastral surveying, titling, and land
                             regularization, improving conflict resolution capacity, and training stakeholders, were likely to result in
                             expected outputs such as improved property regularization, titling, and registry services. This would in turn
                             support the achievement of the objective of strengthening the property rights and aid in improving land
                             administration and management in Nicaragua.

                             The critical assumptions were: (i) there is smooth inter-institutional coordination among key land
                             administration agencies; municipalities understand the benefits of improving their cadastral database; (iii)
                             indigenous communities and other project beneficiaries understand the benefits of formal cadaster system.

                             Outputs

                                        The project assisted in formalizing the land records, with use or ownership rights for 229,699 parcels,
                                          exceeding the target substantially (original target 123,000; revised target 187,400). 120,965 legal land
                                          documents were issued, exceeding the target of 118,900 documents. Of this, 92,022 were new titles



                                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



       (target: 84,800) of which 47,851, or 52% were issued to women, either individually or jointly with their
       spouse, surpassing the 50 percent target (46,011).

      SIICAR 2.0 was developed and jointly adopted by two different government branches - Nicaraguan
       Institute for Territorial Studies (INETER) and (Supreme Justice Court (CSJ) (INETER had the mandate
       for cadastre, and the CSJ had the mandate for property registry). This integrated model helped
       improve services across both property registry and cadastre offices in the project area.
             o At project close, SIICAR 2.0 was functioning in Managua and Estelí, with substantial progress
                made in migrating and reconciling cadastral and property registry data for various types of land
                transactions.

      Municipal cadastre management capacity was enhanced through training and learning by doing. The
       project facilitated an environment for an increased demand for services related to land administration.

Outcomes

      The property rights of the population in the project area was strengthened through improved land
       regularization, titling, and registry services. The project benefited 952,814 people, achieving 94% of a
       target of 1,016,000 people. Of this, 478,408 beneficiaries were women (achieving 98% of the target).

      The project successfully resolved land possession conflict. About 3,322 mediation cases were
       requested, of which 2,003 resulted in agreements between the parties.

      Through titling, the land tenure security was improved and the necessary environment for investing in
       land improvement was created. Overall, parcel value increased by 11% as a result of land
       regularization, and this impact was perceived to be higher for parcels owned by women. Rural land
       increased its value five years after having a title, and urban housing increased its value one year after
       having a title (ICR para 32).

      There was substantial reduction in the number of days required to complete the recording of the
       purchase-sale of properties, which went down from 50 to 18 days (target was 25 days). The number of
       days to issue a cadastral certificate in INETER's regional offices was reduced from 12 to 7 days
       (target was 6 days) (ICR para 34 and 35).

      The impact evaluation shows that there was an increase in the collection of property taxes in the
       departments of Nueva Segovia and Jinotega between 2012-2014.

The project also contributed to strengthening Indigenous People's land rights. It supported the demarcation
and titling of two complementary areas of Indigenous territories in Bosawas through a participatory process
that promoted consensus and conflict resolution. The project successfully completed cadastral surveying of
the land of six Indigenous Peoples communities in Pacific, North and Central regions, and provided them with
updated information on their land. The ICR notes that as a result, these communities can now manage and
protect their land better.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



Overall, the efficacy of this objective is assessed as high, for many important milestones and targets were
achieved or exceeded, and there is evidence on the increase in the collection of property taxes attributable to
project activities.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.

Rationale
Theory of change (ToC). The ICR did not include a ToC related to this PDO. There is a disconnect between
the complex goal of “improving capacity” (the PDO) and an activation of the CERC to deliver quick financing.
The CERC was introduced across Nicaragua's portfolio at the request of the government to support its
response to natural disasters and disease outbreaks. However, there was no activity supporting the objective
of "improving capacity to respond effectively to an eligible emergency".

The CERC objective was included as per OPCS guidelines (at the time of approval). However, it was pitched
ambitiously at a high level “to improve the emergency response capacity of the Borrower”. The objective
should have been specifically focused on supporting an effective and rapid response to a
defined emergency (which the CERC guidelines allow) rather than broadly building capacity.

Several years into the project, the government wanted to have access to the Catastrophic Insurance Risk
Facility (CRIF) that the Bank had established for Central American countries. The Bank cancelled US$4.0
million from this project and used it for financing the premium and the initial fee to access the membership to
the CRIF. This was a priority and had been very useful for Nicaragua recently with the hurricanes. Nicaragua
got the payout of US$50 million through the CRIF. The remaining funds were reallocated to increase the
scope of the development of the Integrated Cadastre-Registry Information System (SIICAR) to Managua
province, which is the main area of the country with the highest number of transactions.

Outputs

CERC was triggered on June 30, 2020 (just before the closing of AF credit) and was used to finance
expenditures incurred by the government for equipment and goods used for the COVID 19 health emergency
response. According to the TTL, the Bank agreed to finance eligible expenditures already incurred by the
Government before the CERC activation. It took one week from the Government’s request (June 22, 2020) to
the activation on June 30, 2020. Therefore, through the activation of CERC, the Government was reimbursed
US$1.45 million from project savings for COVID 19 response.

While the original CERC Manual was not prepared under the project, the Manual was updated on April 9,
2020, with contribution from the project. The ICR notes that training was provided to the Ministry of Finance
as the Coordinating Agency for CERC. The ICR does not provide any information regarding how the funding

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



                            was used. The TTL subsequently provided documentation on the list of items that were procured. This
                            included: medical goods, supplies, and equipment, as well as necessary personal protective equipment such
                            as disposable masks.

                            The achievement of this objective is modest as there is no available evidence that the project did improve the
                            government's capacity to respond to eligible emergency as formally stated. However, the project did provide
                            the necessary equipment to address COVID 19 pandemic.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective is assessed as high, as the project achieved and exceeded targets in
                            strengthening the property rights of the population in the project area, through improved land regularization,
                            titling, and registry services. The achievement of the second objective is modest as the project did not provide
                            evidence on improvements to the government's capacity to respond to eligible emergency as formally stated.
                            However, the project did provide the necessary equipment to address COVID 19 pandemic. On balance,
                            efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency

   The ex-post economic rate of return (ERR) was 22%, using as 12% discount rate. This was higher than the
   appraisal estimate of 18%. The benefits included the impact of titling such as increased land value.

   The unit costs of land surveying were US$65.14/parcel for urban and US$104.59/parcel for rural land. The unit
   costs of land titling for titles issued and delivered were US$41.49 per title in urban areas and US$42.12 per title
   in rural areas. The ICR reports (para 42) that these unit costs are within the range of unit costs of similar Bank-
   financed projects in the region.

   The project is expected to increase the property tax collection by the municipalities, which is estimated to be
   around US$123.31 million (for a ten-year flow of net benefits).



                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



Administrative efficiency

There were delays in cadastral surveying because of delays in the acquisition of ortho-photos. The PCU faced
difficulties in the acquisition of ortho-photos with three different firms. It is not clear if the ex-post ERR calculation
took into account the delay of 18 months.

Overall, efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                  Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          57.00
 Appraisal                                                     18.00
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          90.00
 ICR Estimate                                                  22.00
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO remains highly relevant to the government and Bank strategies. The project achieved important
milestones in strengthening the property rights of the population in the project area, through improved land
regularization, titling, and registry services, with some targets significantly exceeded. There is evidence on
the increase in the collection of property taxes attributable to project activities. However, there is no available
evidence that the project improved the government's capacity to respond to eligible emergency, although the
project did support the government to address COVID 19 response. The overall efficacy is substantial. The
efficiency is rated substantial. The overall project outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Risk. The project assisted in building the institutional capacity and fostered inter-institutional
collaboration and coordination for land administration. SIICAR 2.0 developed under the project for cadastre
and registry information was functioning satisfactorily. However, there are some issues relating to the long-
term role of municipalities in cadastre data management to ensure the maintenance of the national cadastre

                                                                                                           Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



system. The project team informed IEG that the main issue at the closing of the project was the lack of a
model that would enable municipalities to have an active role in maintaining cadastral data. The Cadastre
Law allows the delegation of data maintenance to municipalities, and progress is being made under the
follow-on project to develop the model for making municipalities’ role clear and formal. However, regional
cadastre offices from INETER are currently responsible for centralizing the maintenance of cadastral layer
data. The centralization of the maintenance of cadastral data can lead to discrepancies between reality in the
field and the reality recorded for long periods, which encourages the duplication of data between
municipalities and the national cadastre managed by INETER at the central level. The institutional risk is
assessed as substantial.

Financial Risk. The property registry offices lack adequate resources to sustain the impact of system
modernization. The financial risk is assessed as substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was the second land administration project in Nicaragua and took into account the lessons
  from the previous project. To name a few: (i) a strong focus on municipalities is critical to the
  sustainability of investments on cadastre and registry modernization. It is particularly important to
  integrate land administration within the long-term vision of municipalities and to make them active
  partners in the implementation of the national cadastral system; (ii) achieving PDOs related to land
  administration reform requires building a long term social and political commitment, mobilizing support
  from diverse stakeholders, assuring a high level of transparency, and promoting good governance. PCU;
  and integrate the M&E and Planning teams under the PCU.

  As discussed in section 3 above, this project was designed to expand efforts to new areas of the country
  and into regions with no previous cadastre and outdated property registry records. There was continuity
  of the Bank team throughout the first and this project, the same Task Team Leader from the first project
  designed and supervised this project. This continuity provided a sound knowledge of the country's
  context, sector issues, and fostered good relationship with the client. The project design included gender
  participation and was consistent with Indigenous Peoples’ culture and priorities. A gender assessment
  was carried out to analyze the factors that may enable or limit gender equity in strengthening of property
  rights. It collected primary data through interviews and focus groups with three groups of key informants
  across the Project area (PAD para 69). One shortcoming was that it was designed entirely using Bank
  financing and did not provide enough resources to sustain information system modernization.

  The quality of entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)




b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports (para 76) that the supervision missions were timely, appropriately resourced, and solution
 oriented. Social safeguards were well supervised (however, the reporting in the ICR is sparse).
 The monitoring of project progress and decision making related to project implementation was satisfactory.

 In addition, the Bank developed a program of South-South exchanges (partially financed through trust
 funds), on systematic cadaster, land tenure and property registration, including visits to Croatia and North
 Macedonia in 2014, and a major in-country event with other 13 Latin American Countries in 2015.

 At the end of the project, there were savings of about 1.45 million dollars, so a week before project closing
 the government requested the activation of the CERC allowing for a reallocation of project savings to
 finance eligible expenditures incurred by the Government for the COVID 19 response. The Bank was
 proactive agreed to use the savings otherwise those savings would be cancelled.

 Bank Processes were followed for the activation of CERC. The CERC manual was already in place (it was
 prepared in 2014 and updated in April of 2020 in preparation for future emergencies). Bank procedures
 were followed for determining the eligibility to expenditures. There was an ongoing health project and the
 environmental and social documents from that project was applied to the CERC.

 The government prepared the emergency action plan based on the items it had procured. The Bank hired a
 consultant to review the procurement processes of those items to make sure that they will be eligible
 expenditures. The Bank team verified that they were indeed eligible expenditures.

 The ICR further reports (para 76) that the COVID 19 pandemic did not adversely affect supervision as the
 project was in final implementation stage and the last in-country mission was in March 2020. The Bank
 supported the project remotely through virtual meetings and monitored data from SIICAR 1.0 and 2.0. The
 quality of supervision was satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO- level indicators were appropriate, and targets were realistic. The M&E was in line with the Food
 and Agriculture (FAO) recommendations and the online toolkit for designing, monitoring, and evaluating
 land administration projects in Latin America. This facilitated the PCU and its consultants to use already
 developed tools to measure most of the project's indicators. For each indicator, a factsheet was completed




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



 where the geographic scope, measurement method, and formula were set and updated as needed (ICR
 para 61).

 The M&E system under the project was integrated in the Planning Unit of the PCU. This was based on the
 lesson learned from the previous land administration project. Staff was designated in each co-executing
 agency to enhance communication within the different focal points.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports (para 61) that the FAO and the PCU team contributed to the design of the land tenure
  module of the 2014 Nicaragua Living Standards Measurement Survey conducted by the National Institute
  for Development Information. This survey provided a rich set of data on households' social, economic,
  and land tenure situation across Nicaragua.

  The ICR also reports (para 60) that the M&E team’s capacity was strengthened to provide timely and
  accurate information related to the project’s results framework. The quarterly and semi-annual reports
  were of adequate quality and submitted on time (ICR para 62). At the mid-term review (2016), an
  Evaluation Report was prepared. This provided an assessment of specific project activities such as the
  development of SIICAR, the demarcation of the protected areas, the gender equity approach, and the
  cadastre surveying and land regularization process. Following this, the results framework was revised to
  focus on better data integration under SIICAR, the refocusing on Managua, and more accurate
  documentation of conflict resolution/mediation agreements and their legalization in the Property Registry.
  The Additional Financing further revised the results framework to reflect the scaled-up activities and
  increased targets.

  In 2018, the Bank and FAO team also supported the PCU M&E team in linking each indicator of the
  Result Framework with the corresponding allocated budget to measure the physical and financial
  achievement of each target (ICR para 62).



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 63) that the information provided by the M&E team was used by the Attorney
  General's Office and the co-executing agencies to identify bottlenecks that could affect the achievement
  of project targets. This allowed the integration of the property registry with the cadastre information
  within SIICAR.

  At the end of the project, the PCU (with Bank and FAO advice) designed a household-level impact
  evaluation to assess the efficiency of combined investments in the modernization of land administration
  systems and land tenure rights regularization. This study consisted of a beneficiary survey of 1,014
  households within the departments covered by PRODEP I and PRODEP II (treatment and control
  groups). The study assessed both the evolution of the land transactions in the RPP of Chinandega and
  tax collection by municipalities (including counterfactuals). It also provided valuable information about
  the short and long-term effects of the land tenure regularization on households’ main assets, the
  increase in the formalization of land transactions in the SIICAR in Chinandega, and the municipalities'
  capacity to collect land taxes (ICR para 64).



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)




  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Category "B" and triggered the following six
   safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habits (OP/BP 4.04), Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   An Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were prepared in
   consultation with relevant stakeholders and disclosed on the Bank and Government website on December
   27, 2012.

   A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out to assess any risk or impacts on stakeholders, and an
   Indigenous Peoples’ Plan (IPP) and a Process Framework were prepared and disclosed on the Bank and
   Government website on December 27, 2012. There were delays in the implementation of the activities
   related to Indigenous Peoples (ICR para 68).

   The ICR reports (para 66 and 68) that the project complied with the Bank's environmental safeguards
   policies, the government environmental regulations, and the Bank's Social Safeguards Policies. The
   subcomponent for demarcation of Protected Areas was fully implemented in 2017 and followed the
   processes outlined in the Manual for the Demarcation of Protected Areas.

   To implement COVID 19 health emergency response, the Environmental and Social safeguards instruments
   prepared under the Integrated Public Provision Health Care Project (P164452) were used. This project was
   supporting the government to develop and implement medical waste management plans for all the major
   national hospitals in compliance with Bank safeguards requirements (ICR para 69).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports (para 70) that the FM performance was rated satisfactory
   throughout project implementation. The bi-annual interim unaudited financial reports (IFR) were generally
   submitted to the Bank with only minor delays. They were of acceptable quality. Audit reports were
   submitted in a timely manner and included unmodified (clean) opinions.

   Procurement. The ICR reports (para 71) that the procurement rating was satisfactory throughout project
   implementation. The annual procurement plan was reviewed by the Bank prior to its implementation.
   However, there were some delays in keeping the supporting information updated in Systematic Tracking of
   Exchanges in Procurement System (STEP). The Bank provided regular procurement training to the PCU


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



   staff during project implementation. The project also included annual independent procurement reviews,
   which confirmed satisfactory procurement performance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are taken from the ICR with some modification of the language:

      The strengthening of land rights require a continuous and consistent approach. The
         project experience shows that the government’s commitment to land administration agenda,
         supported by the Bank through a long-term engagement, helped test and define project
         methodologies and results. Further, assigning the leadership for land reforms to one agency,
         in this case Procuraduría General de la República (Attorney General's Office PGR), further
         enhanced the enabling environment for project coordination and implementation.

      The in-house upgrading of the internationally developed Integrated Cadastre Registry
         Software (SIICAR) using local programmers and technical experts was critical for
         developing national technical capacity and sustainability of the software. By doing
         so, international standards and good practices can be better integrated into the system
         design and aligned with the national legal and institutional framework; and system
         maintenance and updating will likely be more organically integrated into the agencies’
         functions and services.

      Cadastre and land regularization activities need to consider social aspects in addition
         to technical issues. The experience in Nicaragua shows that gaining the broad support of
         beneficiaries is as important as having adequate technical specifications and experience in
         land regularization. The project, based on lessons learned from prior interventions, included
         a Communications Strategy and a Grievance Redress Mechanism to promote strong

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)



        socialization, awareness, and the active participation of all beneficiaries, considering cultural
        and gender aspects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project is the second land administration project in the series of three projects. Once the third project is
  completed, the field assessment of the entire program would be useful to gain in-depth lessons on
  implementation challenges and outcomes delivered and sustained.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is outcome oriented and provides a rich body of evidence in the support of the achievement of the first
PDO. It draws substantially on the impact evaluation conducted at project closure, which contributed to the ex-
post economic and financial analyses. Annexes 4- Efficiency and 5-Impact Evaluation offer a solid analytical
base and a good level of detail. The ICR provides several useful lessons learned from the project that are
relevant for similar land administration projects.

The ICR should have discussed and assessed the achievement of the second PDO. While the CERC is
associated with the second PDO, there was no discussion of 'increasing capacity to respond promptly and
effectively to an eligible emergency' and the level of detail and evidence was insufficient to judge the
achievement of this PDO. More information and details had to be subsequently sought from the project team.

The overall quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NI Second Land Administration Project (P121152)




                                                                               Page 17 of 17
