     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0022436

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P155172                                    PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin.

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Serbia                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86080                                 29-Feb-2020                                          63,501,153.30

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Apr-2016                                29-Feb-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            75,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             63,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         63,501,153.30                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Yumeka Hirano               Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   The program development objective (PDO) of this Program-For-Results (PforR) on Modernization and
   Optimization of Public Administration (the “Program”) is to improve efficiency in public sector employment
   and finances (Project Appraisal Document [PAD], p.7 and Financing Agreement, p. 5). This review assesses
   the stated objective as two sub-objectives, as follows: (i) to improve efficiency in public sector employment,
   and (ii) to improve efficiency in public sector finances.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No


c. Components
   The Program supported the implementation of two out of the five objectives of the Action Plan for
   Implementation of Public Administration Strategy (Government’s program): establishment of a public
   service system based on merits and promotions of human resource management, and improvement of
   public finances and public procurement management (PAD, p.8). The Program encompassed three results
   areas (PAD, pp. 8-9 and pp. 20-24; Implementation Completion and Results Report [ICR], p. 8).

   Public Sector Employment
   Results Area 1: Improved human resource management
   The Program supported the development of a system for managing staffing levels and monitoring the
   wage-bill. The system comprised the following key activities: establishment of a public administration wage
   system; creation of a Managers training program within the State Administration; preparation of a
   consolidated list of public administration job positions; creation of a training program for Human Resources
   employees within State Administration units; development and management of a registry of public sector
   employees; implementation of staff ceilings and selective downsizing; preparation and implementation of
   an affordable, public administration market-based pay and grading system; and preparation and adoption
   of bylaws for the enforcement of the Law on Public Sector Employees Salary System.
   The three PDO results indicators were:

     • PDO Indicator 1: Share of public administration employees assigned to new pay grades as per the
     Law on Public Sector Employees Salary System (percentage)
     • PDO Indicator 2: Total number of public administration employees at or under the annual ceiling
     prescribed by the Law on the Ceiling on Number of Employees (Yes/No)*
     • PDO Indicator 3: Share of redundant public administration employees receiving redundancy payments
     pursuant to provisions of Law on Ceiling on the Number of Employees, Civil Servants Law and Labor
     Law (percentage)


   *Total number of employees with the respective employer. The law requires the government to set a
   maximum number of staff allowed for each entity.

   Public Sector Finances
   Results Area 2: Improved financial management
   The Program supported: strengthening expenditure control and supervision of the Government’s financial
   management system, including expansion of the Financial Management Information System (FMIS) to
   include Indirect Budget Beneficiaries (IBBs). In particular, the Program supported the Government in
   improving financial and budget information, commitment control and arrears; establishing a centralized
   payroll system; and improving business process automation.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



  IBBs are defined in the Republic of Serbia Law on Budget Systems as legislative bodies, public institutions
  founded by the Republic, and/or local governments and subordinate to their respective bodies and
  organizations of the republic and/or local governments in administrative and budgetary sense. IBBs include
  courts, prisons, schools, and social welfare centers (PAD, p. 39 and p. 55). Expenditure control over IBBs
  is hindered by the lack of effective commitment control and incomplete institutional coverage of the FMIS.
  IBBs are responsible for the bulk of the stock of expenditure arrears.
  The PDO results indicator was:

    •PDO Indicator 6: Percentage of commitments in budget execution system entered within the required
    deadline per the Law on Deadlines for Payments in Commercial Transactions

  Results Area 3: Improved procurement management
  The Program supported: (1) strengthening the technical capacity of officers involved in public procurement;
  (2) preparation of procurement tools and manuals; (3) development of a public procurement performance
  monitoring system; (4) development and implementation of Framework Agreements*; (5) preparation of the
  Bill on Amendments to the Law on Public Procurement to enhance transparency and procedures; (6)
  improved training for certified public procurement officials**; (7) adoption of the value for money
  methodology and guidelines for “Life cycle product cost” implementation; and, (8) increased use of
  information and communication technology (e-Government) to enhance efficiency in procurement.
  The two PDO results indicator were:

    • PDO Indicator 4: Share of public procurement contracts, within the category of public authorities over
    RSD 5 million in value, signed in a Fiscal Year of the Borrower, in 90 days or less, between the date of
    Issuance of Bidding Documents and signing of the Public Procurement Contract (percentage)
    • PDO Indicator 5: Value of Public Procurement Contracts awarded through Framework Agreements
    (RSD) (described below)


  * Framework Agreements are arrangements between one or more buyers and one or more suppliers that
  provide the terms governing contracts to be established for a certain period of time, in particular with
  regard to price and, where necessary, the quantity envisaged (ICR, p.11).
  ** The training includes the expansion of basic training and the specialized training for a higher level of
  certification for public procurement officers who would acquire more complex and broader knowledge,
  including EU procurement practices.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: At appraisal, the estimated cost of the Program was US$ 242 million over three years.
  The actual cost was US$ 197 million (ICR, Annex 3; data obtained from the interview with Task Team).
  The Program was financed by an IBRD loan of EUR 69 million (US$ 75 million equivalent). The amount of
  EUR 11 million, which was allocated to Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI) 2, was canceled, as the DLI 2



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



         was not achieved. The actual disbursement amount was EUR 58 million (ICR, Annex 3) (US$ 63.5
         million due to exchange rate differences) (ICR, p.2).
         Borrower Contribution. The borrower contribution estimated at appraisal was US$ 167 million (PAD,
         p.9). The actual contribution was about US$ 133.5 million (ICR, p.2 and data obtained from the interview
         with task team).
         Dates and Revisions: The Program was approved by the Board on April 20, 2016 and became effective
         on December 1, 2016. The Program closed on February 29, 2020, as scheduled.
         There was an amendment to the Loan Agreement to extend the date of achievement of DLI1 from June
         30, 2017 to September 30, 2017 (the first extension), then December 29, 2017 (the second extension), to
         account for implementation delays in the Law on Public Sector Employees Salary System.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

       Rationale
       The PDO was highly relevant to the country context and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY16-
       20. The first of the CPF’s two focus areas was Economic Governance and the Role of State and aimed at
       assisting in creating a more effective public administration and improving select public service delivery. The
       CPF highlighted that addressing the structural problems in public sector governance is a prerequisite for the
       implementation of the Government’s program (CPF, Annex 1). Aligning staffing levels with the needs of
       service delivery was critical to improving efficiency in public finances and service delivery, in line with the
       CPF objective (ICR, para. 12). The PDO was consistent with Serbia’s Public Administration Reform (PAR)
       Strategy (adopted in 2014) and Action Plan for the Implementation of the Public Sector Reform Strategy for
       2015-17(adopted in 2015) and Action Plan for 2018-20. The PDO remained relevant to critical constraints
       and priority areas identified in the Systematic Country Diagnostic Update: strengthening government
       effectiveness, efficiency, and accountability (World Bank 2020, Section 5 and p.42).



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Improved efficiency in public sector employment

    Rationale
    Supporting a comprehensive job evaluation and pay grading exercise (i.e. evaluating positions and matching
    them to new grades), the development of a new job catalog, and the preparation and implementation of


                                                                                                          Page 4 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



 retrenchment plans was expected to better control and reduce the number of public administration
 employees and enhance efficiency in public sector employment.
 There was a substantial progress in enhancing efficiency in public sector employment. The Program
 supported the adaptation of the job catalog in 2017, while the catalog for state administration officials and
 local self-governments remained in draft form (168 positions at the time) (ICR, p.17). Following the adoption
 of the amendments to the Law on Public Sector Employees Salary System and the Law on Employees in
 Public Services in December 2017, at least 70 percent of public administration employee positions were
 assigned to pay grades according to the Law on Public Sector Employees Salary system (DLI 1/ IRI 1).
 improvements in efficiency through a simpler, more straightforward pay and grading structure that would
 contribute to a reduction in the wage bill The Program supported the preparation of by-laws for the
 enforcement of the Law on the Method of the Determination of the Maximum Number of Public Sector
 Employees, and focused on keeping the number of employees under the targeted ceilings, meeting the
 target of PDO Indicator 2 (DLI 3) for all three years (ICR, p.39). The Program also supported ministries in
 identifying redundant positions, prepare retrenchment plans and declare eligible staff redundant. 100 percent
 of employees received redundancy payments pursuant to the provisions of the Law on the Method of the
 Determination of the Maximum Number of Public Sector Employees, the Law on Civil Servants (1,362
 people in 2017 and 654 people in 2018), meeting the target of PDO Indicator 3 (DLI 4).
 These actions contributed to decreasing the overall number of employees in the public sector and reducing
 the overall wage bill. The wage bill as a percentage of GDP declined from 11.0 percent of GDP in 2014 to
 9.2 percent in 2018, and then rose to 9.5 percent in 2019, relative to an average of 10.1 percent in seven
 small transition economies of Europe (ICR, para. 38). In terms of total government expenditures, the wage
 bill accounted for around 22.5 percent in 2019, a slight reduction from 22.8 percent in 2015 before the
 Program began. These efficiency gains were jointly achieved by the PforR and the DPLs that facilitated
 headcount controls.
 One out of three PDO Indicators was not achieved due to implementation delays. Initial progress towards
 reforming the wage system was made, including the creation and adoption of a legal basis for managing the
 wage-bill and employment practices across the public sector. However, the implementation of relevant laws
 was continuously postponed by the Government and the transition of the wage system remained incomplete,
 falling short of achieving the target of two IRIs and PDO Indicator 1 (DLI 2) (ICR, paras. 35 and 37). DLI 2
 was not fulfilled by the time the Program closed, and remains on the Government’s agenda and the
 Government remains committed to completing the outstanding structural reforms to the wage system (ICR,
 para. 73).
 It should be noted that the development of the improved registry of public employment was started but not
 completed during the implementation period of the Program due to a disagreement between the Ministry of
 Public Administration and Local Self-Government (MPALSG) and the Ministry of Finance, which slowed
 progress. For reporting data on DLI 3 and 4, the client relied on the existing registries in the central registry
 of compulsory social insurance and in the Treasury Administration (ICR, para. 39 and information from the
 interview with TTLs).



 Rating
 Substantial
PHREVDELTBL


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)




PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Improved efficiency in public sector finances

    Rationale
    Financial Management. Extending the coverage of the FMIS to IBBs was expected to improve the
    monitoring and prevention of the accumulation of arrears and improvement in cash management.
    Complementary information and communications technology equipment, training and oversight were also
    provided to the IBBs to effectively operate in the FMIS. The establishment of a central register of invoices in
    the Treasury Administration was expected to help each vendor register their invoices upon issuance. The
    expansion and technological upgrading of capacity and the improvement in business process automation
    were expected to contribute to improving efficiency in public finances.
    There was significant progress in enhancing efficiency in public finance. In 2016, no IBBs were covered by
    the FMIS. By the end of 2018, 529 IBBs had been included in the system, meeting the target and achieving
    DLI 7 (IRI 2.1) (ICR, p. 19 and p. 45). According to available data when the ICR was prepared, there were no
    new budgetary arrears, suggesting that interventions under the program helped to contain arrears.* The
    share of commitments in the budget execution system entered within the required deadline rose from 60
    percent in 2016 to 91.6 percent in 2018, slightly exceeding the target of 90 percent (PDO indicator 6/ DLI 8).
    Despite the progress measured by the PFM DLIs, which specifically focused on institutional capacity, a
    systematic approach to approve, record and monitor multi-annual contracts, to improve control over multi-
    annual contractual commitments (one Program Action Plan) was not in place at closure (ICR, paras. 46 and
    51).
    *In June 2013, the Financial Management Information System (FMIS) system reported arrears amounting to
    RSD 84,942 million (US$ 1,003 million) equivalent to six percent of total expenditures in that year (PAD,
    para. 13).

    Procurement Management. Capacity development in good procurement practices for procurement officers
    was expected to help procurement staff complete their duties more effectively and efficiently. In addition,
    support for preparing and implementing models of Framework Agreements (a tool to reduce administrative
    burden by reducing the number of procedures a contracting authority must run) was expected to decrease
    the time and costs linked to carrying out a procurement.
    Two procurement DLIs (DLIs 5 and 6) were overachieved, reflecting significant improvement in increasing
    efficiency in the procurement processes. The number of public procurement officers who were certified
    increased from 1,810 in 2016 to 4,727 in 2019, exceeding the target of 2,400 (IRI 3.2) (ICR, pp. 46-47).The
    share of public procurement contracts in the public authorities category, with a value of over 5 million RSD,
    signed in the borrower’s fiscal year in 90 days or less from the time the bidding documents were issued to
    the signing of the contract rose from 62 percent in 2016 to 93.9 percent in 2020, exceeding the target of 71
    percent (PDO Indicator 4/ DLI 5) (ICR, pp. 18-19 and p.40). Complemented by the support from the Good
    Governance and Investment Climate Reform (GGICR) Trust Fund by the UK, the FAs were made available
    on the public procurement portal, which increased their use. With strengthened procurement officers’
    capacity, the value of contracts awarded through FAs almost tripled from 26.6 billion RSD in 2016 to 75.2
    billion RSD in 2018, far exceeding the target of 35.4 billion RSD (PDO indicator 5/ DLI 6) (ICR, p. 19 and p.

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



             41). The overachievement of the procurement DLIs (5 and 6) was also attributed to the support provided
             through the GGICR Trust Fund, which supported creating a set of public procurement performance
             indicators and monitoring the performance of public procurement (ICR, para.44).



             Rating
      High
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                      Rate
                                                                          Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                      Available?
                                                                                                 0
            Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                                 Not Applicable
                                                                                                 0
            ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                                 Not Applicable

     * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


     6. Outcome

     Relevance of the PDO for the country context, government strategies and plans and the Bank strategy was
     High. Relevance of DLIs was rated as Substantial. Overall relevance is rated as Substantial. Given the PDO
     was mostly achieved with some shortcomings (falling short of achieving the target of two IRIs and PDO Indicator

                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



1 (DLI 2)), overall efficacy is rated as Substantial. Taking these factors into account, the overall project outcome
is rated Satisfactory.


a.    Outcome Rating
      Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risks to the sustainability of the development outcome are substantial. While the Program’s achievements in
public procurement and financial management are expected to be sustained due to the continuous reforms (the
adoption/implementation of the new Law) and substantial achievement of outcomes with the PDO indicators
exceeding expected targets in most cases, there are substantial risks on public sector employment, especially
on costs. Despite the government’s commitment on completing the outstanding structural reforms to the wage
system, there is concern over the government plan on annual wage increases in the public sector above the
inflation rate, which could undermine some of the progress made in enhancing the costs of public sector
employment. Efficiency gains in procurement are likely to be preserved and have been further reinforced by the
new Public Procurement Law adopted in 2019 and in effect since mid-2020 (ICR, para. 104). PFM systems’
improvements are likely to be sustained and the projects TTLs believe that system improvements have largely
withstood the shocks that resulted from the COVID19 crisis without increased arrears. Efficiency gains in public
sector employment remain at some risk as there is a pent-up demand for additional hiring in several sectors.
The ICR states: “under the action plan for 2018-2020, the pace of reform on key aspects of the public wage
system slowed” (ICR, paras. 25 and 104). The Public Sector Efficiency and the Green Growth DPL under
preparation is designed to support managing employment numbers and will help to mitigate the risk of
increased hiring and salary cost.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The selection of instrument was strategic and appropriate, considering key features of PforR (e.g.
     government ownership, strong results orientation, and donor coordination). The government showed strong
     leadership and commitment to implement the PAR Strategy and Action Plans, the Bank team was able to
     align the Program with Serbia’s strategic priorities. This Program was the country’s first PforR. The PforR
     was an effective way to support the newly formed Government, that was keen on advancing reforms, to
     focus on structural reforms from a results-oriented perspective while complementing the fiscal
     consolidation efforts being led by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and policy reform supported by the
     two DPLs under preparation at the time (closed in 2018 and 2019 respectively) (ICR, para. 90). This
     ‘tripartite’ engagement (the IMF Stand-by Arrangement, the PforR and Bank-supported DPLs) was
     designed to form the basis for a concerted approach to engage and support the Government to stabilize
     the fiscal situation and make progress on reforms that had failed to take off before.*


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



  The operation's “basics-first” approach to put essential elements in place built on experiences and lessons
  from the Bank’s engagement in core institutional reforms. The Bank had a good track record of supporting
  public sector reforms in Serbia and had become a trusted partner in the implementations of such reforms
  The technical foundations for the engagement had been laid by the numerous diagnostic and analytical
  pieces conducted by the Bank, including 2015 PEFA assessment and a 2010 report titled “Serbia
  Rightsizing the Government Wage Bill” (ICR paras. 14 and 92). In addition, the design of the project was
  supported by analytical work conducted by other development partners, such as the IMF and European
  Union (EU).
  The team carried out the detailed assessments on technical issues and government programs (PAD,
  Section 4 and Annex 4). These quality assessments provided the basis for the design of the program
  scope, interventions types, and the program action plan (PAP).
  The Bank team assessed the potential risks as high, including limited capacity for implementation, weak
  coordination, and political commitment to reforms, and proposed risk mitigation measures such as
  complementary support from Bank-administered trust funds, the EU, OECD, United Kingdom, Russian
  Federation and IMF, enhancing coordination through the Joint Government-Donor Working Group, and
  ensuring the government commitment regarding the implementation of the Program in the context of an
  IMF Stand-by Arrangement and the longer-term process of accession to the EU (PAD, pp. 71-73).
  However, there were minor shortcomings in the risk assessment. The specific risk that the proposed
  reforms to the wage system could result in an increase in the wage bill in the short run was not factored
  into the design (ICR, p.93 and p. 103). During implementation, it impacted the Program’s ability to achieve
  the PDO because the Government was reluctant to move forward with the reforms without a financial
  analysis that forecasted the expected impact of the new wage system. Political resistance to changes in
  wage policy was also underestimated.
  * The IMF Stand-by Arrangement for 2015-2018 included broad targets for reducing fiscal imbalances,
  including through reductions in the aggregate wage bill and for reducing arrears (ICR, para. 16). The First
  and Second Public Expenditure and Public Utilities Development Policy Loans (approved in 2017 and
  2018) helped advance reforms, using the same results indicators (DPL ICR, para. 71).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank team provided solid and constant support for the Government to facilitate activities and resolve
  issues that arose. As the Government had no prior experience with the PforR instrument, the Bank adopted
  a proactive approach to implementation support (ICR, para. 96). Because the PAD did not provide sufficient
  details on how exactly verification was to be conducted for each DLI, the Bank conducted several
  workshops and presentations on the instrument and the concept of verification. The Bank also played a
  critical role facilitating dialogue between the relevant institutions to agree on data collection and sharing
  processes that were required for the verification of the DLIs.
  The Bank team built relationships with political appointees as well as technical staff to continue the
  implementation of key technical aspects of the reforms that relied less on political leadership (ICR, pp. 33-
  34).* The DLI 2 moved slowly but the Bank managed to strike the right balance between encouraging the
  client to move forward with the reforms and ensuring that there was sufficient ownership of the process

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



  especially with regards to sensitive discussions on the wage reform (ICR, para. 97). However, the Bank
  team noted an important area in which they could have done more during the mid-term reviews, which was
  adjustment in DLI 2 (PDO Indicator 1) and related IRIs. This review notes there was room to refine and
  adjust DLIs, considering risks related to political commitment and effective coordination on structural
  reforms on the new wage system and delays in the full implementation of the Law on Public Sector
  Employees Salary System.
  * Political leadership played a role in setting strategic direction and coordination, energizing the reform
  momentum and linking the Program with activities at the technical levels.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The M&E design was mainly adequate, albeit with some shortcomings. The PforR used the Results Framework
  (RF), which was aligned with the monitoring framework for the PAR Strategy (PAD, p.11 and ICR, p.29). The
  PDO was clearly specified. The PAD presented the results framework and monitoring arrangements, with
  detailed indicators and target values, and identified the parties responsible for data collection (PAD Annex 2
  and 3). The MPALSG had the overall responsibility for M&E for both the PAR Strategy and the Program,
  therefore it was practical and efficient to align the RF with the monitoring framework.
  The relationship between the PDO, IRIs, DLIs and the PAP could have been clearer. The repetition of
  indicators on different levels in the RF created some confusion in terms of understanding the hierarchy of the
  indicators and also complicated the reporting process (ICR, para. 79). For example, the PDO indicators mostly
  duplicate the DLIs. Another issue was that the description of the achievement for PDO indicator 1, was the
  same as IRI 1.2. As mentioned above, this review notes that one of the PDO indicators was achieved without
  achieving the IRI. This review agrees that the achievement of the IRI should clearly contribute to the PDO
  targets, and ultimate achievement of the PDO. In addition, the results framework could have had a better line of
  sight to anticipated improved service delivery outcomes, even if expected to occur after project closing. IEG’s
  PforR evaluation “An Early-Stage Assessment of the Process and Effects of a New Lending Instrument (IEG,
  2016)” found that PDO indicators are mostly focused on outputs/early outcomes. Objectives that lead to clear
  results at the outcome level are rare, and the projects could benefit from pushing the envelope further in terms
  of concentrating on outcomes that are achievable during the program period.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E data of the Program were collected and analyzed systematically, albeit in some cases with delays,
  and indicators that were in the RF were measured and reported (one or two times a year) in Implementation

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



  Status and Results Reports (ISRs) (ICR, para. 80). Despite some challenges in the initial stages of the
  implementation of the Program, the verification of DLI was institutionalized by establishing a common
  understanding, creating the Guidance Note on the Monitoring and Verification of Result, and documenting
  results in Annual Verification Reports. There could have been better collaboration between OECD, which is
  supporting capacity building for M&E for the overall PAR Strategy, and the Bank. The Government is aware of
  this, and working on a better system for coordinating donors supporting reforms (ICR, para. 48).



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on the performance of the Program and results, or lack thereof, were used to inform program
  management and decision-making processes. Importantly, the data were used to engage the Government
  on reforms that were not moving and as a result posed a risk to the achievement of the development
  outcome (ICR, para. 83).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The PAD rates the Environmental and Social risks as Substantial. The Environmental and Social Systems
  Assessment (ESSA) conducted at appraisal determined that the PforR did not pose any major
  environmental risks but identified social risks related to potential retrenchment of the public sector
  employees (PAD, Annex 6). Therefore, specific measures were included in the PAP to mitigate the adverse
  effects associated with retrenchment. The measures and actions in the PAP were all complied with (ICR,
  pp.30-31).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

   The PAD rates the Fiduciary risks as Substantial. The fiducial assessment indicated that there were
   adequate arrangements in place to safeguard Program finances, but pointed out some deficiencies
   particularly in regards to commitment control (PAD, pp. 16-18). Therefore, among other fiduciary-related
   actions, improved control over multi-annual contractual commitments and regular periodic reporting on
   comprehensive data on arrears were included as actions in the PAP. However, by the end of the Program,
   one of these actions —a systematic approach to reporting data on multi-annual contractual commitments —
   was determined to be a less critical element under the basics-first approach, and was not implemented. The
   other fiduciary-related actions included in the PAP were all achieved (ICR, paras. 46 and 87).

                                                                                               Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)



   The financial management of program expenditures was consistently satisfactory throughout the Program
   (ICR, para. 88). Program expenditures detailed in the semi-annual program reports remained at sufficient
   levels to cover the DLIs under the Program. The State Audit Institution’s 2019 audit of the final account of the
   Republic of Serbia and the separate audits of the Program implementing entities; the Ministry of Public
   Administration, Treasury Administration and the Public Procurement Administration returned clean opinions.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Gender. Although the Program’s activities were gender neutral, it was recognized at the appraisal stage that
  women would be disproportionately affected by the rightsizing and reduction in public sector employment as
  they make up the majority of employees in the public sector. As predicted, by June 2019, 70 percent of the
  employees affected by the rightsizing were women. However, all the actions in the Social Systems
  Assessment Program Action Plan were implemented to reduce the burden of the reforms on women (ICR,
  para. 56). For example, measures that reinforce the protection of women in instances of retrenchment were
  provided for in the law, including the protection of women on maternity leave, female headed households,
  etc. Also, the criteria to select employees to be made redundant were based on principles of non-
  discrimination.



d. Other
  None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  According to the Bank’s rules,
                                                                                  the combination of a
                                                                                  substantial relevance and
                                                                                  substantial efficacy rating can
                                                                                  be Moderately Satisfactory if
                              Moderately
Outcome                                                Satisfactory               there is modest achievement
                              Satisfactory
                                                                                  of one of the PDOs. In this
                                                                                  case, one PDO is rated
                                                                                  substantial and the other is
                                                                                  rated high, so the outcome
                                                                                  rating is Satisfactory.
Bank Performance              Satisfactory             Satisfactory               ---
Quality of M&E                Substantial              Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)




12. Lessons

 The following are some of the key lessons from the ICR (pp.35-38) with some adjustment in language:
Effective support can benefit from leveraging the World BankIMF relationship and harnessing different
World Bank instruments. The Bank and the IMF coordinated closely to push critical reforms forward, with the
IMF primarily focusing on the wage bill, and the Bank focused on how efficiency could be strengthened at the
disaggregate level. Given the complex nature of the reforms in Serbia— complexity of single spine pay systems
and large-scale retrenchment of public employees —a concerted multi-faceted approach (using the PforR as
well as Bank-administered trust funds and DPLs to incentivize reforms along with complementary support from
other development partners) was warranted, and it greatly improved the prospects of achieving the
development outcome under the PforR. Without the full package of distinct but related approaches, the PforR
may not have achieved as much as it did in a relatively difficult reform context.
Institutional capacity can be improved through the necessary cooperation in the monitoring and
reporting of DLIs. Despite the initial challenges, the need for inter-ministerial and institutional coordination
improved the capacity of individual institutions to collect, collate and integrate data. Furthermore, the process
helped to shine a light on specific aspects that needed to be addressed to strengthen existing databases and/or
create new ones. The significant institutional improvements made with support from the Program as well as the
technical assistance provided by development partners are likely to last beyond the Program.
The client and the Bank should view mid-term reviews as an opportunity to make strategic adjustments
to the program. Mid-term reviews are an important step in the program cycle. They give both the Bank and the
client a moment to step back and conduct an objective and holistic assessment of how the program is
performing. If a program is experiencing challenges, it is an opportunity to troubleshoot and catalyze change. In
this case, the Mid-Term Review was a missed opportunity to address implementation problems and make
strategic adjustments to the program to fully achieve the PDO. Specifically, there were significant challenges
and subsequent delays with the verification process for DLI 8, while this ultimately did not affect the
achievement of the PDO. The mid-term review report mentions that the definition of some DLIs could have
been refined, especially with regards to their targets and data collection requirements.
Given the complexity of public wage system, it is important to address the fiscal costs explicitly when
designing reforms. This PforR did not explicitly address the fiscal costs of the reforms that were envisaged
under the Program, and to some extent this impacted the implementation of the wage system reforms. In
addition, the lack of data analytics and fiscal forecasts of the impact of the reforms made it difficult for the
Government to make a clear decision about the full implementation of the reforms. This could have been
avoided by ensuring that the fiscal impacts and costs were explicitly discussed, understood, and built into the
Program.
The following is an additional lesson from this review:
Results frameworks for core institutional reforms should provide a clear line of sight from operational
support incentivized by DLIs through to IRI and PDO targets, and ultimately achievement of improved
public services. PDO targets should seek to reflect results at the outcome level, and go beyond the outputs
incentivized by DLIs. The theory of change should provide an analytical basis to justify why particular
interventions were selected and sequenced, and what impact in what timeframe they were expected to have on
specific, longer-term fiscal consolidation and service delivery outcomes expected to occur, even if beyond the
Program’s closing.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PforR on Modernization of Pub. Admin. (P155172)




13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain
 This Program was the country’s first PforR lending instrument. The Program achieved significant results in
improving efficiency in public sector employment and finances, while it highlighted challenges in
implementation, notably the full implementation of the new wage system. Greater clarity is needed on why
particular interventions were selected and sequenced, and what impact in what timeframe they had on
specific, longer-term service delivery outcomes beyond the Program’s closing. The assessment on the
continuity of the reform and lessons from the ground would be useful for other countries which may be
considering use of the PforR for core institutional reforms.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good description of key achievements and effectively highlights the shortcomings, or areas
that the Bank could do better, such as continuous delays in the full implementation of the new wage system,
and assesses the extent of achieving outcomes in most cases. Annex 5: Lessons Learned from Moving To A
Single Spine Public Sector Pay System, is particularly well researched and insightful, drawing on evaluations
and analytical work by IEG and others. The ICR points out that this international experience should have been
thoroughly considered from the beginning so that effective mitigation measures could be designed. The
analysis should be helpful in planning a way forward for implementation of the Law on Public Sector
Employees’ Salary System.
The ICR should have selected the correct rating to determine the outcome rating, following the ICR Guidance
for PforR Operations. The ICR could have discussed more effectively the linkages between the IRIs and
outcomes (e.g. IRI 1.3 and DLIs 3 and 4 /PDO Indicators 2 and 3; IRI 2.2 on budget inspections) in assessing
the relevance of the results framework and achievements of IRIs (e.g. IRI 3.2 on the number of public
procurement officers certified). The ICR could have provided the information and assessment on the total
actual expenditures of the Program.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
