     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0022273

1. Project Data



 Project ID                           Project Name
                                      RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg
 P148927
                                      Phase3

 Country                              Practice Area(Lead)                         Additional Financing
 Rwanda                               Agriculture and Food                        P161000


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)                     Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55480,IDA-59620,TF-              31-Mar-2018                                              200,713,436.24
 19208,TF-A5936,TF-A6465

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Oct-2014                          30-Sep-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,600,000.00                                   69,085,803.00

 Revised Commitment                            205,835,803.00                                   59,835,803.00

 Actual                                        200,713,436.24                                   59,835,803.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Alexandra Christina         Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson      IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Horst                       Nelson



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Rwanda Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program
   Phase 3 (“Agriculture PforR”) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated November 11, 2014 was “to
   increase and intensify the productivity of the Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors and expand
   the development of value chains”, in line with the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) dated October 9,
   2014.
   This PDO was not revised during implementation and is hence adopted for this ICR Review.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No


c. Components
   The Agriculture Program-for-Results (PforR) contributed to the Government of Rwanda’s (GoR) Third
   Phase of the Transformation of Agriculture Sector Program (known by its French acronym, PSTA 3), which
   was a national program that covered the five‐year period 2013/14 to 2017/18. It built on the previous two
   phases of IPF lending operations that supported the PSTA 1 and PSTA 2. The Agriculture PforR was
   designed to support all PSTA 3 programs (ICR, paras 4 and 5). Hence, its intermediate results areas were
   identical with the four components of the PSTA 3 (PAD, Annex 4):

     i.Agriculture and Animal Resource Intensification: Appraisal estimate: USD628 million. This
     program aimed at improving practices for soil conservation, land husbandry, irrigation and water
     management, and supported inputs like mechanization, agrochemicals and markets, as well as seeds
     and livestock development. Those activities were a continuation and refinement of those carried out
     under PSTA 2.

        Research, Technology Transfer and Organization of Farmers: Appraisal estimate: USD87 million.
     ii .
     This program aimed at supporting research, technology transfer, and professionalization of farmers as
     they are main drivers of agriculture and animal resource intensification and food and export value
     chains.

         Private Sector‐Driven Value Chain Development and Expanded Investments: Appraisal estimate:
     iii .
     USD382 million. This program aimed at creating an environment to attract private investment, encourage
     entrepreneurship, and facilitate market access, develop priority food and export crop, dairy, meat,
     fisheries, and apiculture value chains, increase access to agri-finance and market-oriented infrastructure
     for post-harvest to enhance production, productivity, and value addition.

        Institutional Results-Focused Development and Cross‐Cutting Issues: Appraisal estimate:
     iv .
     USD104 million. This program aimed at supporting institutional capacity building, decentralization in
     agriculture, a legal and regulatory framework, agricultural communication statistical systems, M&E and
     knowledge management, environmental mainstreaming in agriculture, and nutrition and reducing
     household vulnerability to promote agricultural sector growth.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing. At appraisal in October 2014, the total cost for the Agriculture PforR was
   estimated at US$1,200 million, of which US$100 million were expected from new IDA credit financing

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



   through the PforR instrument, US$194 million from existing IDA credit financing[1], US$300 million from
   borrower contribution by the GoR, and US$606 million from co-financing by various other donors.[2]In
   March 2015, a Multi‐Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) of US$50.6 million was approved to support the
   implementation of the Agriculture PforR. Furthermore, in February 2017, an Additional Financing (AF) in
   the amount of US$46 million from the IDA credit was approved as well as an additional US$9.24 million
   for the MDTF. At completion, the actual amount disbursed was US$1,218.24 million (102 percent of the
   appraisal amount), of which US$140.88 million were from the IDA credit, US$59.84 million from the grant
   financing of the MDTF, US$248.72 million from existing IDA credit financing, US$368.4 million borrower
   contribution, and US$400.3 from donor co-financing.
   Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the borrower contribution of the GoR was estimated at US$300
   million. At completion, actual borrower contribution was US$368.4 million (129 percent of expected
   borrower co-financing).
   Dates and Restructuring. The Agriculture PforR became effective on December 11, 2014 and closed on
   September 30, 2018. The original closing date was March 31, 2018. It underwent one restructuring -which
   included an AF- in February 2017 to expand the scope of the program by scaling‐up targets for the PDO
   indicators and DLIs and to accordingly extend the closing date by six months. Specifically, the
   restructuring led to the following changes for DLIs:

     • Scaling‐up of targets for productivity objective-related (DLIs 1 to 4)
     • Nationwide rolling‐out of the Management Information System (DLI 6)
     • Review and adjustment of the policies on seeds, fertilizers and financing to align with the new
     National Agricultural Policy (NAP) (DLI 7)
     • Introduction of DLI 8 focused on the approval of an updated National Agriculture Policy (DLI 8)
     • No further disbursement allocation for DLI 5 based on the GoR being satisfied with the results
     achieved (DLI 5)

   The restructuring did not alter the PDO or affect the Theory of Change (ToC).

   [1] This was related to the ongoing IPF operations in Rwanda: Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and
   Hillside Irrigation Project (LWH), Rural Sector Support Project (RSSP) and Feeder Roads Development
   Project (FRDP).
   [2] The PAD page vii lists the details of the US$800 million co-financing as follows: EU (U$160 million),
   USAID (US$138 million), IFAD (US$120 million), DFID (US$90 million), Netherlands (US$10 million),
   Swiss (US$6 million), Japan (US$ 32 million), AfDB (US$ million), FAO (US$ 30 million).


3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Alignment with Agriculture Sector Strategy. Agriculture has been a priority to the GoR, given the sector’s
  significant contribution to GDP and poverty reduction (ICR, para 1). To increase the low level of 40 to 50
  percent of the country’s agricultural production potential at appraisal, the Third Phase of the Transformation
  of Agriculture Sector Program (PSTA 3) focused on production intensification, research and technology

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



transfer, value chain development, and results-focused sector development. The Agriculture PforR was fully
aligned with the PSTA 3 and horizontally financed all its programs and sub-programs, which resulted from
Rwanda’s strategic document “Rwanda Vision 2020 and the related Second Economic Development and
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (2013-2018).
At the time of this review, the Agriculture PforR objective remains relevant with the GoR’s current follow-on
program PSTA 4 (covering the period 2018 to 2024) that includes the priority areas of (i) Innovation and
Extension, (ii) Productivity and Resilience, (iii) Inclusive markets and value addition (expanding the PSTA 3
focus to), (iv) Enabling Environment & Responsive Institutions. PSTA 4 builds on PSTA 3 and the
contribution of the Agriculture PforR, expanding the focus to knowledge and information further down the
value chain (under Priority Area 1), more attention to nutrition sensitive, sustainable, and resilient production
(under Priority Area 2), a higher weight of developing insurance, finance, market infrastructure and export
readiness (under Priority Area 3), and more strategic evidence-based policymaking to improve planning and
coordination processes (under Priority Area 4) (PSTA, page 36). Overall, PSTA 4 promotes a stronger role of
the private sector as market enabler, more focus on farm profitability and commercialization, and the
adoption of a food systems approach for enhanced nutrition and household food security, amongst other
things (PSTA, pages 30 and 31). PSTA 4 is supported by the World Bank-financed Agriculture PforR 2,
indicating the continued relevance of the PDO (ICR, para 17).
Moreover, the Agriculture PforR was in line with the FY21-26 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Rwanda, which highlights the importance of the sector to modernize, be responsive to market signals, and to
more effectively integrate with regional and global markets (CPF, para 40). CPF Objective 4 (“Increased
Agricultural Productivity and Commercialization”) relates most strongly with the activities supported by the
Agriculture PforR and emphasizes their continued relevance for Rwanda’s agricultural sector growth. Also,
the PforR instrument was relevant to address market failures and drive aspired sector reforms on
agribusiness highlighted in the CPF (CPF, para 78), such as increased agri-finance (CPF, para 99), value
addition and market orientation of agriculture production (CPF, para 40).
World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience. The World Bank had supported the previous
PSTA 1 (2004-2008) and PSTA 2 (2009-2012) through Investment Project Financing (IPF) operations,
accumulating over a decade of experience in Rwanda’s agriculture sector needs and strategic priorities. It
also acted as co-chair and has been a member of the Agriculture Sector Working Group, which holds
monthly meetings and is the main policy dialogue and donor coordination platform for agriculture in Rwanda
(PAD PSTA 3, para 20). Additionally, it was well placed to assist the GoR in the PSTA 3 implementation and
in improving its systems and processes towards more results-orientation, given its considerable regional
knowledge and sector expertise (PAD PSTA 3, para 19 and PAD PSTA 4, para 28).
Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR instrument. The Agriculture PforR built on the Bank’s decade-
long engagement in the Rwandan agriculture sector, including support to the PSTA 1 and 2. At the time of
appraisal, the country and government systems were considered strong enough to “take the next step”
towards the more results-oriented PforR instrument, which was justified by the results of the technical,
fiduciary and safeguards assessments (ICR, para 7). The choice of PforR over other financing instruments
was taken with the institutional focus of the program in mind, in order to address the remaining risks in the
country and government systems (ICR, para 7) and to support the GoR strengthen results-based programs
through incentives (PAD PSTA 3, para 18). This intended to incentivize the government towards linking
resources with specific results and to allow for further strengthening the capacity of its systems in a broader
manner (not just at project level) and in the risk areas identified in the PforR assessments.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



       Given this was the World Bank’s first PforR in agriculture and for the Rwandan sector counterparts in
       particular, the formulation of the PDO was also pitched at the right level for the country capacity at appraisal,
       although DLIs could have been stronger (see Relevance of DLIs). Moreover, the choice to support all
       programs of PSTA 3 is considered adequate, given the long-standing engagement between the Bank and
       the GoR in the agriculture sector and PSTA financing support.



       Rating
       High
   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Increased and intensified productivity of the Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors and

    Rationale
    At appraisal, Rwanda’s agricultural productivity had “considerable potential to accelerate” (PAD, para 3), as
    it was at 40 to 50 percent of the country’s agricultural production potential (ICR, para 2). Productivity
    increases, value chain development and high-value commodity production were highlighted as “essential to
    secure further reductions in rural poverty and to convert the largely subsistence sector to a more knowledge-
    intensive, competitive, and market-oriented sector” (PAD, paras 4 and 7). The PAD highlighted several
    constraining factors, including high prevalence of subsistence farmers with mostly rainfed production
    systems in need of modern practices, small production units, and the country’s limited arable land and
    environmental concerns which called for focusing on intensification instead of extending the agricultural
    frontier (PAD, para 5). In addition to these farm-level constraints, there were several institutional constraints,
    such as weak technology transfer packages targeted to increase on-farm agricultural productivity, and
    agencies’ low capacity and experience with results-focused policy-making measures.

    Theory of Change. To address the above constraints and improve productivity in agriculture and livestock,
    the Theory of Change (ToC) focused on the activities of the Agriculture PforR Results Area 1 “agricultural
    and animal resource Intensification” and Results Area 2 “research, technology transfer and organization of
    farmers” (ICR, para 11 and Figure 1). Under the former, the first key inputs were the construction of erosion
    control measures such as terracing and training for their continued adoption. This was expected to lead to a
    larger land area under erosion control measures (measured by DLI 1) and reduced actual soil erosion, which
    in turn was anticipated to result in higher productivity and sustainability measured in crop yields (measured
    by DLI 3 for three major crops in Rwanda). The second key input under Results Area 1 was the construction
    of irrigation systems and farmer training for their operation and maintenance. The resulting larger land area
    with irrigation systems (measured by DLI 2) was expected to intensify production performance and to result
    in higher crop yields. The input of Results Area 2 relevant to Objective 1 were focused on farmer field school
    trials of improved agricultural technologies adapted to Rwanda’s agro-ecological potential and beneficiary
    farmers’ needs (PAD, para 30), the generation and release of agricultural technologies (measured by DLI 4)


                                                                                                           Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



and the related training of extension agents, all of which were expected to increase the adoption of improved
agricultural technologies among farmers (measured by DLI 4) and as a result to yield increases of crop
production.
The ToC for Objective 1 is sound and in line with the sector’s notion that the provision of productive
infrastructure (e.g. irrigation) and knowledge transfer of improved practices (e.g. erosion measures,
agricultural technologies) would lead to a strengthening of producers’ capacity and willingness to adopt
those technologies on their agricultural land to enhance agricultural productivity, i.e. yields. The ultimate
expected impacts of increased yields in the project ToC were increased rural incomes and poverty reduction.
The outputs and outcomes towards the achievement of Objective 1 of the Agriculture PforR are described in
the following:

Outputs (based on ICR Section II.B, Annex 1 and Annex 6)

  • PDO 1: 31 percent (target: 34 percent; baseline: 19 percent) increased agricultural land under
  modernized agricultural technologies
  • DLI 1: 932,604 hectares (target: 919,561 hectares; baseline: 802,292 hectares) of land protected against
  soil erosion with progressive bench terraces and 110,041 hectares (target: 103,918 hectares; baseline:
  46,246 hectares) land protected against soil erosion with radical terraces
  • DLI 2: 48,508 hectares (target: 44,500 hectares; baseline: 27,796 hectares) of land on hillsides and
  marshlands with irrigation according to agreed technical standards
  • DLI 3: 19 megatons of cassava per hectare (target: 19; baseline: 15), 2.8 kilograms of coffee cherries
  per tree per team (target: 2.9; baseline: 2.2), and 6.3 liters cow milk per day (target: 6.2; baseline: 4)
  • DLI 4: 6 enhanced agricultural innovation technologies developed and released (target: 6) and 54.5
  percent (target: 70 percent) of farmers adopting enhanced agricultural innovation technologies
  • 816,791 metric tons (target: 780,000 metric tons; baseline: 503,000 metric tons) of increased milk
  production
  • 23 percent (target: 23 percent; baseline: 20 percent) of households with acceptable levels of food
  consumption


Outcomes (based on ICR Section II.B, Annex 1 and Annex 6)
Technology Generation, Extension and Adoption. The Agriculture PforR focused on modernizing
Rwanda’s agricultural research system to address gaps in research‐extension linkages that affected the
adoption of improved technologies among farmers and to be more market-oriented. For that, it supported
research to develop quality seed and planting material for traditional and nontraditional crops, trials on farm
fields, market-related research on key commodities, and the development of a system for competitive
research funding and a strategy to secure long-term funding support (PAD, page 41, para 11). The ICR does
not provide details on specific research- and extension-related activities, but the related results indicators
capture that the target of innovation technologies developed and released was met (DLI 4). The Project also
supported the dissemination of those technologies among farmers through extension services to stimulate
technology adoption. At project completion, the land area under modernized agricultural technologies (PDO
1) and the adoption rate among farmers (DLI 4) were slightly below their respective target but had been on a


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



    continuously increasing trend throughout project implementation. Nevertheless, the ICR highlighted that
    Rwanda’s agriculture sector continues to suffer from “severe underinvestment in agricultural research” (ICR,
    para 83), that the actual expenditures of PSTA 3 for research were only a mere tenth of its budget of 7.2
    percent (ICR, footnote 68), and that more expenditures in the area are needed for the sector to stay
    competitive and resilient to population density and climate change.
    Production Intensification and Increased Productivity. Key areas of engagement of the Agriculture PforR
    were the investment in two key production intensification measures: soil erosion protection of agricultural
    land and irrigation infrastructure. The ICR reported that all related targets on those measures were
    surpassed at project completion (DLI 1 and 2). No evidence was presented on the maintenance of those
    practices and/or infrastructure of those measures. Yet, immediate faults with terraces or newly installed
    irrigation systems are considered unlikely and the ICR mentioned related training activities and monitoring of
    rural infrastructure (ICR, paras 11 and 29). Regarding productivity, the ICR rightfully acknowledges the
    limitations of PDO indicator 1 on increased agricultural land under modernized agricultural technologies as a
    single measure and added the results of the productivity related DLIs of 1-4. Most relevant and directly
    related to the PDO of increased productivity, the ICR reported DLI 3’s yield increases -a standard measure
    of agricultural productivity- for the three commodities that were selected as key in Rwanda’s agriculture
    sector: cassava (key staple food), coffee (most important export crop) and milk (dairy as largest subsector of
    livestock and strategic for food security). The productivity targets for all three commodities were met or
    surpassed at project completion. This is strong evidence for the achievement of Objective 1, complemented
    with the fact that average national yields for those commodities had been on an increasing trend since
    project start (ICR, page 10 Table 2). As the Agriculture PforR/PSTA 3 operated at national scale, challenging
    attribution is difficult as it is not possible to obtain counterfactual evidence related to other factors.
    Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the ICR provided evidence (paras 28 to 30) that the
    project activities contributed to the intensified and increased productivity of the Rwandan agricultural and
    livestock sectors for selected commodities. Hence, the efficacy of this outcome for Objective 1 is rated
    Substantial.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Expanded development of value chains

    Rationale
    Theory of Change. The Theory of Change (ToC) behind of Objective 2 relates to the activities of the
    Agriculture PforR Results Area 2 “research, technology transfer and organization of farmers” and Results
    Area 3 “private sector-driven value chain development” (ICR, para 11 and Figure 1). Under the former, the
    key input was capacity development for farmer organizations and cooperatives. This was expected to lead to
    better performance of the agricultural services for farmers and stronger entrepreneurial skills for more
    “effective engagement in input and output markets” (ICR, page 46) and hence value chain development.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



The inputs of Results Area 3 relevant to Objective 2 were two-fold: on the one hand, training of savings and
credit cooperatives (SACCOs), which was expected to increase their capacity and as a result to increases in
agricultural finance lending (measured by DLI 5), which was assumed to support value chain development.
On the other hand, investments in marketing infrastructure such as agricultural storage, processing facilities
and roads was expected to improve product quality and enhance farmers’ access to markets for better value
chain development.
The ToC for Objective 2 is logical. However, the related DLIs are not comprehensive, as they’re heavily
focused on an increase in agri-finance and approved policies. No measures for farmers’ market integration
are captured (e.g. expansion to new buyers or markets, more efficient interaction of value chain actors).
Outputs (based on ICR Section II.B, Annex 1 and Annex 6)

  •  PDO 2: 44.7 percent (target: 25 percent; baseline: 22 percent) increased exports of export commodities
  (coffee, team, pyrethrum and horticulture)
  • USD516 million (target: USD309 million; baseline: USD132 million) increased value (total production and
  exports) of major competitive value chains
  • DLI 5: USD6.8 million (target: USD7.6 million; baseline: 3.6 million) agricultural finance lending for
  farmers and agricultural enterprises; 66.5 percent (target: 75 percent; baseline: 65 percent) increased agri-
  finance lending
  • USD774.5 million (target: USD730 million; baseline: USD513 million) of private sector investments in
  agriculture sector
  • 23 percent (target: 25 percent; baseline 28 percent) of agricultural production marketed
  • 54 percent (target: 35 percent) of cooperatives/farmers’ organizations which are graded Category A and
  42 percent Category B in the Rwanda Cooperative Agency’s classification system for capacities and
  performance of cooperatives (Grade A is the highest level of performance)


Outcomes (based on ICR Section II.B, Annex 1 and Annex 6)
Increased Exports and Marketed Agricultural Production. The PAD formulated the key measure for
Objective 2 as PDO Indicator 2 on the “percentage increase in value of agricultural export commodities”,
which referred to the annual percentage change in value of Rwanda’s agricultural export commodities
coffee, tea, pyrethrum and horticulture (PAD, page 58). The end-of-project value of PDO Indicator 2 is
largely surpassed in the final year of project implementation. However, the ICR critically discussed the use of
PDO indicator 2 due to its susceptibility to external factors like world market prices and added data
supporting this argument (ICR, para 31 and Table 4). This is in line with IEG’s assessment on the limitations
of PDO indicator 2. The ICR expands its analysis by including achievements of various other project results
indicators, including on the “percentage of agricultural production marketed”. This is relevant, although the
indicator falls slightly short of its target. Nevertheless, the ICR did not present evidence on better functioning
of agricultural value chains, such as the expansion to new buyers or markets in specific sub-sectors or more
efficient interaction of the different value chain actors. Too much emphasis is made of assumptions relating
to changes with broad application to the market, rather on specific changes related to the PFORR reforms.
Enhanced Agricultural Finance Lending and Private Investments. The ICR evidence on exports and
marketed agricultural commodities was complemented by the results from DLI 5 on “increases in agricultural


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



    finance lending” and the results indicator on “increased private investments”. The former had been
    increasing continuously during project implementation and in 2015 surpassed the end-of year target.
    However, in the final year agri-finance lending dropped and the target was not achieved. The ICR did not
    include any qualitative information on the inclusiveness of the support to agri-finance lending, such as for
    smallholder producers. Private investments in the agriculture sector increased significantly during project
    implementation, surpassing the respective indicator target. The ICR did not provide an explanation for this
    increase but referred to the Technical Assessment pointing out that at appraisal that “investments into
    irrigation, soil fertility, and technology are financially and economically highly attractive” (ICR, para 6). Also,
    the activities related to Results Area 4 aiming to improve the sector’s policy and business environment might
    be considered to have contributed to this development. Thus, the story is incomplete.
    Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the ICR provided evidence (paras 31 to 34) that the
    project activities contributed to enhanced agri-finance lending and marketing of agricultural products.
    However, the evidence for value chain development is limited and reliant on indicators that are influenced by
    exogenous factors. Hence, the efficacy of this outcome for Objective 2 is rated Modest.


    Rating
   Modest
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Institutional capacity building

    Rationale
    One of the objectives of PforR Programs is to strengthen a countries’ institutional capacity, even if it is not
    explicit in the PDO statement. It is therefore important to assess if and how improved institutional capacity,
    systems, and procedures contributed to improved Program efficacy. In line with this, the ICR of the
    Agriculture PforR included an assessment on the “implicit objective” of improved institutional capacity and
    program systems (ICR, paras 35 to 38).
    Theory of Change. The Theory of Change and results framework of the Agriculture PforR included activities
    related to institutional capacity building. In particular, key activities of Results Area 4 were the development
    and approval of agricultural policies (measured by DLIs 7 and 8), that were expected to enhance the
    agricultural policy and business environment in Rwanda, which was assumed to enhance policy making and
    positively stimulate the sector’s value chain development. These activities were complemented by the
    development of a modern Monitoring Information System to enhance performance monitoring and lead to
    more results-focused decision-making processes within sector institutions.
    Outputs (based on ICR Section II.B, Annex 1 and Annex 6)

        • DLI 8: Updated National Agricultural Policy 2016 approved by ASWG with supporting implementation
        plan (target achieved)




                                                                                                           Page 9 of 17
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



                  • DLI 7: Agricultural policy reforms are implemented: Seeds, Fertilizer and Agricultural Finance policies
                  and Action Plan prepared and implemented (target achieved).
                  • DLI 6: Updated gender-sensitive management information system for the agricultural sector developed
                  and implemented, functional in 30 Districts and producing regular reports (target achieved)
                  • Enhanced results-focused institutional capacity development: Action Plan of MINAGRI and Districts
                  Action Plans fully operational (target achieved); Districts’ Strategies pending formal approval (target: fully
                  operational)
                  • 91 percent increase (target: 93 percent increase) of women’s empowerment in the Agriculture Index for
                  Rwanda


             Outcomes (based on ICR Section II.B, Annex 1 and Annex 6)
             Updated/New Sector Policies and Increased Institutional Capacity. The Agriculture PforR supported
             several activities with the objective to strengthen institutional capacity, based on organizational reviews
             conducted before and during the Agriculture PforR implementation (ICR, par 57). The development/updating
             of the National Agricultural Policy and three sector policies were key milestones in this and form an important
             framework for sector growth and private sector engagement (ICR, para 82), and therefore contributing also
             to Objective 2 on value chain development. Furthermore, the Program Action Plan of the Agriculture PforR
             included numerous actions related to strengthening fiduciary, environmental and social systems, evolving
             public sector institutional roles and capacities. While there were significant delays in some of those actions,
             they were all finalized at project completion (ICR, para 36 and 38). As examples, the ICR highlighted the
             progress in the restructuring of the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB)
             and the National Agriculture Export Development Board (NAEB) to enhance country capacity (ICR, para 36)
             or the development and implementation of the eProcurement System (ICR, para 37). While measured only
             as an output in DLI 6, the use of the project-supported MIS is described as having “enabled the government
             (MINAGRI) to do “corrective actions” during PforR/PSTA 3 implementation, including on budget allocations
             to DLIs, based on a more comprehensive and timely understanding of sectoral developments” (ICR, para
             37).
             Despite these advances in institutional capacity, the ICR pointed out to analytical reports that revealed
             remaining shortcomings, such as the need for continuous capacity building on technical, safeguards and
             fiduciary aspects in particular in the Rwanda Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (ICR,
             para 38). These were taken into account in the design of the follow-on Agriculture PforR2, demonstrating
             continuity in the tackling of institutional needs in Rwanda’s agriculture sector.
             Summary. Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the ICR provided evidence (paras 35 to 38) that the
             project activities contributed to enhanced institutional and systems capacity at different levels. Hence, the
             efficacy of this outcome for Objective 3 is rated Substantial.


             Rating
     Substantial
    PHREVDELTBL

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale
                                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 ---
PHREVISEDTBL



  5. Efficiency

    ---



  Efficiency Rating
  ---


  a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
    and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                             Rate Available?        Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                           0
    Appraisal                                                       0
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                           0
    ICR Estimate                                                    0
                                                                                           Not Applicable

  * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


  6. Outcome

  The relevance of objectives was High, given the strong alignment of the Agriculture PforR with the government
  and Bank strategies, the continued World Bank engagement in Rwanda’s agriculture sector, and the adequacy
  of the PforR instrument. Relevance of the DLIs was rated Substantial, given that the overall mix of DLIs reflects
  reform-orientation and institutional change, despite some DLIs focusing on achievements at the output level.
  Hence, overall Relevance was rated Substantial. Efficacy of Objective 1 to increase and intensify productivity of
  the Rwandan agricultural and livestock sectors- was rated Substantial, as most targeted project outcomes were
  achieved and some exceeded at project completion and the ICR provided plausible evidence. The achievement
  of Objective 2 to expand the development of the value chain was rated Modest given insufficient outcome
  evidence. Efficacy of Objective 3 to build institutional capacity was rated Substantial, based on the ICR
  evidence presented related to enhanced capacity of institutions, policies and systems at different levels. As a
  result, the combined efficacy rating was Substantial. Therefore, the Outcome rating for the Agriculture PforR
  was rated as Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                         Page 11 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Climate Change/Environmental risk. Rwanda is increasingly exposed to environmental changes, in particular
droughts, which could undermine the accomplishments of soil protection and productivity.
Market risk. In Rwanda’s pursuit to promote agricultural value chains, there is a continuous risk of fluctuating
export prices. This can adversely affect the sector agents at all levels (from agribusiness to smallholder producer)
and private sector development in export-oriented crop production.
Infrastructure Sustainability risk. Project-supported infrastructure such as irrigation systems or roads require
sufficient financial and human resources for effective operation and maintenance to ensure improved productivity
levels. The ICR reveals that resource limitations for operation and maintenance remain, which can negatively
affect agricultural production and productivity.
Research Capacity risk. As mentioned under Efficacy for Objective 1, there is severe underinvestment in
agricultural research, which can jeopardize the competitiveness of the Rwandan agricultural sector and related
value chains.
Institutional risk. The national government remains highly committed to the PSTA program and the fourth phase
is currently under implementation, with support from a World Bank-supported Agriculture PforR2. However,
during the Agriculture PforR implementation several issues regarding service delivery and auditing of the Rwanda
Agriculture and Animal Resources Development Board (RAB) occurred. The ICR stated that the ongoing
Agriculture PforR2 is “addressing this risk proactively and elevated further restructuring of RAB to the PDO level”
(ICR, para 36).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The Agriculture PforR was the first agriculture operation using the PforR lending instrument. This
     instrument was appropriate, given that this was the third phase of the government program, whose
     previous phases had been supported by IPF operations. The design of the Agriculture PforR
     incorporated lessons from the first two phases of the government program, such as supporting the
     expansion of the private sector role, pursuing low-cost irrigation options for high-value hillside crops, and
     strengthening the use and effectiveness of a sector-oriented M&E system (PAD, para 22). Also, the
     government commitment was demonstrated by its contribution of US$300 million (25 percent of the
     Agriculture PforR costs).
     An Integrated Risk Assessment and Program Action Plan (PAP) were prepared at preparation based on
     the findings of the Technical Assessment, the Fiduciary Systems Assessment and the Environmental and
     Social Systems Assessment (ICR, para 6). Several risks were identified at appraisal and assessed to be
     moderate (ICR, para 99), and associated mitigation measures were incorporated at design. Overall
     program risk was rated as Moderate at appraisal (PAD, para 101). The arrangements made at appraisal
     for M&E environmental and social safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate.

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



  However, the ICR rightly points out that a shortcoming of the Technical Assessment at appraisal was that
  the risk of private sector development and consequent feasible outcomes had been underestimated,
  given the nascent stage of the private sector at the time (ICR, paras 43 and 73). Further, the capacity of
  RAB and the Districts, whose responsibilities increased significantly compared to the PSTA2, was
  overestimated (ICR, para 74), which was demonstrated by the implementation challenges related to
  RAB. The PforR instrument was not exploited as it might have been to better stimulate a government
  response to private sector development. DLIs oriented to this goal would have amplified the potential
  impact.
  The implementation arrangements were similar to the IPF supporting the predecessor PSTA2, with the
  Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) responsible for overall coordination and two
  semiautonomous implementing agencies (the Rwanda Agriculture Board and National Agricultural Export
  Board), three Single Project Implementation Units that implement donor-supported projects and 30
  Districts for local program implementation.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  Given the novelty of the PforR instrument for both the Bank task team and the client, the Bank task team
  adopted a flexible approach and put emphasis on being responsive to emerging issues and needs, such
  as the restructuring or the Additional Financing (ICR, paras 76 and 77). The task team was proactive and
  benefited from its good relations with the GoR and development partners to create additional activities
  related to the Agriculture PforR work, such as the addition of the NAP as a DLI or the development of an
  Agriculture Public Expenditure Review for Rwanda (ICR, para 76).
  Supervision implementation support was generally adequate in terms of a qualified supervision team and
  missions. However, delays in numerous PAP actions were addressed late, like the actions to address
  delays in the private sector development activities (ICR, paras 38 and 78). The supervision did not utilize
  the PforR instrument to the full potential to stimulate a timelier government response to those delays and
  broader reform, which would have increased the potential impact of the program. Respective lessons on
  private sector development and the DLI verification process were incorporated into the design of the
  ongoing Agriculture PforR2 (ICR, para 80).


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)




a. M&E Design
  The PDO of the Agriculture PforR was clearly defined. The Theory of Change behind the Results
  Framework and DLIs was clear for Objective 1 (productivity increase) but fell short of a logical result
  change for Objective 2 (value chain development). The PDO indicators were inadequate and the
  related DLIs were a mix of mostly output and outcome measures, and their clustering to respective
  Results Areas partially balanced them out (see Relevance of DLIs). For the implicit Objective 3
  (institutional capacity-building) related to Results Area 4, a DLI to incentivize the use of M&E results in
  policy decision-making could have been considered. Also, the alignment of some KPIs (e.g. on women
  empowerment and food security) are not clearly framed in the ToC.
  MINAGRI was responsible for M&E at the national level and the implementing agencies (the Rwanda
  Agriculture Board and National Agricultural Export Board, three Single Project Implementation Units) at
  the subnational level (PAD, para 70).



b. M&E Implementation
  Results Indicators were regularly measured and reported. M&E implementation revealed that the
  harmonization between national and subnational M&E data required further work (ICR, para 67). The
  development of the MIS (DLI 6) is a key milestone to strengthen M&E capacity in Rwanda’s agriculture
  sector. However, its use for results-based policymaking is still to be seen.
  The DLI verification protocol outlined in the PAD was clear and robust. The ICR highlighted related
  challenges of insufficient budget and human resource capacity for the verification process, also because it is
  not a core mandate of the PMO (ICR, para 48). The Bank team incorporated lessons from the DLI verification
  protocol and modified its design in the PforR2 (ICR, 79).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used as a decision tool during implementation and for disbursing against the DLIs during
  implementation (ICR, para 68). The ICR highlighted that the M&E results were incorporated in the design of
  the PforR2, in particular for a better-defined focus on private sector development (ICR, para 68).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The Agriculture PforR activities included civil works, capacity-building and policy reforms. The environmental
  impact of PforR program interventions like the construction of irrigation systems, agricultural storage,
  processing facilities and roads were expected to be minor (PAD, para 93). The PAD noted that there were no


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



  expected significant adverse impacts on the environment or affected people and the overall environmental
  and social risks were rated Moderate (PAD, para 93). Also, the Environmental and Social Systems
  Assessment at appraisal concluded that MINAGRI’s environmental and social systems’ policies and
  procedures were adequate (PAD, para 94). However, it highlighted potential shortcomings in terms of lacking
  “human and financial resources, especially for coordination and monitoring of activities at the local level”
  (PAD, para 94). This is something that continued to be an issue at closing, as the ICR stated that
  “continuous capacity development of front-line staff on technical, safeguards and fiduciary aspects is
  needed” (ICR, para 38).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary management. A fiduciary (financial management and procurement) assessment conducted at
  appraisal, concluded that the arrangements were satisfactory and of moderate risk (PAD, para 52), based on
  13 years of experience in implementing World-Bank supported operations (PAD, para 23). The areas of
  improvement in fiduciary aspects were largely at District level and the PAP included 14 out of 25 actions
  related to fiduciary aspects, which were all concluded at program closing (ICR, para 71). The ICR reported
  that fiduciary arrangements were compliant with World Bank Policy/PforR Directive (ICR, para 71). One
  issue highlighted in the ICR were the unqualified audit options on RAB and the need for continued reform
  during the Agriculture PforR 2.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                          IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                  Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory   ---
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                   While there were limitations in
                                                                                   the framework and some key
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Substantial
                                                                                   data was not collected, there
                                                                                   were efforts to use the data

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)



                                                                                  collected and institute
                                                                                  improved practices.
Quality of ICR                                         High                       ---

12. Lessons

 The following lessons are drawn from the ICR with some adjustments in language:
A phased approach from a set of IPF projects to a PforR program can allow for country systems to
adapt more effectively and ensure effective M&E. Moving from the IPF to the PforR instrument also
challenges the capacity of client countries and raises the bar on what is expected in a set of interventions over
time. Hence, a geographically or thematically narrower and less complex scope for the “initial PforR” would
allow institutions and systems to adapt over time and strengthen the preparation for highly relevant PforR-
related processes, such as the M&E system and DLI verification process. A phased PforR approach could
acknowledge increased capacities and gradually expand coverage over time.
PforR programs should identify and focus on those activities within typically complex government
programs that can incentivize reform. PforR operations often horizontally support large and complex
government programs and attributing outcomes to specific PforR-supported activities is difficult. Hence,
designing a clear PDO and logical Theory of Change is key to understand which activities were the triggers for
reform processes oriented towards PDO achievement. Or else, the PforR risks “going unnoticed” in the
government program without clear means to steer the direction towards its PDO.
The M&E system and DLI verification requires a transparent and robust criteria-based process. The DLI
verification is a key aspect of PforR programs, both for disbursements and credibility of the instrument. It allows
for improving the accountability and transparency of the government. To ensure that, the process could:

  • involve a verifying entity which has the mandate, capacity and experience to conduct verification of
  development programs
  • be transparent by detailing the methodology for the reported status of the DLIs
  • recognize and incorporate qualitative material in telling the performance story
  • allocate adequate staff time and financial resources.


PforR programs can be a catalyst for donor coordination in supporting government programs. The
generally larger PforR programs can facilitate better coordination among development partners to develop a
common approach in alignment with government priorities. Such harmonization of donor support towards a
government program can be a welcome and efficiently approach for client countries.


13. Assessment Recommended?

Yes

Please explain
First Agriculture PforR program of World Bank.


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RW: Transform of Agric. Sect. Prg Phase3 (P148927)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-structured according to guidelines. It was comprehensive yet concise and internally
consistent for a complex program. The logic of the program was explained well in the ex-post Theory of
Change and its coherence with the previous phases of interventions well presented. The ICR provides the
reader with a good technical understanding and rationale of the program activities. Moreover, the ICR
candidly identifies and discusses weaknesses, such as the selection of some PDO indicators/DLIs and
draws on secondary evidence to underline its conclusions.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   High




                                                                                               Page 17 of 17
