     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022389

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P123399                                   Niger Safety Net Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                     Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49200,IDA-D1130,TF-A2304             30-Jun-2017                                         93,953,042.18

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 19-May-2011                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                   8,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            98,992,629.58                                   8,498,601.59

 Actual                                        93,953,042.18                                   8,498,601.59




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg            Joy Maria Behrens              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as set out on page 5 of the Financing Agreement and page 4 of
   the Project Appraisal Document was to establish and support an effective safety net system which will
   increase access of poor and food insecure people to cash transfer and cash for work programs.




                                                                                                Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



   The PDO was revised in February 2012 to read as follows: to establish and support an effective and adaptive
   safety net system that will increase access of poor and vulnerable people to cash transfer and cash for work
   programs.

   The ICR undertook a split evaluation of the project. The ICRR does not. Drawing on the PDO and original
   outcome indicators, the intended outcome appears to be “increased access…to programs” by means of
   establishing safety nets (the output). The new outcome indicators, introduced with the adaptive system, seem
   to indicate that the establishment of safety nets was the outcome. The ICRR is adopting the original
   interpretation and assesses Efficacy on the basis of the following reformulation of the objective:

   “increasing access of poor and vulnerable people to adaptable cash transfer and cash for work programs.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Apr-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   Component 1: Establishing a safety net system for delivering cash transfers and implementing cash for
   work programs (estimated cost at appraisal US$ 3.20 million; actual cost US$5.19 million). Building on
   lessons learned from piloting that preceded the project, the component was to build a national safety net
   system including a management information system, targeting and payment systems, and monitoring and
   evaluation systems, as well as necessary capacity building to operate the systems.

   Component 2: Provision of cash transfers for food security (estimated cost at appraisal US$48.60
   million; actual cost US$59.18 million). The component included cash transfers and accompanying measures
   to increase incomes and human capital among an estimated 80,000 poor and food insecure households in
   the five poorest regions of Niger (95 percent of poor households in the country). It included three sub-
   components to allow a gradual run-in and scale-up of the cash transfer system:

   Sub-component 2.1 (starting phase): the provision of cash transfers to approximately 10,000 beneficiaries
   in two of the poorest regions (Dosso, Maradi).

   Sub-component 2.2 (expansion phase): based on a positive assessment of the implementation of the cash
   transfer system during starting phase, expansion to scale in all five regions.



                                                                                                 Page 2 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



Sub-component 2.3 (accompanying measures): awareness campaigns and training modules in eight
essential family practice activities (health, nutrition, sanitation) conditional on receiving the cash benefit. The
accompanying measures had been developed in collaboration with the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), who had field-tested them and found that they had led to significant improvements in child
health. They were to be implemented by non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

Component 3: Cash for work (estimated cost at appraisal US$10.50 million; actual cost
US$17.68 million). The component was to provide short-term income support to an estimated 60,000
individuals participating in labor-intensive public works schemes. The schemes were to be targeted at areas
experiencing temporary acute food insecurity. The project was to finance wages as well as non-wage
costs, and work was to be overseen by NGOs.



Component 4: Project management (estimated cost at appraisal US$7.70 million; actual cost
US$11.89 million). This component was to finance all costs related to the management of the project.



Significant changes during implementation

The project underwent three restructurings and included one case of Additional Financing:

A first restructuring was undertaken in February 2012. Project funds of US$ 1.19 million were reallocated to
sub-component 2.1 to deal with additional demand for cash transfers that arose from crop failures and
workers returning from Libya and Cote d’Ivoire. The number of potential beneficiaries increased from the
original 10,000 to 12,500.

Additional financing in the form of an IDA grant of US$ 22.5 million was provided in March 2016,
accompanied by US$8.5 million in trust fund resources from the Sahel Adaptive Social Protection Program
(SASPP) to support adjustments to the project. The PDO was revised to include a scalable, adaptive safety
net for times of crisis; and the revised project also supported the expansion of project coverage to
three more regions, becoming nationwide.

Two further restructurings in March 2018 and May 2019 extended the closing date of the project, mainly to
ensure a smooth transition from the Safety Net Project to a new Second Adaptive Safety Net Project that
became effective in May 2019.



Other changes

With the introduction of the additional financing and the revised PDO, the project name was changed to
“Adaptive Safety Net Project." and the names of components 1 to 3 were similarly revised to add clarity,
albeit without significantly changing the substance of the project or its components.

A new sub-component 2.2a was added at that time: “productive measures to support the promotion of
resilient livelihood." It was to include such measures as strengthening the operation of community savings
program activities through trainings on financial education, provision of small grants to test alternative

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



                       livelihood options with high income generating potential, linking of beneficiaries with access to microfinance
                       or banks to gain access to credit, and support to improve agricultural productivity through partnership with
                       the Bank-funded Climate Smart Agriculture Program.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                       Project cost. At appraisal, total project cost was estimated at US$70.00 million. Actual project cost at
                       closing was US$93.94 million.

                       Financing. The project was financed by two IDA credits totaling US$92.5 million (US$70.0 million and
                       US$22.5 million, respectively) and an SASPP Trust Fund contribution of US$8.5 million. A total of US$84.86
                       million (US$62.9 million and US$22.5 million, respectively) of the IDA funds were disbursed. The full
                       amount of the trust fund was disbursed. Total disbursements added up to US$93.94 million.

                       Dates. The project was approved on May 19, 2011 and became effective on October 11, 2011. The original
                       closing date, June 30, 2017 was postponed once to December 31, 2019, at which time the
                       project closed. The additional financing – the second IDA credit of US22.5 million – was approved on April
                       7, 2016 and closed on June 30, 2019 fully disbursed. The trust fund was approved at the same time and
                       closed on June 30, 2018 fully disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The original and revised PDOs were relevant to the country situation, government policy and Bank strategy.
Niger is one of the poorest countries in the world, characterized by widespread poverty, food insecurity, and
malnutrition due to a hostile climatic environment (the country is located along the edge of the Sahara
desert) and the absence of sustainable safety nets to alleviate poverty and build resilience among the
population against external shocks. The project built on Niger’s national social protection policy (2011) and
its strategy for food security (2012), and was aligned with its economic and social development plan (2017-
2021) and its focus on setting up a permanent safety net system to replace the largely ad hoc emergency
programs focused on addressing short term acute crises. The project is consistent with the ongoing policy
dialogue between the Bank and Niger reflected in the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
FY2018 to FY2022. Following the Systematic Country Diagnostic of 2017 that set out core constraints to
reducing poverty and improving shared prosperity by 2030, including social transfers as a means of not only
coping, but also building resilience, the CPF includes social protection among its three focus areas, and it
continues to support the further development of an adaptive safety net system as well as measures to
address socio-economic aspects of displacement. While the project was introducing an institutionally
challenging safety net system, it was, with capacity building, in most instances appropriately scaled. The
addition of the adaptive mechanism, introduced in mid-stream and appropriately supporting the objectives
of the project, would not, however, be completed within the project time frame (see Section 4).


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Increasing access of poor and vulnerable people to adaptable cash transfer and cash for work programs

                Rationale
                The objective was to be achieved by establishing and implementing an adaptable safety net system that
                could deliver cash to targeted beneficiaries, either for work (community micro-projects) or accompanied by
                other measures that would strengthen their resilience. “Other measures” included accompanying measures
                that encouraged income generating and productive activities, or provision of advice on family health, nutrition,
                and sanitation; and support to households in coping with climate change shocks and disasters, mainly by
                scaling cash assistance to the affected households. The latter mechanism – climate change and disaster
                relief - was expected to be fully in place only under a second Adaptable Safety Net Project (P166602).



                Outputs

                Most of the core elements of an adaptable safety net system were put in place and were operational at the
                time of the ICR:

                      i. a targeting system, including intake, registration and selection of beneficiaries and based on proxy
                           means-testing (PMT) and community validation:
                     ii.   a payment mechanism using established micro-finance institutions and mobile phone companies to
                           deliver payments to beneficiaries;
                    iii.   grievance mechanisms;
                    iv.    a monitoring and evaluation function to assess the performance of the delivery system; and
                     v.    a dedicated management structure, including a management information system to help manage the
                           data base of all potential and actual beneficiaries and monitor all processes relating to targeting,
                           registering, and payment.

                Work was underway towards finalizing the crisis mechanism (the adaptable component) that, once fully in
                place, was expected to further strengthen the adaptability of the safety net and the resilience of beneficiaries
                to a variety of shocks, including climate and disaster ones; and on developing a unified social registry to
                combine multiple user programs.

                The family health-related accompanying measures had already for some time been tested in the field by
                UNICEF, and evaluations had indicated that trainings and sensitization programs were leading to
                improvements in child health. Linkages with early disaster warning systems were under development and


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



once in place were expected to further strengthen the adaptability of the safety net to a variety of shocks,
including climate and disaster ones. This is expected to be finalized under a new, second Safety Net Project
(P166602).

Based on a composite indicator that assessed the adequacy of institutions and staff introduced into the safety
net system, as well as the functioning of the core elements of the system, the ICR determined that “the key
systems required for a well-functioning national safety net program were set up." Targets set for key
indicators were being met (see Outcomes), which would indicate that the components were operating as
expected. Implementation is being monitored and periodically evaluated, including through field audits, and
elements will be adjusted as necessary.

In addition to regular project monitoring, larger-scale evaluations (two impact evaluations and a mid-term
review) have documented the effectiveness of the project in facilitating household savings and investment
activities, promoting parenting practices, and in targeting performance, i.e. building people’s resilience and
human development. In particular, they have underlined the value of combining cash transfers with
community outreach as means of improving children’s health, nutrition and cognitive development; and with
productive inclusion (training and accompaniment) as a means of economic diversification and income
generation, including women’s empowerment.



Outcomes

Achievement of project outcomes was observed using the following key indicators:

A total of 149,000 households (or some 1 million individuals, assuming an average household size of seven)
had access to the cash transfers compared to an original target of 126,500 households as the cash transfer
component increased. The targeting approach (PMT and community validation) proved effective in targeting
the poor: a household targeting evaluation found that 83 percent of beneficiary households were classified as
chronically poor. A subsequent World Bank-initiated study found that PMT was more effective than other
methods in identifying chronically poor households.

Of the 149,000 households, 87,000 households participated in one or more accompanying measures
compared to a target of 107,000 as security considerations and cultural factors relating to child rearing limited
participation Cultural considerations were somewhat mitigated by participants being able to select among
several maternal and child health-related interventions and consequently participation in accompanying
measures was able to exceed the end target of 90 percent, reaching 93 percent coverage.

An evaluation of the impact of accompanying measures indicated that exposure to accompanying measures
(by means of community meetings, group discussions and home visits) was likely to yield positive behavioral
changes in instances where mothers who actively participated were more likely to adopt preventative health
practices. Exposure to preventive health practices did not, however, appear to show up as positive growth or
cognitive development effects. The ICR plausibly assumed that to appear, such effects may require
significantly longer exposure to accompanying measures.

An impact evaluation of the effects of cash transfers on resilience of beneficiary households carried out prior
to the introduction of adaptive approaches under the revised project indicated that cash transfers can on their
own mitigate the effect of shocks, as recipients are more likely to use savings mechanisms and diversify

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



                            economic activity than non-recipients. This result appears to confirm findings in other countries that safety
                            nets, adaptive or not, can help improve resilience.

                            A total of 50,256 households benefited from cash for work activities, exceeding the target of 30,000. These
                            activities generated 3.4 million days of temporary work, or 94 percent of the target. The shortfall reflected
                            absences and in some instances insufficient availability of workers.

                            As part of cash for work activities, the project rehabilitated 579 community-level infrastructures (micro-
                            projects) compared to a target of 600. All 579 micro-projects were operational at project closing.

                            Building on the disaster risk financing mechanism, the safety net system was able to scale up in response to
                            shocks, benefiting some 4,700 exposed households, 94 percent of the targeted households. Each household
                            received monthly transfers of FCFA10,000 for a period of 12 months.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Based on the above outcomes, the project mostly was able to achieve the objective. It established the
                            institutional setting and developed the systems for an effective safety net that successfully covered 83
                            percent of targeted chronically poor households with transfers, in most instances increasing coverage of the
                            chronically poor and vulnerable groups. While there was a shortfall in the number of households benefiting
                            from accompanying measures, largely for external reasons, attendance among participants remained
                            high. Impact evaluations noted the positive effects of cash transfers on household welfare and food security,
                            and in coping with climatic shocks; of accompanying measures on household resilience and human
                            development. Benefits from cash for work activities far exceeded the target for beneficiary households.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD and the ICR analyzed benefits of the cash transfer program and the cash for work program applying
   conventional methods for estimating their economic impact. In both programs, the results reported in the ICR
   exceeded those envisioned in in the PAD. Likewise, ICR results for both programs were in line with international
   experience.



                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)




For cash transfers, drawing on the analysis in the ICR that looks at consumption vs. cost of a productive
inclusion package (a grant plus training), the economic impact of the package exceeded its cost after 18
months; few programs have proven to be cost effective over such a short period of time. In addition, cash
transfers have indirect positive spillover effects on the local economy



The cost effectiveness of the cash for work program outperformed estimates at appraisal and were in line with
international experience. The ICR undertook an analysis of the cash for work program based on how much it
costs to transfer US$1 to the beneficiary population, incorporating three variables: labor intensity, wage targeting
performance, and new wage gain. The resulting cost effectiveness was calculated at 0.52, and the total cost of
transferring US$1 in net wage to a food insecure person at $1.92. Comparable costs range from $1.80
(Ethiopia) to $1.98 (Liberia).



Other considerations also contributed to enhancing efficiency. Close engagement with parliamentary leadership,
including their participation in field missions, broadened the appeal of the project and strengthened political
commitment to the program, facilitating its implementation. Synergy with other projects, notably through the
availability of its database and systems for other interventions, helped lower targeting and implementation costs
for this project as well as other interventions. While the closing date was extended by over two years, this had a
number of benefits: it allowed a phased expansion of coverage, starting with the poorest regions and
progressively expanding nationwide; it resulted in better targeting (including through the timely launching of a
unified social registry), resulting in an ICR-estimated 83 percent of participants being poor compared to 87
percent in Ethiopia and between 74 and 86 percent in Liberia; and it allowed the introduction of flexibility into the
safety net to better cope with the impact of climate risk and improve the resilience of poor and vulnerable
people. Administrative costs remained moderate at some 10 percent of lending.



At the same time, the project faced challenges that moderately reduced efficiency: a government decision to
change project coordinator contributed to slowing down implementation, as did occasional delays in cash
payments due to cash shortfall problems.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance was rated high, reflecting that the project was well targeted at priority concerns and largely scaled to
the government’s absorptive capacity. Efficacy was likewise substantial, with minor shortcomings in achieving
set objectives. Efficiency was substantial, in line with results in comparable countries. These ratings are
consistent with minor shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, producing an outcome
rating of satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The PAD rated the overall risk to the development outcome as high, acknowledging risks relating to political
stability due to recent regime change and a fragile security situation; potential imbalances between a weak
institutional framework and a complex project design, i.e. the setting up of cash transfer and cash for work
programs; and the challenges of maintaining the financial sustainability of those programs. While the ICR did
not give a rating for risk post-project, it discusses the risk to the development outcome (Section D) and
notes that these same risks remain, albeit somewhat reduced during implementation. The security situation
remains fragile and may threaten operations on the ground, but the government has remained committed to
the interventions supported by the project. Institution building, including expanded operational capacity,
was completed as planned (and will continue under a second safety net project), raising absorptive capacity
for new technologies. Project outcomes indicate that institutional development has been successful as core
elements of the safety net have been put into place, ranging from targeting, through payment systems to
grievances and management. Fiscal-financial challenges remain and are increased with the COVID-19
pandemic and an increasingly fragile environment; they leave sustainability dependent on donor
support. The latter currently appears to be stable, including with the continued participation of the Bank
through its engagement in the follow-up project and in related community development operations. Still,
despite tangible improvements, the overall risk to the development outcome remains high.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, addressing poverty and vulnerability in Niger by starting the
  process of replacing ad hoc emergency assistance with permanent safety net structures. The introduction
  of an adaptive approach during implementation to deal with environmental shocks would further

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



  strengthen the project’s focus on alleviating poverty and building resilience. The project was consistent
  with the Bank’s ongoing policy dialogue with Niger on food security and safety nets, emphasizing
  technical and financial assistance to set up and operate key programs. Design drew on the Bank’s
  extensive and similar experiences in other sub-Saharan countries, as well as economic and sector work
  in Niger. The latter had examined the main causes of poverty, the relevance of existing safety net
  programs, and the feasibility of different methodologies for building a safety net system. Findings had
  pointed to the need for a regular transfer system and the importance of accompanying measures to
  expand the effects of cash transfers. Close involvement of national stakeholders (which included
  participation in Bank missions and continued during implementation) ensured integration of project
  management into the institutional framework. Likewise, engagement with the main bilateral donors and
  NGOs created a common platform for supporting safety net. A cash transfer pilot fed into the detailed
  design of the project, and the design itself sought complementarities with other Bank interventions,
  including in particular ongoing community action programs. Implementation arrangements centered
  around the Prime Minister’s Office, where a safety net unit was introduced to establish and manage the
  safety net system, giving it a strong profile. M&E arrangements built on a consistent results
  framework. The project logic was in principle straightforward and linked to indicators that allowed
  progress to be monitored and outcomes to be assessed. However, the formulation of the framework
  introduced some uncertainty regarding outcomes and outputs, reflected in the ICR; for example, did the
  project view the establishment of the system as an outcome, or was that determined by the delivery of
  services through that system, or by changes in behavior among the beneficiaries? The project had a
  gender aspect, with women being the recipients of the cash transfers and the main beneficiaries of the
  accompanying measures. While a key gender indicator had been introduced – “female beneficiaries” -- it
  did not point to a specific gender focus beyond the fact that half the recipient household population
  consisted of women. Nonetheless, many of the accompanying measures were oriented towards
  preventive care for women and children, and it would not have been improbable that a clear majority of
  direct beneficiaries were women. The project fell under environmental classification “B." Fiduciary
  compliance was deemed satisfactory (see Section 10 on Other Issues). The risk assessment (risk rating
  “high”) took into account the political and institutional challenges facing the country.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Formal supervision missions were undertaken twice yearly and were complemented by technical
 missions. The missions focused on building institutional capacity and on supervising fiduciary and
 safeguard aspects. Results are reported in Sections 4 and 10. Bank inputs and processes during
 implementation were satisfactory; the Bank fielded an experienced team with extensive knowledge of
 safety net development in general and in Sub-Saharan Africa in particular, and their experience is reflected
 in the progress that was made in setting up a system that largely was able to meet expectations based on
 project outcomes. While a second safety net project has been launched building on the results of this one,
 successful transition is influenced by uncertainties surrounding security concerns. During implementation of
 this project, the supervision team was able to adapt to unexpected situations as they arose: at the technical
 level, by adjusting the project to respond to the unexpected return of migrants from neighboring countries;
 and by introducing an adaptable function to strengthen the productive impact of transfers and help address
 short term environmental shocks. The project adapted to precarious security through remote programming

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



 to monitor activities when access was not possible while also adapting to circumstances when mobility was
 difficult because of insecurity – police escorts, motorbikes, donkeys, etc. Such challenges did make timely
 payment delivery and provision of supporting activities difficult but appear not to have unduly affected
 achievement of output and outcome targets.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR (p. 6) developed a detailed results framework that defined the objectives of the project and links
 between outputs and outcomes. Indicators focused on setting up the safety net and monitoring access to
 the cash transfer systems once the safety net was in place. Longer-term evaluations focused on process
 (the functionality of core components), targeting efficiency, and the impact of the program on behavior
 change such as levels of consumption, nutritional status and food security. A management information
 system allowed for rigorous M&E, including mid-term and end-of-project evaluations to assess progress
 towards the PDO, notably by assessing the impact of the project on beneficiaries, assessing the quality of
 works, and overall project efficiency. The focus of the evaluations was on process to assess the
 effectiveness of project implementation, targeting evaluation and notably the extent of targeting errors, and
 the impact of the project on change in behavior.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring was undertaken by the Bank supervision team in collaboration with the project’s safety net
  unit, originally located in the prime minister’s office and consisting of a steering committee, a technical
  unit, and regional offices. The unit was subsequently introduced as part of a national agency for
  prevention and management of food crises, linking the safety net system to disaster risk management.

  The results monitoring framework pre- and post-AF was mostly implemented as planned, albeit with a
  few challenges. Data collection occurred manually instead of electronically, as had been expected,
  leading to delays in data entry and monitoring, and consequently in the distribution of data for analysis.
  Movement restrictions due to security concerns occasionally delayed the conduct of some project
  activities, notably the timely distribution of benefits.

  Four impact evaluations were carried out – one on targeting effectiveness, one on accompanying
  measures for behavioral change, one on productive inclusion measures, and one on cash transfers for
  resilience. All captured key project achievements. A planned evaluation of cash for work schemes was




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



  not conducted (due to security concerns); it was replaced by a subsequent qualitative review of the cash
  for work component.

  [TTL: why manual data collection – what was the problem?]



c. M&E Utilization
  Monitoring during implementation allowed several improvements to be introduced into the project. These
  included the introduction of adaptability to address crises; scaling up of the cash transfer function; and
  improvements in targeting. The impact of climatic shocks promoted the design of AF by encouraging
  adaptability (scaling) of cash benefits in combination with productive measures to build resilience against
  such shocks. The targeting effectiveness evaluation drew attention to the primacy of PMT as a targeting
  mechanism in the Nigerian environment. An impact evaluation of accompanying measures for
  behavioral change drew attention to the need to engage with health centers in addressing the challenge
  of undernourished children.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as environmental assessment category “B” and triggered two safeguard
   policies: OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement, primarily due to the
   potentially negative, although limited and localized, impact of cash for work projects. An Environmental and
   Social Management Framework was prepared to consider such safeguard measures in implementing cash
   for work micro-projects. A third safeguard policy on Pest Management (OP 4.09) was triggered during the
   additional financing restructuring. It was linked to productive inclusion measures conducted in partnership
   with the Bank’s Climate Smart Agriculture Program. An Integrated Pest Management Plan was prepared to
   ensure the efficient use of pesticides and fertilizers,

   The ICR reported that the project complied with the triggered safeguards policies, and the project
   implementation unit was considered capable of applying and complying with environmental and social
   policies, procedures, and regulations. Performance on environmental safeguards was upgraded from
   moderately satisfactory to satisfactory after the implementation of a set of recommendations formulated in
   the mid-term review in 2016. All micro-projects subject to classification were compliant with the
   environmental and social assessment procedures.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Fiduciary compliance was deemed satisfactory. Both procurement and financial
   management performance were rated "moderately satisfactory" by the supervision mission on the occasion

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



   of the additional financing. Based on the recommendations of the supervision mission, the project
   strengthened fiduciary controls and developed an action plan accordingly. The last audited financial
   statements for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2018 were submitted to the World Bank on time with
   an unqualified audit opinion, and the audit reports were found acceptable to the World Bank.

   Procurement. Procurement activities included contracts to equip and supply consultant services to the
   safety net functions that were being introduced under the project. An initial procurement plan for the first
   18 months of project implementation was updated annually. The ICR notes that procurement was rated
   “moderately satisfactory," as the grievance redress mechanism registered a small number of incidents that
   resulted from insufficient clarity in procedures (concerning referrals, follow-up on complaints, and
   timeliness in addressing complaints). The ICR recommended that the GRM manual be updated to ensure
   a more rigorous application of incident reporting procedures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   With micro-finance institutions being given a key role in payment delivery, financial services spread to
   underserved areas, including services that fell outside the strict limits of the project.



d. Other
   Gender. The role of women as the recipients of the cash transfers was enhanced. They were the main
   beneficiaries of accompanying measures, and their role in community savings and credit activities was
   enhanced, as opportunities for investment in productive assets opened up for them and contributed to their
   economic empowerment.



   Institutional strengthening. The project brought the safety net agenda into the political discourse and
   thereby facilitated the introduction of initiatives for poverty alleviation as a way of building resilience against
   climate effects. Active engagement of parliamentarians in field missions and workshops engendered
   political support. Identification of key social reforms raised the efficiency and effectiveness of public
   spending on safety nets, and drawing attention to adaptive initiatives helped build the framework for
   resiliently addressing climate change.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)



Quality of ICR                    ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are drawn from the ICR:



In a context of recurring shocks, high poverty rates, and limited resources, multi-year
government cash transfers can be effective in mitigating the welfare effects of climatic
shocks and contributing to resilience. In Niger, cash transfers targeting poor households
increased consumption by about 10%, largely benefitting households affected by droughts. Cash
transfers also fostered these households’ resilience by facilitating savings and economic
diversification.



"Cash-plus" programs can yield more cost-effective results for household well-being than
cash-only. The project included measures to improve human development and human capital
outcomes (e.g. child health and nutrition, reproductive health, early child stimulation, etc.) and
promote productive inclusion as integral elements of the cash transfer intervention. Project
evaluations showed that cash-plus can boost investments and diversify off-farm income-generating
activities, leading to significant increases in revenues and profits compared to cash-only. However,
in including "cash-plus" measures, cultural sensitivities may influence take-up. In this case, some
beneficiaries perceived some interventions, notably ones relating to parenting, child development,
and women’s empowerment as foreign to local culture (ICR, para. 38). This points to the need to
focus on better understanding cultural barriers, for instance through participatory research, when
seeking cost-effective results.



The sustainability of cash for work microprojects and their impact on resilience can be
enhanced with participatory planning, securing land tenure, and ensuring an adequate time
span for effective changes to take place. The project introduced a community-based participatory
approach to the design, management, and maintenance of microprojects. Legal documents secured
land tenure and ensured long-term asset utilization. Likewise, cash for work projects were extended
to two years. These measures contributed to sustainability of the public assets created through the
projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Niger Safety Net Project (P123399)




The quality of evidence and the analysis presented in the ICR was satisfactory. It was results-oriented and
presented a coherent theory of change, including the discussion of critical assumptions underlying
it. Distinctions between key concepts – poor/vulnerable, adaptability/resilience -- were well made; on the other
hand, a clearer distinction between outcomes and outputs would have been helpful. Overall, the ICR provided
sufficient evidence to assess the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
