     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022120

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P146294                                    Global Partnership For Education Program

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                       Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18062                                   30-Sep-2018                                           27,161,496.21

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Feb-2015                                30-Sep-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            27,800,000.00                                     27,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             27,800,000.00                                     27,161,496.21

 Actual                                         27,799,550.67                                     27,161,496.21




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Xiaoxiao Peng               Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens                IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) and
   the Grant Agreement (page 6) as follows:

   (i) improve the quality of teaching and learning in early grades of primary school; and (ii) strengthen access
   and equity in primary schools particularly in deprived prefectures.



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



   The project had a level 2 restructuring on June 28, 2018. While the restructuring expanded the scope of
   activities under component 1 and revised related intermediate indicators, including the target of one of them,
   the project achieved both the initial and revised targets. Therefore, this review does not apply a split
   evaluation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the quality of pre-primary and primary education (originally planned cost:
   US$13.8 million; restructuring revised cost: US$15.3 million; actual cost: US$15.3 million). This
   component aimed to improve new curricula and textbooks for grades 1 through 3 and to improve the
   capacity of teachers to teach the new curricula as well as raise awareness of the need to reduce repetition
   rates.

         Sub-component 1.1: New curricula and textbooks, including:
              o for preschool, piloting and finalizing new curricula along with the development of pedagogical
                  material, textbooks, and teachers' guides, and printing of teachers' guides;
               o for grades 1 and 2, implementing curricula and textbooks, and producing and distributing
                  new textbooks and teachers' guides;
               o for grade 3, developing curricula and designing textbooks and teachers' guides; and
               o revising the curriculum of teacher training schools.
         Sub-component 1.2: Teacher training and awareness-raising to reduce repetition, including:
              o in-service training of preschool teachers and public and private grade 1 and 2 primary
                  teachers;
               o assessing teachers' competencies via classroom observations and developing a new teacher
                  training policy to inform future teacher training;
               o awareness-raising to ensure full implementation of a government decree limiting repetitions;
                  and
               o financing equipment and pedagogical materials for teacher training schools and the
                  government agency.
         Sub-component 1.3: School grants and research activities for improving primary education quality,
          including:
               o allocating school grants to preschools and primary schools in 18 deprived prefectures where
                  the girls' primary completion rate was below 70 percent; and



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



               o financing policy research activities on improving primary education quality.

   Component 2: Strengthening access and equity in primary education (originally planned cost:
   US$7.8 million; restructuring revised cost: US$6.7 million; actual cost: US$6.7 million).

         Sub-component 2.1 Construction of schools and boreholes in 18 deprived prefectures where the
          girls’ primary completion rate was below 70 percent.
         Sub-component 2.2. Promoting girls’ schooling in 4 selected prefectures where the girls’ primary
          completion rate was below 40 percent.

   Component 3: Strengthening education service delivery (originally planned cost: US$6.2 million;
   restructuring revised cost: US$5.8 million; actual cost: US$5.8 million).

         Sub-component 3.1 Capacity-building of school-based management committees (COGEPs).
         Sub-component 3.2. Capacity Building of Education ministries, Monitoring and Evaluation and
          Accountability.

   Revision made at June 2018 restructuring: The project reallocated US$1.5 million (US$1.1 million and
   US$0.4 million from Components 2 and 3, respectively) to Component 1 due to significant cost savings from
   exchange rate gains. Component 1 expanded the implementation of curricula and the provision of textbooks
   and teachers' guides to grade 3.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. According to the PAD (page 16) and ICR Datasheet (page 2), the total project cost at
   appraisal was US$ 27.8 million, and that amount was fully disbursed. The project restructuring reallocated
   some funds among activities as noted above.

   Financing. The project was solely financed by a US$ 27.8 million education sector program implementation
   grant from the Global Partnership for Education (GPE).

   Borrower Contribution. There was no contribution from the borrower.

   Dates. A level 2 restructuring was approved on June 28, 2018, with an extension of the project’s closing
   date from September 30, 2018 to September 30, 2019. The one-year extension was for completing both: (1)
   delayed activities such as school construction, student learning assessments, and research activities; and
   (2) activities added to component 1 during restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY17-20, which was in effect at the
project closing in September 2019. Shortcomings in the quality of education in poor and rural areas were

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



               identified as a constraint in the Systematic Country Diagnostic (CPF, page 17). The CPF also noted the
               Bank’s involvement in the education sector, with this project as an example (CPF, page 26). The
               Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF in FY20 presented a strengthened focus on primary
               education with additional planned investments and emphasis on quality of learning, girls’ education, and
               school resilience (PLR, page 9).

               There is a strong linkage between the project’s focus on quality, gender equity, and learning outcomes and
               the country’s education sector plans (PSE) for 2010-20 and 2014-25. The project supports PSE objectives,
               including: (1) in PSE 2010-20, achieving universal primary education by 2020, improving access and quality
               of preschool, and decreasing repetition and increasing retention in primary and secondary schooling; and
               (2) in PSE 2014-25, achieving universal primary education by 2022, focusing on equity and
               inclusion through such mechanisms as support for underprivileged girls, extending coverage of preschool,
               and improving teaching and learning.

               The Bank has provided continued support to basic education in Togo. This project was part 2 of a series of
               Education and Institutional Strengthening Projects (PERI) funded by GPE with the World Bank as the grant
               agent, following the US$4.4 million PERI 1 (P116384) implemented in FY11-15. The TOGO - Improving
               Quality and Equity of Basic Education Project (P172674), jointly funded by the Bank and GPE, is currently
               under preparation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of teaching and learning in early grades of primary schools

                             Rationale
                             With the shift to a competency-based curriculum, the development and provision of new textbooks and
                             teachers’ guides, along with school grants for acquiring learning materials, would improve the content of
                             learning and build a foundation upon which teacher training, assessment, and coaching could improve
                             teachers' knowledge, skills, and deployment, which presumably would help to improve the quality of teaching
                             and learning.

                             Outputs

                             Teaching quality

                                        The project trained 30,902 primary teachers (including head teachers) in the use of the new
                                          curriculum, exceeding the revised target of 29,000.

                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)




      The percentage of CP1 (grade 1) and CP2 (grade 2) teachers using the new curriculum in public
       schools reached the 100% target.
      With financial incentives and electronic tablets provided to school inspectorates by the project, the
       teacher supervision visits per year by inspectors and pedagogical advisers rose from the initial 35% to
       68%, almost reaching the 70% target.
      Defined as the R-squared, or coefficient of determination, between the number of teachers allocated
       to a school and the number of students enrolled in the school, the primary school teachers'
       deployment consistency index measures the extent to which teacher allocation correlates with the
       number of students. This index shifted from 58% to 48.9% and failed to meet the target, neither the
       original 68% nor the revised 65%. The weak progress was related to teacher strikes, especially during
       the 2016-2017 school year.
      The project also provided in-service training to all primary school teachers, including volunteer
       teachers, which supported the government's efforts to incorporate volunteer teachers into the civil
       service.

Learning quality

      2,343,426 new textbooks in math and reading were distributed in CP1, CP2, and CE1 (grade 3),
         exceeding both the initial and revised targets. The initial plan was to distribute 1,188,000 textbooks for
         CP1 and CP2 only. The restructuring expanded the scale of distribution to CE1 and raised the target
         to 1,800,000. The project also developed textbooks and teachers' guides for grade 4 in mathematics
         and reading.
        The indicator "system for learning assessment at the primary level" is an old World Bank core sector
         indicator. Two conditions need to be met for the value to be "yes": (1) the official purpose of the
         assessment is to measure overall student progress toward agreed system learning goals; and (2) the
         assessment is given to a representative sample or census of the target grades or age levels. The
         target was already met at the baseline, as the national learning assessment was conducted in 2013,
         prior to the project's launch.
        The indicator "utility of the learning assessment system" increased in value from 1 to 3, fulfilling the
         target. This indicator provides supplemental value to the indicator above. The value is determined by
         three criteria: (1) data are analyzed, and results are reported to education policymakers and/or the
         public; (2) results are reported for at least one of the following student subgroups: gender, urban/rural,
         geographic region; and (3) the assessment exercise is repeated at least once every five years for the
         same subject area(s) and grade(s). The indicator's value is four if all three criteria are true, three if
         two are true, and two if only one is true, and one if none of them is true. Since the national
         assessment that took place during the project was in 2019, more than five years after the previous
         one was conducted in 2013, we could assume that the project achieved only the first two criteria
         mentioned above.
        The project met the goal of 1,650 public primary schools receiving school grants each year in 18
         covered prefectures since the school year 2014/2015. The target of a related indicator measuring
         effectiveness and efficiency of implementing the grants was also met, with 95.9% of schools
         implementing their budgets in line with initial forecasts, exceeding the 90% target.
        Planned research activities for gaining a deeper understanding of factors that matter for improving
         primary education quality (under subcomponent 1.3) were dropped due to delays (ISR no. 8).

Outcomes


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



Teaching quality

      The percentage of primary teachers rated satisfactory in the use of the new curriculum reached
       75.8%, exceeding the target of 65%. The percentage increased steadily over four rounds of
       assessments conducted in the form of classroom observations.

Learning quality

      The percentage of students in grade 2 (CP2) who attained defined minimum standards on national
       learning assessment tests in reading/writing increased from 28.5% in 2013 to 42.8% in 2019,
       exceeding the 34% target.
      The percentage of students in grade 2 (CP2) who attained defined minimum standards on national
       learning assessment tests in math increased from 36% in 2013 to 46.5% in 2019, exceeding the 41%
       target.

Teaching and learning quality

      The project reported a drop in the repetition rate, an intermediate indicator, from 18.5% in 2013 to
       7.9% in 2019. This achievement did not fully reach the revised target of 7%. The original target, 12%,
       was changed at project restructuring to 7%, making it more ambitious. However, several contextual
       elements suggest that the reduction in repetition rate may have occurred for reasons external to the
       project. In 2013, the government launched a policy that divided primary education into three subcycles
       and prohibited repetition within a subcycle, and the repetition rate decreased significantly afterward.
       Also, a review of project ISRs indicates that the repetition rate fell from the baseline of 18.5% in 2013
       to 9.5% on June 30, 2015, before the project's effectiveness date of July 3, 2015.



This project was not the only intervention that contributed to improving teaching and learning quality.
According to the GPE's Togo country-level evaluation report, during 2014-17, other donors such as Islamic
Development Bank, UNICEF, and Agence Française de Développement also supported Togo's basic
education on improving the quality of teaching and learning with construction, equipment, teacher training,
and local level capacity building.

Despite the attribution issues noted above, this objective's achievement is rated Substantial since the targets
for PDO indicators on teaching quality and learning outcomes were achieved and were, arguably,
convincingly linked to interventions financed under the project.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen access and equity in primary schools particularly in deprived prefectures


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)




                            Rationale
                            In deprived regions, the construction of schools with sanitation facilities, together with specific incentives for
                            girls such as uniforms and sanitary kits, and a community-based approach, would expand school availability
                            and raise local awareness on schooling, especially for girls. These interventions would lead to more children
                            enrolling in primary schools and reduce the gender disparity in school enrollment.

                            Outputs

                                  252 additional classrooms were built or rehabilitated at the primary level, and 480 latrines were
                                    constructed, exceeding targets.
                                  84 communities received at least 4 out of 5 grassroots management training modules planned under
                                   the project for school construction, meeting the target of 80.
                                  All schools that received grants under the project communicated with their communities through brief
                                   meetings, exceeding the 80% target.
                                  179,007 school uniforms were distributed to girls in four deprived prefectures, exceeding the target of
                                   165,000. The project also provided sanitary kits to 13,949 female students.

                            Outcomes

                                  For grade 3 (CE1), the intake rate in 18 deprived prefectures increased from 93% to 109.5% on the
                                   overall level and from 90% to 110.2% for girls, exceeding the 99% and 96% targets. The intake rate
                                   measures the total number of students entering a school level (regardless of age) divided by the total
                                   number of age-appropriate children for that level in the country. Exceeding 100%, as reported in
                                   the ICR, could be caused in part by a high number of over-aged children and repeaters in addition
                                   to expanded access to education.
                                  The percentage of girls enrolled in the four most deprived prefectures (with the lowest girls' completion
                                   rate) improved from 45.2% to 48.2%, almost reaching the 49% target.
                                  The overall number of project beneficiaries reached 795,843, with 48% female, exceeding the target
                                   of 700,00 in total and 45% female.


                            Achievement is rated Substantial, as targets were nearly achieved, achieved, or exceeded, indicating
                            improved access, including for deprived prefectures.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Evidence provided in the ICR, such as satisfactory performance of teachers and improved learning
                            assessment results of students, suggests that the project improved the quality of teaching and learning.


                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



  Results related to the increased intake rate for both genders and girls' enrollment indicate that the project
  expanded access to primary education in deprived regions and reduced the gender disparity in primary
  education in those regions. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, given that achievement of both objectives is
  rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ICR conducted a cost-benefit analysis for both preparation and completion stages, as this analysis was not
done in the PAD. It estimated a net present value of $105.52 million and a 6.4 benefit-cost ratio at preparation
and $118.36 million and 7.2 at completion. The increase in returns was mostly due to a larger than planned
number of beneficiaries at project completion. The estimates were based on the following assumptions:

      Rates. A 15 percent discount rate was used, the inflation rate assumed for the project's lifetime was 5
         percent, and the maintenance cost assumed for the lifetime of the construction was 7.5 percent. The
         2018 official exchange rate was set at 555.7 CFA per US$1.
        Earnings. A wage rate was estimated for different levels of education and age, using the 2015 QUIBB
         (Questionnaire Unifié des Indicateurs de Base du Bien-Être). The earning rate remained the same over
         the benefit time span.
        Employment. The probability of employment remained the same, estimated by the level of education
         using the 2015 QUIBB.
        Labor market entry. The age considered for entry in the labor market was 18.
        The life span of the project. The beneficiaries from the access component of the project were assumed to
         engage in the labor market for a period of 40 years. Beneficiaries from the quality component were
         assumed to engage in the labor market for 15 years. The universities were assumed to provide services
         for 40 years.
        Probability of implementation. The probability of project implementation used was 63%, which is an
         average of 40 interventions in Latin America.
        Running costs or maintenance costs. There were costs associated with providing services, including
         building maintenance fees, throughout the project's life span. These were considered to remain the same
         after project interventions.

The ICR did not provide information on the basis for selecting the assumptions mentioned above. For example,
under the probability of implementation, the ICR did not address how comparable the 40 interventions in Latin
America were to the project. The ICR did not include a sensitivity analysis when presenting the cost-benefit
analysis.

The PAD's estimates of unit costs for textbooks and construction were similar to those in other countries in the
region. The PAD also mentioned that the estimated construction and furniture costs for a classroom were lower
when compared to those in Cote d’Ivoire (US$23,512 vs. US$25,339). During implementation, the project
benefited from approximately US$2.2 million in exchange rate gains, which allowed the project to expand the

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



scope of intervention, including the production and distribution of textbooks for grade 3 and the development of
textbooks for grade 4. The ICR made a comparison between the planned and the actual cost of key project
components. For textbook and school construction, the project either met or exceeded the target with much
lower unit costs than planned, especially in the construction of boreholes ($1,786 actual vs. $5,320 planned).
The only exception was the unit cost of teacher training and awareness-raising for reducing repetition, which
increased from $214 to $221. According to the ICR, the project also benefited from cost savings on school
construction using the community-based approach, and gained efficiencies by sharing a project coordination unit
(PCU) with the French Development Agency.

Some inefficiencies stemmed from delays in implementing curriculum reform activities such as the delivery of
textbooks and teachers’ guides, school construction, school uniforms delivery, launching a pilot literacy program
for school-based management committees, and conducting the student learning assessment. The planned
research activities under subcomponent 1.3 were dropped due to the delay in project implementation. There
were also delays in staffing the PCU due to administrative bottlenecks and turnovers, especially during the last
year of project implementation. Though these delays did not impact the achievement of project outcomes, they
led to a one-year extension of the project closing date.

Despite the overall low unit costs for construction and textbooks, there were various delays through the project's
course and limitations in the cost-benefit analysis. Efficiency is therefore rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              37.20
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High, considering the project's alignment with the country's education sector strategy and
the Country Partnership Framework for FY17-20. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as relevant outcome targets
were mainly achieved or exceeded. Efficiency is rated Modest given the weakness in cost-benefit analysis and
delays during implementation. Consequently, the outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Togo's education sector relies heavily on foreign assistance, and government spending on education
concentrates on recurrent expenses with a large portion allocated to teacher salaries. Numerous teachers'
strikes for higher wages since 2013 have pressured the government to spend more on teacher salaries,
limiting not only the hiring of additional teachers but also spending in other areas of education. The progress
made by the project will be challenging to sustain without continuity in financing resources. The next Bank
and GPE co-funded project Improving Quality and Equity of Basic Education (P172674), currently in the
pipeline, will continue to support and scale-up many activities conducted by this project, such as textbook
production and distribution, teacher training, school grants and performance-based contracts, access for
girls, and national learning assessments. Also, the effects of training provided for COGEPs should extend
beyond this project's closure, as COGEPs enhance the capacity of school management.

The COVID-19 pandemic has shocked the education system worldwide. The education sector is confronting
a crisis with widespread school closure and economic recession. In response, the Bank has launched the
Togo COVID-19 Education Response Project (P174166). Funded by GPE, the project aims to mitigate the
pandemic's negative impact, including ensuring learning continuity and tracking student progress, supporting
the safe reopening of schools and student re-entry in schools, and providing targeted school Grants to
support School Management Committees.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Funded by GPE’s Education Sector Plan Implementation Grant, the project was designed to align closely
  with PSE 2014-2025, with continued support to initiatives launched under the predecessor project (PERI
  1). Built upon lessons learned from PERI 1, the project supported activities that were proven to be
  successful, such as working with communities and COGEPs for school construction and school-based
  management. The project design also recognized the complexity in curriculum reform and the need to
  take a modest approach at a grade-by-grade pace. Given the country’s limited capacity and need for
  hands-on support and supervision, the project selected Investment Project Financing as the lending
  instrument. The overall risk was rated as Substantial at appraisal, mostly due to weak implementing
  capacity from central government to school levels. The project proposed incorporating capacity-building
  through the project cycle as a mitigation measure, including the provision of technical expertise for
  curriculum reform, teacher training, school construction, and training sessions for relevant government
  staff, school headmasters, and inspectorates.

  The project recognized the importance of financial sustainability and the risk incurred by rising spending
  on teacher salaries. Still, it assumed that the government would increase non-salary expenditures to
  support primary education activities. However, the recurring teachers’ strikes since 2013 have pressured



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



  the government to spend more on teacher salaries and escalated the country’s dependency on external
  aid.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted regular supervision missions twice a year and a mid-term review during project
 implementation. It consistently documented observed progress and issues in aide-memoires, back-to-office
 reports, and ISRs. A consultant in the capital city Lomé was recruited to support operations on the
 ground. The Bank closely monitored issues raised in financial management, procurement, and safeguards.
 The project had recurring procurement issues through implementation, such as delays in textbook
 production and distribution. In response, the Bank worked closely with the government and provided
 recommendations and training to the PCU. The Bank also took action to ensure environmental and social
 safeguards compliance. After discovering water quality unsuitable for consumption, it requested to close
 boreholes and only reopen them after bacteriological tests and water treatment were completed. The
 project's Grievance Redress Mechanism conducted a detailed review after a complaint filed by a female
 construction worker's husband and issued compensation. However, the ICR did not mention if an end-of-
 project safeguard review was conducted and how the triggered OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources
 safeguard was followed. The TTL did not provide information on them upon request.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As stated in the PAD, the project used country systems for M&E, with government agencies such as the
 National Assessment Unit, Ministries of Primary and Secondary Education, Directorate of Educational
 Planning and Evaluation, Directorate of Training, and Financial Resources Directorate responsible for data
 collection and monitoring. Some indicators were to draw data from the project reports provided by the
 PCU. Output and outcome indicators were, on the whole, adequate and complete measures of
 achievement of the objectives. Most intermediate indicators were at the output level, measuring the
 completion of project activities. Grade 3 intake rates with baselines above 90% should be used with caution
 as a measure of access to education, since an increase to near or above 100% could be caused by a rising
 number of repeaters rather than first-time enrollees.

                                                                                                Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)




 Cost savings and exchange rate gains allowed the restructuring in 2018 to expand the provision of
 textbooks and teachers' guides and related training to grade 3. As a result, the wording of two intermediate
 indicators was adapted to included grade 3. In addition, the restructuring raised the targets of five
 indicators:

       Percentage of primary teachers rated satisfactory in the use of the new curriculum -- 60 to 65
        percent;
       Primary teachers trained (including headmasters) in the use of new curriculum as a result of the
        project -- 22,000 to 29,000;
       Percent of schools that implement their budgets in line with the initial forecast -- 80 to 90;
       School uniforms distributed to girls in 4 deprived prefectures --155,000 to 165,000; and
       Repetition rate at the primary level -- 12 to 7 percent.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project tracked and reported on all PDO and intermediate indicators during implementation. The
  M&E system was regarded as adequate, though the M&E rating was moderately satisfactory in most
  ISRs due to delays in data collection of some indicators. A review of the PAD, restructuring paper, ISRs,
  and ICR found some minor inconsistencies in some indicators' target values and dates. According to the
  TTL, some changes made in restructuring were not updated in the Operation Portal and, therefore, not
  reflected in the ISRs, as listed below.

        For the intermediate indicator, "primary school teacher's deployment consistency index," the
         target was 68 percent in the PAD (page 30) and all ISRs but 65 percent in the restructuring paper
         and ICR (page 47).
        Intermediate indicator "latrines constructed" had a target of 480 in the PAD (page 29) and all
         ISRs, but 456 in the restructuring paper and the ICR (page 45).
        The indicator "percentage of CP1, CP2 and CE1 teachers using the new curricular in public
         schools" was revised to "percentage of CP1 and CP2 teachers using the new curricular in public
         schools "in the restructuring paper but remained unchanged in all following ISRs and ICR (page
         44).
        The indicator "New textbooks distributed in CP1 and CP2 (math and reading)" was revised to
         "New textbooks distributed in CP1, CP2 and CE1 (math and reading)" in the restructuring paper
         dated June 28, 2018. However, the change was not reflected in ISR no 6 (June 28, 2018) and ISR
         no 7 (December 31, 2018).

  There are three versions of the target date of the indicator "System for learning assessment at the
  primary level," which are March 31, 2018 (ISRs no1- no 5 and restructuring paper), September 28, 2018
  (ISR no 6), and September 30, 2018 (ISRs no7- no 9 and ICR). TTL explained that the initial date of
  March 31, 2018 was an error during the project's preparation, which was revised twice to be consistent
  with the project's closing date.

  The project strengthened data collection on the ground by school inspectorates with performance-based
  contracts and tablets to record data on the go and reduce transaction costs for inspectors. However, the


                                                                                                         Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



  tablets' utilization did experience challenges such as confusion caused by the reporting system and
  inadequate training of school inspectors.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR, data from the national teachers' assessment was used to inform the planning of
  the teacher training program. The feedback from teachers who participated in training allowed
  adjustments in real-time. M&E capacity was enhanced at the grassroots level.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   According to the PAD, the project triggered three safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. It was
   classified as Environmental Category "B" due to the construction of school classrooms, latrines, and
   boreholes.

   According to the ICR, an Environmental and Social Management Framework and Resettlement Policy
   Framework were prepared, approved, and disclosed in November 2014. Environmental and Social
   Management Plans for construction sites were implemented by contractors but submitted to the Bank for
   approval with delay. Three resettlement action plans were developed and implemented. A total of ten
   people affected by physical or economic displacement received compensation. Social risk management
   provisions were applied for all construction sites.

   The Bank promptly addressed safeguard issues identified throughout implementation. After finding water
   quality unsuitable for consumption, the Bank requested to close boreholes until test results indicate that the
   water was treated and suitable for consumption. However, the ICR did not explicitly address whether
   an end-of-project safeguard review was conducted. In addition, there was no mention of OP/BP 4.11
   Physical Cultural Resources in the ICR. The ICR (page 33) stated that the overall safeguards rating was
   Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The financial management risk at the time of project appraisal was rated
   moderate. The project had a financial management system based on the previous PERI 1 project. With
   adequate reporting standards and protocols, the project had the account regularly updated, and the Interim
   Financial Reports were of acceptable quality and submitted on time. Three audit reports of unqualified
   opinion reported no significant irregularities. Most recommendations from supervision missions were
   implemented. As documented in ISRs, the project experienced difficulties recruiting and later turnover of

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



   the internal auditor and had some weakness in supervising funds transferred to COGEPs and
   Inspectorates.

   Procurement. The project experienced various delays in the early stage due to procurement issues, such
   as delay in preparation of bidding documents and bid evaluation reports, inefficiency in the bid analysis
   committee and its review of procurement documents, and delay in government approval of contracts for
   textbooks. According to the ICR, issues causing procurement delay were resolved in the last year of the
   project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   Quality of Supervision rated MS
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   due to moderate shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

A realistic understanding of capacity on the ground and the launching of mitigation
measures at an early stage are critical for yielding results. As pointed out in the ICR, issues
that contributed to delays in the procurement of textbooks and teacher guides could have
been factored into the timeline's formation, and a more streamlined procurement approach
would have sped up the process. Similarly, early training of project staff on World Bank procurement
rules and procedures would also have removed obstacles.

Capacity building requires ongoing attention and continuous efforts. The ICR noted that the
one-time training on the use of electronic tablets provided to inspectors was not sufficient for utilizing
the benefits from the technology. On the other hand, findings from inspectors' classroom
observations helped identify difficulties confronted by teachers, who also benefited from follow-up
support.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Global Partnership For Education Program (P146294)



Local communities can play a positive role when engaged and enabled. The ICR found that the
community-based approach contributed to the quality and efficiency of school construction. Training
provided to COGEP members allowed the COGEPs to play a significant role in supervising and
monitoring at the school level.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented candid and detailed information on the context and process of the project. The assessment
was accompanied by sufficient evidence. It also provided a rich and thorough discussion on obstacles
experienced by the project and room for improvement. The results chain diagram (page 10) could have
been improved with better mapping of the relationships among outputs and outcomes, e.g., activities related to
school inspectors are linked to teaching quality, which itself is a building block of learning quality. The section
on safeguards did not mention compliance with OP/PB 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, which was mentioned
in the PAD, as well as whether any end-of-project safeguard review was conducted.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
