     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022447

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P151215                                     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                        Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2350,IDA-H9930                         30-Apr-2017                                         29,407,584.88

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Oct-2014                                 05-Jun-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            18,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             34,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         29,407,584.88                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson               Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective is to improve the availability of and access to food and livestock productive
   capacity for targeted beneficiaries affected by the conflict in the Central African Republic on the Recipient's
   territory.

   For purposes of assessing the extent which the PDO was achieved in Section 4, this review will parse the
   PDO into two objectives, namely:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



   Objective 1: to improve the availability of and access to food for targeted beneficiaries affected by the conflict
   in the Central African Republic on the Recipient's territory;

   Objective 2: to improve livestock productivity for targeted beneficiaries affected by the conflict in the Central
   African Republic on the Recipient's territory.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Targeted Food Assistance (Original Allocation: US$7.0 million; Revised Allocation:
   US$14.8 million; Actual: US$12.1 million). The original component had the objective of improving the
   availability of food and access to it by the target population (or “unconditional food assistance”), through: (i)
   the provision of vouchers; (ii) the distribution of specialized and staple food packages; and (iii) the conduct
   of supplemental feeding programs. The component was designed to support WFP’s existing safety net
   operation for vulnerable households in Chad, providing resources to cover 31,200 refugees and returnees
   for 12 months.

   The Additional Financing/AF (2017) expanded component 1, which was split into three subcomponents:

        (i)   1.1: Unconditional food assistance. The activity was unchanged, and subsequently dropped;

      (ii)    1.2: Conditional food assistance. This was a new subcomponent, linking food assistance to
   sustainable productive asset-building, for example through cash-for-work programs. The rationale was to
   increase the focus on strengthening the resilience of beneficiary populations; and

     (iii)  1.3: Improving access to sustainable cooking systems and drinking water. This new sub-
   component included construction and distribution of mobile cooking facilities, rehabilitation of wells, and
   awareness campaigns and training.

   Component 2: Agricultural Production and Livestock Stabilization (Original Allocation: US$11.0
   million; Revised Allocation: US$19.2 million; Actual: US$17.6 million). Its objective was to restore and
   maintain crop and livestock production capacity among the affected populations in a context where socio-
   economic conditions were precarious and distress sales of assets were likely, and where pressure on the
   natural resource base was increasing rapidly. There were three sub-components, which remained the same
   following additional financing (ref. second restructuring), while expanding activities for each:

   (i) 2.1: Support for agricultural production (Original: US$5.4 million). This subcomponent aimed at securing
   and increasing food production capacity. The activities were: (i) provision of technology packages to
   approximately 15,000 affected households; (ii) support to seed multiplication producer groups; and (iii)
   construction or rehabilitation of communal storage facilities;




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



(ii) 2.2: Support for livestock stabilization (Original: US$5.0 million). This subcomponent was designed to
support stabilization of the productive capacity of the target refugees, returnees and host communities’
(RRHC) livestock activities through: (i) a vaccination campaign for 1,500,000 animals; (ii) a targeted animal
feeding program benefitting 1,500 households in areas where the grazing capacity had been exceeded; and
(iii) a restocking program for 1,000 displaced households. The AF added distribution of harvesting, milling
and drilling equipment.

(iii) 2.3: Support for conflict mitigation (Original: US$0.6 million). This subcomponent aimed to help: mitigate
potential conflicts among users of natural resources; reduce the pressure on limited grazing areas; and
prevent overuse of an already fragile ecosystem. Priority activities included: (a) participatory development of
transhumance corridors; (b) organization of forums for peaceful coexistence amongst stakeholders; and (c)
establishment of committees of elders.

As stated above, the project was restructured three times. While the project retained the same PDO,
components and subcomponents, the first and second restructurings were level 2; the main restructuring
was carried out in 2017, and involved additional financing/AF; the first two restructurings expanded the
existing and added some new activities, as follows: (a) scaled-up emergency activities due to continued
influx of refugees and returnees from the CAR, and to strengthen the resilience of the entire target group
(ref. subcomponent 1.2 above); (b) shifted the balance from the initial humanitarian actions towards
increased emphasis on resilience building, whereby some food assistance became conditional, tied to
rebuilding productive assets.

Also, part of the first restructuring (2017) involved modifying implementation arrangements. The Project of
the Regional Sustainable Pastoral Support Project (PRAPS) within the Ministry of Livestock and Animal
Production took over responsibility for coordination of implementation from EAPSP which was closing. The
existing contractual arrangements with WFP and FAO were renewed. UNICEF became the implementing
agency for sub-component 1.3 (see above).

The project’s second restructuring was carried out in early 2019, mainly to provide more resources for
asset-building activities in order to strengthen the resilience of beneficiaries, favoring a more resilience-
oriented approach, while still providing emergency assistance (ICR, para 30). Subcomponent A1
Unconditional food assistance was dropped, and the remaining resources (SDR 1.9 million) transferred to
Subcomponent 1.2, Conditional food assistance. WFP was dropped as implementing agency for
Subcomponent 1.2 due to failure to comply with World Bank fiduciary requirements, especially regarding the
fund reconciliation requirements for cash transfer type of operations. The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) was selected to implement the sub-component based on its expertise and sound track
record in implementing food assistance and asset building in Chad.

The third restructuring, a level 1 restructuring, was carried out in mid-2020, involving only the advanced
closing of the project, to June 5, 2020, instead of March 31,2021. The rationale for the early closing was a
joint GoC/WB effort to consolidate the Chad World Bank portfolio. There were still some pending activities
to be implemented by IOM, but it was decided that these activities could be efficiently integrated into the
World Bank-financed Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (PROPAD), which
had been approved in mid-2018 (with a closing date of end-2023). The remaining PURCAE activities and
the implementation arrangements were unchanged. This integration became effective with the amendment
of the PROPAD Financing Agreement in May 2020, which incorporated the remaining PURCAE activities
into PROPAD and its results framework.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
      1. Project Costs: The total project costs at approval was US$18.0 million; there was additional
          financing of US$16.0 million (in 2017), such that the total project cost was US$34.0 million. The
          actual cost at project closing was US$29.7 million, which also reflected the early project closing, as
          stated above.
       2. Financing: Total financing was provided by IDA, through two separate IDA credits ($18.0 million
          and $16.0 million). There was no Government counterpart funding, aside from the staffing and
          operational costs during implementation. The conditional food assistance involved some
          contributions from beneficiaries through their labor for project works, although the amount was not
          quantified.
       3. Borrower/Recipient Contribution: There was zero counterpart contribution.
       4. Dates: The project was approved on October 14, 2014, became effective on March 2, 2015. The
          Bank approved Additional Financing/AF in September, 2017, essentially a second phase. The
          original closing date was April 30, 2017, and the actual closing date was June 5, 2020. The project
          was thus extended for 3 years and 2 months, for a total of 38 months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were “to improve the availability of and access to food and livestock productive
capacity for targeted beneficiaries affected by the conflict in the Central African Republic on the Recipient's
territory.” The targeted beneficiaries were clearly defined to include 3 types: refugees, returnees and local
(or “host”) populations in the areas where the displaced populations were being resettled, and which
provided the rationale for the project interventions (ICR, para. 17). The two sub-objectives were
complementary, and their supporting components (and subsequent adjustments during the 2 main
restructurings) demonstrated high relevance to the priority needs of the target beneficiaries, by addressing
key elements of the Government’s national and sectoral policies/strategies. These objectives also
supported and were strongly aligned with the Bank’s: FY11/12 Interim Assistance Strategy, which guided
the Bank’s operations at the time of formulation and approval of the PURCAE, especially with respect to
helping to stabilize food production and help address the added pressures from large numbers of incoming
refugees and returnees. The restructured project (2017) also was strongly aligned with the Bank’s new
Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2016 -2020), especially with respect to prioritizing support to GoC’s
poverty reduction strategy, with particular focus on supporting the agriculture sector (see below).

This relevance of both phases of the PURCAE is evidenced in several key Government and Bank
documents, including the following (see PAD, paras. 1-9, 13 – 17, 20 – 21); and ICR, paras. 9 – 11):

(a) Government of Chad’s National Development Plan (2013-2015), which emphasized sustainable
agriculture and rural development, which were key pillars to serve as key “levers” for promoting a
diversified, inclusive, and sustainable economy;



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



               (b) Government of Chad’s Global Emergency Response Plan for the Returnees/Refugees, which was used
               to appeal to the international community to raise US$ 53 million. The Bank responded by helping to
               convene donor support and, in June 2014, by restructuring an existing project, the Emergency Agricultural
               Production Support Project, to reallocate US$ 3.5 million to support the GoC Emergency Plan;

               (c) Government of Chad’s National Food Security Program (2014), which focused on overcoming hunger
               and combating food insecurity through sustainable increases in productivity and through improved access
               to food;

               (d) The Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2016-2020, approved in December, 2015), which
               prioritized support to GoC’s poverty reduction strategy, with particular focus on improving returns to
               agriculture, building value chains, and reducing vulnerability.

               (f) The Bank’s World Development Report/WDR of 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development. The main
               lessons from this WDR were incorporated into PURCAE, notably the need to: sustain human capital;
               prevent the conditions of returnees, refugees and their host communities (RRHCs) from deteriorating and
               prejudicing their prospects for development; and leverage United Nations (UN) capacities to support
               effective implementation.

               A core development challenge which PURCAE was designed to address involved the growing number of
               refugees and returnees coming into Chad, therefore requiring the need for appropriate emergency AND
               developmental-type of responses and interventions from Government, to be funded by developmental
               partners in a coordinated manner. Since the project originally was designed as an emergency project for a
               limited period of time, the original scope of interventions were limited, and focused primarily on the output
               level. Subsequently, when the project was restructured, and supported by additional financing and
               implementation period, the main indicators focused primarily on outputs, while stating an intention to also
               contribute to five strategic outcomes (see below).

               Accordingly, the Project’s focus on two strategic components, with highly relevant and responsive
               subcomponents, further enhanced and expanded by the two restructurings and AF, the overall relevance of
               objectives was rated “High”.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the availability of and access to food for targeted beneficiaries affected by the conflict in the
                             Central African Republic on the Recipient's territory.


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)




Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): While the project's design included a results framework (RF), the PAD did not
develop a ToC because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR reconstructed a ToC
that was consistent with the PAD and the AF (paras. 12 - 14, and illustrated in Figure 1), which explained how
the two broad and inter-related objectives of availability and access to food and livestock productive
capacity would be achieved. This ToC/Figure 1 combined both objectives, to illustrate cause-effect linkages.
The following points refer to and assess the ToC for Objective 1:

(a) PDO and relevant intermediate outcomes and supporting indicators which correspond to improved
availability of and access to food, and which correspond to the two project components, and their relevant
subcomponents, although most of indicators are output-based, rather than outcome-based);

(b) corresponding project activities/interventions channeled to the target beneficiaries, which contributed to
key outputs (see below) and then also contributed to improved food and nutritional security. These outputs
included: vouchers to purchase food basket; direct food transfers; distribution of mobile cooking facilities and
rehabilitation of wells; various income-generating activities; purchase and distribution of key agricultural inputs
(for increased food production); small storage facilities to enable post-harvest storage and price stabilization
of foods.

Key assumptions in the ToC were generally sound, including (ICR, Figure 1): commitment and role of the
GoC to integrate the returnees and refugees in the “least disruptive manner”; supportive role of the host
communities to enable resettling these new arrivals; and the supportive and enabling role of the relevant UN
agencies, which ended up as the main implementers of the project.

Outputs: (ref. ICR, paras. 36-45, 47-48, Annex 1 and Table 3):Outputs:

(a) No. of improved cookstoves fabricated and distributed: Target: 9,000; Actual: 13,107; 146% of target;

(b) No. of drinking water wells rehabilitated: Target: 157; Actual: 172; 110% of target;

(c) No. of beneficiaries of conditional food assistance: Target: 152,960; Actual: 78,710; 51 % of target;

(d) No. beneficiaries of direct food transfers/vouchers: Target: 31,200; Actual: 32,460; 104% of target; this
indicator was dropped after Year 1;

(e) No. of beneficiaries receiving agricultural input packages: Target: 45,200; Actual: 47,038; 104% of target;

(f) No. of assets rehabilitated: Target: 40; Actual: 15: 37 % of target; (assets included: rehabilitated water
wells; installed water pumps; rehabilitated boreholes, with handpumps; drilled and equipped new boreholes;
constructed latrine units;

(g) No. of people trained (by IOM): Target: 14,000; Actual: 8,371; 60% of target; this training focused on
enhancing financial management, skills and practices of households and cooperative associations;

(h) No. of people trained on conflict resolution: Target: 1,656; Actual: 2,433; 68% of target;




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



(i) No. of decentralized staff trained (by FAO): Target: 100; Actual: 72; 72% of target; the training included
basic skills/tools for improved planning and implementation of development projects at the provincial and
district levels, consistent with Government’s decentralization strategies;

(j) No. of people benefitted from other trainings (by FAO): Target: 1,956; Actual: 3,379; 58% of target; the
training included: individual capacity building in household management; creation of small businesses, basic
accounting; group business activities, including management of cooperative associations;

The PAD, AF and ICR presented some of the above indicators (items c, d, and e) as outcomes; these
indicators and their measures are actually outputs, and therefore reflected above (and not under outcomes).

Key Outcomes: (which correspond to the relevant PDO indicators, Annex 1, with original or revised targets):

(a) No. of direct project beneficiaries: Target: 550,000; Actual 592,350; 107% of target;

(b) Percentage of female beneficiaries: Target: 52; Actual: 53; 102% of target;

 It should be noted that para. 38 and Annex 1 (Table 3) present the output results (and corresponding project
activities and components) in terms of contributing toward 5 relevant strategic outcomes,
namely:            (1) improved nutritional status and well-being; (2) enhanced water security; (3) improved
agricultural productivity and local livelihoods; (4) improved livestock productivity, which is linked to objective 2
below; and an added dimension, (5) strengthened social cohesion, which is a very relevant and sound
addition of the project.

However, the results framework did not include indicators and corresponding measures for these 5 key
outcomes, but rather, showed various output indicators and their measures. It would have been preferable for
the Project’s M&E system to have developed appropriate outcome indicators to enable the monitoring and
reporting of each of these 5 key outcomes, especially to help pave the way for follow-up support.

Given the emergency nature of the project, the PAD and ICR output-focused approach in its indicators may
be appropriate to some degree, while recognizing that the output-focused approach makes it difficult to
assess in a more rigorous manner the progress toward achieving the above 5 outcomes, and therefore,
progress toward objective 1. For example, it is difficult to assess: the extent of progress toward “improving
agricultural productivity and local livelihoods (ref. to one of the six intermediate outcomes in the ToC); how
effective were the input packages used (“adapted”) by the beneficiaries, and also difficult to assess the type
and extent of technical support/advise provided to beneficiaries to enable them to generate increases in crop
productivity and livelihoods; also, it is difficult to assess the actual use and effects of the project-funded
community assets. These aspects were presented in a vague manner in the ICR, paras. 39 – 45, and the
conclusions in the ICR were not supported by clear evidence and relevant documentation. While the ICR
reported that “there was evidence from FAO that agricultural production was significantly improved with high
yields of main crops” (ICR, para. 44), the ICR does not provide supporting evidence or report
references. Given that only 2 of the 8 outputs were achieved/exceeded (or 25%), and 2 of the 2 outcomes
were slightly exceeded (or 100%, albeit weak outcomes), the efficacy with which the project has achieved
Objective 1 is “modest”.



Rating

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve livestock productivity for targeted beneficiaries affected by the conflict in the Central African
Republic on the Recipient's territory.

Rationale
Theory of Change: While the ToC presented in the ICR (Figure 1 Results Chain and ToC) shows two relevant
PDO outcomes and six corresponding intermediate outcomes, the specific indicators and measures to assess
the progress to achieving these PDO and intermediate outcomes are relatively weak, and focusing primarily
on output measures. With respect to Objective 2 involving livestock productivity increases, the linkages
between the project livestock activities, project livestock outputs (2), project intermediate livestock outcome
(1) and the PDO livestock productivity outcome (1) are relatively weak. As stated above, the ICR presented
one integrated ToC to cover both objectives, with their associated activities, outputs, and to a very limited
extent, outcomes.

Outputs (ICR, para. 46, Annex 1/Tables 1-3):

Some of these, especially involving training of beneficiaries, are the same outputs as outlined above for
Objective 1, especially items: e, g, h, i and j);

(b) No. of beneficiary households receiving breeding stock: Target: 2,000; Actual: 3,300; 165% of target;

(c) No. of Breeding Stock Distributed: Target: None; Actual: 17,500; % of target: NA.

(d) Metric Tons/MTs of animal feed distributed: Target: 3,546; Actual: 3,746; 106 % of target;

Outcomes

(a) No. of livestock/cattle vaccinated: Target: 4,000,000; Actual: 3,926,263; 97.5 % of target;

The overall assessment for the second objective reflects some of the same factors/considerations outlined for
objective 1, involving the project’s focus on output results, and limited measures of livestock productivity.
Based on available information, it appears that 5 of the 8 output targets were achieved/exceeded, and the
sole outcome target, which is actually an output measure, was slightly exceeded. While there is an absence
of outcome indicators and other relevant evidence to document the actual increase in livestock productivity, it
is plausible that the distribution of breeding stock and animal feed (both exceeding output targets) will lead to
an increase in livestock production. Hence, the second objective is rated “substantial” with some
shortcomings as cited above.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated marginally Substantial, based on the following two considerations:

                            (1) Objective 1, which was rated Modest for reasons stated above, and Objective 2, was rated Substantial
                            with some shortcomings in terms of relevant evidence for the project period. The final end-of-project reports
                            which were prepared by IMO, UNICEF and FAO, provide useful results, but they are limited for the period of
                            mid-2018 to early 2020, and the results focus almost entirely on the project’s activities and associated
                            outputs;

                            (2) As discussed above, for both objectives, there are shortcomings in the relevance and depth of the
                            reported evidence to assess the depth and sustainability of meeting these two objectives, especially in terms
                            of assessing the 5 outcomes cited in the ICR (paras. 39 – 47, and Annex 1/Table 3). Also, key pending
                            targets and their expected results of PURCAE were transferred to the Bank-supported PROPAD, which is
                            expected to implement and meet these pending targets by 2023.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Given the emergency nature of the project, a formal economic and financial analysis (EFA) was not carried ex-
   ante, nor at the time of the 2017 restructuring, and was not carried out at completion. However, the ICR provides
   some evidence of production benefits, such as the increases in agricultural production and the establishment of
   numerous micro- enterprises discussed in the assessment of efficacy (e.g., with some of the evidence presented
   in the final project reports prepared by FAO and UNICEF, for a limited period of time, from 2018 to early 2020).
   The ICR also provides “negative” evidence of the benefits of the animal health campaigns in terms of the
   avoidance of disease outbreak, contributed by PURCAE (ICR, para. 49). PROPAD, based on its M&E system, is
   supposed to conduct an Economic and Financial Analysis/EFA of PURCAE (at the end of 2023, ICR, para. 49).

   The following section highlights key efficiency aspects resulting from the project (ICR, paras. 50-56).

   (a) Administrative Efficiency (paras. 50 and 51): The relatively simple design of the emergency project and the
   implementation arrangements employed contributed to the Project’s efficiency. By relying on UN agencies, the
   Project adopted the most cost-effective means of ensuring the required rapid response. Each agency received 7
   percent of the respective contract value to cover administrative overhead charges, management of all project
   activities (technical, financial, and procurement), and delivery of project services to the intended beneficiaries.
   These arrangements, together with accountability reports, were reflected in a Memo of Understanding (MOU)
   between GoC and each participating UN agency. The ratio of administrative costs to direct costs (7:93) was
   relatively efficient compared to similar operations in the region. Comparable emergency operations in South
   Sudan show ratios as high as 14:86, while those in CAR are consistent with the Chad experience (i.e., 6:94).



                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



Another cost-effective implementation approach used by the Project was to involve credible national NGOs to
support implementation of activities at the field level. Also, the alternative option to first create local capacities
and then implement the project, would not have been cost-effective.

(b) Value for Money: On the cost side (ICR, Annex 4), the project spent US$29.7 million to benefit 592,350
people, or equivalent to US$50 per direct beneficiary; this ratio compares well with the ratio of the total
estimated/revised cost and revised target of beneficiaries ($34 million and 550,000, respectively, for a ratio of
$62 per direct beneficiary).

(c) Overall Assessment: The ICR provides relevant qualitative assessment and conclusions on the overall
effects of the project, and states that (ICR, para. 53): “there is evidence of reasonable costs and substantial
benefits” arising from the Project, which clearly helped the country address the emergency crisis. No evidence is
provided in the ICR to back this up, though. Another conclusion presented in the IC is that with a “large influx of
refugees and returnees, the without-the-project scenario would have been one of increased food insecurity and
competition for resources, which would doubtless have aggravated conflict and social instability. Although no
evidence is provided to back up this statement, it is plausible to be a correct assessment of the situation. In this
context, the ICR states that the project made a significant contribution to improving livelihoods and stabilizing
the social situation by reducing household food insecurity, enhancing resilience and sustainability of production
systems, and fostering social cohesion (ICR, para. 53). While it is plausible that the project may have
contributed to such results, limited evidence of such outcomes is presented. Notwithstanding these positive
qualitative conclusions, two anecdotal statements/”testimonies” from beneficiaries, and three end-of-project
reports prepared by the 3 implementation agencies (IMO, UNICEF and FAO, 2020), provide limited scope and
in-depth analyses and some supporting evidence to substantiate the above conclusions. Accordingly, efficiency
is rated substantial, with some shortcomings as highlighted above.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                          0
 Appraisal                                                      0
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          0
 ICR Estimate                                                   0
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome




                                                                                                          Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



Based on the project’s “high” relevance, marginal “substantial” rating for efficacy and “substantial” efficiency,
and given the emergency nature of the project, this IEG review concludes there were modest to moderate
shortcomings in the project’s outcome, resulting in an overall outcome rating of “Moderately Satisfactory”

The rationale for the ratings of the 3 core elements discussed above is as follows:

(1) High relevance of the PDO, based on its strong alignment with Government's strategies and plans,
especially with respect to addressing a core developmental challenge of addressing the multiple needs of the
refugees and returnees (i.e., considering the Government’s: Emergency Response Plan; Poverty Reduction
Strategy, National Food Security Plan; the project also shows high relevance with the Bank’s strategies for
Chad: Interim and CPF, sectoral strategies; and the Bank-wide WDR on Conflict, Security and Development).
Moreover, the project remained relevant during implementation, including the AF phase, given the continued
influx of refugees and returnees, coupled with the added challenges on the existing host communities in Chad;

(2) Substantial rating for efficacy, but marginally so given the Project’s exclusive focus on providing and
measuring outputs, and the mixed and uneven performance in meeting the two core objectives of the overall
PDO and Intermediate Result targets, and weak linkages of project activities in generating relevant outcomes
and robust measures and direct evidence addressing the 5 sound project outcomes, while also considering
emergency nature of the project, notwithstanding the evidence presented in the final project reports prepared by
IMO, UNICEF and FAO; and

(3) Substantial rating for efficiency, despite the absence of any type of EFA and quantitative and robust
analyses of the costs and benefits, while also recognizing the evidence regarding the project's efficient
implementation, favorable comparative cost-effective measures and positive qualitative benefits of this
emergency operation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Given the complex and continued emergency conditions prevailing in the project area of Chad, there are
significant risks to sustaining the project’s outputs, and especially making tangible and sustained progress
to contributing to the 5 intended outcomes and eventual impacts. The ICR presents a candid, although brief,
assessment of these risks, but does not assess and present clear mitigation measures to address these risks
(i.e., assessing the measures outlined in the PAD/Annex 4), aside from relying on the ongoing Bank-financed
PROPAD to address the emerging gaps. More specifically, the ICR provides a brief summary of the project’s
extensive and inter-related risks, especially involving (paras. 102 and 103):

(a, b and c) Political, Social and Governance Risks: the gains made under the project are fragile because
the security situation in CAR is still volatile, from various perspectives and risk criteria. At the end of 2019,
Chad was still hosting over 465,000 refugees and asylum seekers. Accordingly, the current INFORM index
for Chad is very high --- 7.2 out of 10 – ranking Chad as the third country most at risk of humanitarian crisis,
fueled by further political and social instability. Furthermore, Chad has a “vulnerability score” of 7.6 (out of
10), and the lack of adaptation capacity presents a score of 8.9, which illustrates the country’s incapacity and
weak governance system to manage the crisis and the persistent social and political “shocks”, resulting from

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



the continued flow of large numbers of refugees/asylum seekers, including the social and economic impacts
on the host communities;

(d) Financial Risks: the continued flows of refugees and asylum seekers are straining the Government’s and
donor’s capacities and willingness to provide continued financial assistance to address the emergency
needs, including emergency food requirements, agricultural inputs, breeding stock), and especially to provide
the required developmental investments to promote sustained development, even beyond the on-going
support from PROSAD (which closes in 2023);

(e) Environmental Risks: the continued flow of refugees and asylum seekers, with limited food supplies, are
resulting in extensive environmental threats to grazing areas of host communities, which are already being
degraded by uncontrolled livestock;

(f) Stakeholder ownership/support Risks: there are growing and somewhat uncontrolled flows of the refugees
and asylum seekers on host communities, and there is an apparent absence of mitigation measures of social
impacts on host communities, which intensify the above mentioned social, political, governance, financial
and environmental risks.

The ICR correctly concludes the severity of these risks, that: “In face of these challenges, GoC capacity to
intervene and sustain project activities to support refugees, returnees and supporting communities is still
very limited” (ICR, para. 103). Moreover, the ICR, coupled with other available information, also imply that
there are constraints faced by the relevant UN agencies in stepping up and sustaining the project
interventions. At the same time, the ICR does not assess the status and implementation of the Operational
Risk Assessment Framework mitigation measures outlined in Annex 4 of the PAD. Addressing these
mitigation measures could provide useful inputs to be supported by the on-going Bank-supported PROPAD
Project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At the time leading to the Government’s request for the Bank’s emergency assistance, in 2014, the Bank
  was already working in partnership with GoC on the emerging refugee crisis. This engagement enabled
  the Bank to respond quickly to GoC’s formal request for an emergency project, which also was aligned
  strongly with the Government’s emergency and poverty strategies and the Bank’s country assistance
  strategy and priorities for Chad. Through this rapid, collaborative and aligned response, the Bank’s multi-
  disciplinary team worked closely with Government counterparts to design and deliver a highly relevant
  project. Accordingly, the quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory by this review, based on the
  following evidence (ICR, paras. 92 96):

  (i) The situation analysis at appraisal and the consequent project design were based on extensive fact-
  finding and use of relevant background references about the situation of RRHCs and the problems that
  were to be addressed. The social and gender aspects of design were particularly thoroughly researched
  and addressed in the design features, although there was limited in-depth assessment of the gender
  aspects presented in the ICR;


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



  (ii) The inclusion of resilience-building activities, including direct humanitarian support in terms of a
  twelve-month feeding operations for vulnerable beneficiaries, to be delivered through an on-going UN
  supported program;

  (iii) The general design of the project reflected strategic choices that proved to be correct, notably the
  inclusion of host communities among the target beneficiaries as this group proved to be just as
  vulnerable as the refugees and returnees; and the use of UN agencies, which reflected a pragmatic
  approach which recognized the weaknesses of the existing Governmental agencies (as already stated
  above);

  (iv) The implementation arrangements, particularly the use of established UN agencies with strong in-
  country programs known for their general competency in their areas of work, were well planned and
  designed;

  (v) Potential risks were candidly assessed, and included generally appropriate mitigation measures (PAD,
  Annex 4, Operational Risk Assessment Framework); and

  (vi) Project design was able to formulate a very rudimentary M&E system, with limited indicators to
  measure the 5 strategic outcomes cited above, while focusing almost exclusively on output indicators and
  measures.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 (i) The Bank’s implementation support was led by a TTL based in Chad, with regular missions and monthly
 meetings with relevant key actors directly involved in implementation (from GoC and UN agencies) to
 address and resolve problems. During one of the supervision missions, a Bank project team was
 kidnapped, and fortunately, subsequently released unscathed. This reflected the challenging
 implementation environment;

 (ii) The Bank teams were staffed with required competencies reflecting all technical aspects as well as
 financial management/FM, procurement and safeguards;

 (iii) The Bank team provided timely and quality guidance throughout the implementation process, with
 considerable hands-on support on technical, monitoring, and fiduciary aspects. Aide memoires and ISRs
 were clear and complete. Also, the ICR reports that the Bank team was proactive in identifying and
 resolving constraints to the achievement of relevant project objectives throughout the project life (i.e., by
 replacing WFP with IOM; three project restructurings; providing adequate support during review missions,
 including safeguards, procurement and FM assistance). Nonetheless, the Bank team made limited
 progress in helping to ensure a functional and effective M&E system was established and operational,
 depending on the M&E system of the PROPAD.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the M&E design, while also considering the emergency nature of the project, was modest for the
 following reasons:

 (i) the Project’s Results Framework (RF) provided the basis for designing the M&E system, which was
 simple, while focusing entirely on output indicators and measures; also, the Bank team had to rely on the
 M&E roles of the participating UN agencies in charge of the implementation of the different components;

 (ii) the original RF captured major project targets; the RF was updated at the time of the 2017 restructuring,
 including several new indicators and revised end targets, although still with an output focus;

 (iv) the RF (presented in the PAD and ICR/Annex 1), including the updated RF, focused on using mostly
 output level indicators, lacking relevant indicators for the project’s stated five outcomes (as stated above);
 and

 (v) there was absence of an integrated and coherent M&E system designed for the project, and the M&E
 activities were fragmented among various entities, with little involvement of the Government (as part of it’s
 a larger M&E system for emergency operations).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation proceeded smoothly, while also facing numerous challenges, as follows:

  (i) Implementing UN agencies managed their own M&E system and tracked implementation of their own
  activities independently, based on the project’s overall M&E system. Each agency monitored and
  reported on its own activities adequately, submitting both regular reports and special reports on activities
  and missions (e.g., FAO reported on surveys to collect harvest-related information and on missions sent
  to supervise vaccination campaigns; IOM conducted regular monitoring missions for its activities and
  prepared reports, including observation of activities and focus group discussions with beneficiaries;
  UNICEF conducted regular supervision missions and reported on all its activities);

  (ii) Field agents financed under the project were trained to monitor and supervise local-level activities of
  all three agencies. The agents were provided with equipment (3 cars, 10 motorcycles, and 13
  computers);

  (iii) Implementing UN agencies managed their own M&E system, and tracked and reported on
  implementation of their own activities independently, submitting both regular reports and special reports


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



  on activities and missions. For example: (a) FAO reported on surveys to collect harvest- related
  information and on missions sent to supervise vaccination campaigns; (b) IOM conducted regular
  monitoring missions for its activities and prepared reports, including observation of activities and focus
  group discussions with beneficiaries; (c) UNICEF conducted regular supervision missions and reported
  on all its activities; Field agents financed under the project were trained to monitor and supervise local-
  level activities of all three UN agencies;

  However, these reports focused primarily on tracking project activities and outputs. Also, initially, the
  templates of the three agencies were not directly integrated into the Project’s Results Framework and
  indicators. Subsequently, the Bank team resolved this issue;

  (iv) The Bank convened monthly meetings with the UN agencies and GoC focal points, based on
  preparing/sharing with the UN agencies a unified Results Framework, which was integrated into their
  M&E reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Project’s M&E system/information was utilized effectively,

  (i) The Bank convened monthly meetings with the UN agencies and GoC focal points, and shared a
  unified Results Framework with the UN agencies to be integrated into their M&E reporting;

  (ii) GoC lacked an M&E system for emergency operations, and GoC was involved in a very limited
  manner in the M&E activities of this project, and therefore, there was a missed opportunity to use the
  project to help GoC further develop its M&E system for emergency type of interventions;

  (iii) The results of the various reports cited above provided inputs to the Project Implementation Unit
  (PMU), eventually, from PROPAD, and which had overall responsibility for project implementation, while
  also under the overall purview of the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation. The extent to
  which the PURCAE progress reports were utilized for improved project decisions and performance is not
  clear in the ICR.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B (partial assessment), because potentially negative impacts were
   expected to be local and limited, and specific mitigation measures had been designed. This included an
   Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF), which provided general
   policies, guidelines, codes of practice, and procedures, and which were integrated into the design and
   implementation of the project. Accordingly, Project design triggered two safeguards’ policies: OP/BP 4.01



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



  Environmental Assessment; and OP4.09 Pest Management. Overall, the Project complied with these two
  safeguard policies/requirements, although requiring some follow-up support by Bank missions.

  (i) the OP/BP 4.01 environmental assessment was triggered because of potential environmental impacts in
  the support to the intensification and diversification of agricultural production as well as activities to address
  livestock health (a vaccination campaign and feed) and restocking, and the construction and/or
  rehabilitation of small-scale storage infrastructure. The ESSAF and the Environmental and Social
  Management Framework (ESMF) were prepared before appraisal. The later was updated for the 2017
  restructuring (in mid-2017). No specific Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared.
  In practice, each participating UN agency followed its own procedures to assess potential environmental
  and social risks and impacts of their activities;

  (ii) the OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management) was prepared because the project supported the scaling up and/or
  intensification of agricultural and livestock production activities. Beneficiaries were likely to adopt
  pest management practices potentially involving an increased use of chemical pesticides with negative
  environmental and health impacts. To address OP/BP 4.09 requirements, the Pest and Pesticide
  Management Plan (PPMP), was developed for the ongoing IDA- funded EAPSP (P126576), and it was
  updated and used for PURCAE;

  (iii) Regular Bank supervision missions reviewed the environmental and social compliance, and rated
  compliance as “Moderately Satisfactory”. While the ICR highlighted some shortcomings (involving works,
  pesticides, wells/pits), they were addressed and properly corrected (para. 85);

  (iv) There were numerous public consultations involving environmental effects of the project, which included
  community mobilization and engagement by the three UN agencies (FAO, IOM and UNICEF), including
  community mapping exercises involving large and diverse members of the community, which proved key to
  promoting local ownership and sustainability of project activities (para. 86);

  (v) The project included grievance redress processes/mechanism, although there was an initial delay in
  setting up a consolidated complaint management mechanism. IOM set up a system (2019), and the
  complaints were investigated and resolved satisfactorily (para. 87).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Procurement. (a) procurement inadequacies were relatively minor, mainly related to business planning
  and contract management; (b) otherwise, all procurement activities were well implemented, with the goods,
  works and services consistent with Bank review and compliance guidelines and delivered on time.

  (ii) Financial Management/FM.

  (a) financial management policies, procedures and covenants were complied with, and overall
  performance was rated Satisfactory (last ISR, 2020); (b) in accordance with agreements with GoC, the 3
  UN service providers (UNICEF, IOM and FAO) used satisfactorily their own financial management
  procedures. However, there was a reported delay in paying the start-up advance due to a delay in IOM
  signing the project contract; while the payment was delayed to June, 2019, due to bureaucratic and
  technical reasons, and which affected/delayed the disbursement process of the entire portfolio. At the

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



  same time, IOM was able to prefinance start-up activities, and therefore, this lag did not cause significant
  implementation delays (ICR, para. 89); (c) The PIUs of two Bank-supported projects that were supporting
  the project (EAPSP, and subsequently PRAPS) provided needed assistance to the UN agencies on
  financial management; (d) Supervision missions addressed fiduciary aspects and also, gave hands-on
  support; (e) Financial reports were prepared in compliance with Bank requirements, and were delivered on
  time by each of the participating UN agencies; (f) The Project’s PIU submitted these reports to the Bank
  within 45 days of the end of each quarter; (g) However, apart from the information provided through Aide-
  memoires and ISRs, there were no consolidated financial reports. Since the implementing UN agencies
  were considered as direct grant recipients, World Bank audits were not required.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
  The ICR highlighted 3 other positive aspects arising from the project. While recognizing some attribution
  challenges, the nature/scope of these benefits are summarized below, based on evidence presented in the
  ICR, paras. 59 – 61).

  (i) Gender (para. 59): In the social and cultural context of the Project, men are the almost exclusive
  decision-makers. Project design specifically addressed social and economic inequalities existing between
  men and women, with a view to helping to close gender gaps, as follows: (a) almost all project activities,
  including awareness-raising and capacity building initiatives, consistently supported women’s participation;
  (b) a PDO indicator measured women’s participation: overall, women constituted 53% of beneficiaries of all
  activities combined (above the target of 52%), and about 55% of cash-for-work activities; (c) the Project
  contributed to increasing women’s agricultural assets and income earning and employment opportunities,
  as well as their meaningful participation in decision-making; (d) several project activities were specifically
  targeted at women, including safe water provision; and (e) capacity building was conducted for 217 lead
  women (known as “Women Ambassadors”), organized in 47 groups.

  (ii) Institutional Strengthening (para. 60): The three UN agencies (initially WFP and FAO, and subsequently,
  IMO replaced WFP, together with UNICEF) that implemented the project components delivered services
  largely through contracting with local NGOs. This arrangement generated double benefits: ensured effective
  grass roots implementation; and provided significant capacity building effects on local NGOs, which are
  committed to working in the project area for the medium to long term. These arrangements also
  strengthened the cooperation between NGOs and local public services and served to strengthen links
  between the UN agencies and local partners/government agencies. Training provided to ministry staff also
  helped to strengthen public service entities. However, by the end of the project, there was limited
  substantive and direct capacity building of government entities.

  (iii) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (para. 61): There were 4 dimensions: (a) The Project
  contributed to reducing the vulnerability of RRHCs and to strengthening their resilience, important
  components of poverty reduction; (b) The food assistance component provided the poorest among the
  target population with short term food support, reducing hunger and malnutrition; (c) targeted interventions
  also supported sustainable productive asset-building activities and investment in improved cooking systems
  and clean drinking water, which together improved nutritional and health status; (d) the agriculture


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



   production and livestock stabilization component, also targeted at beneficiaries who were very poor,
   contributed to increases in food and animal production and in cash incomes that improved livelihoods, while
   recognizing depth and sustainability aspects of poverty reduction were weak (see below).



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  IEG assessed high relevance, a
                                                                                  marginal substantial rating for
                                                                                  efficacy with moderate
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    shortcomings and substantial
                                                                                  efficiency, thereby resulting in an
                                                                                  overall outcome rating of
                                                                                  “moderately satisfactory”.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents 6 lessons which are based on project implementation experience and supporting
evidence, considering both positive and “mixed” performance (ICR, paras. 104 - 108). The relevant
aspects of the lessons that have broader application beyond this project are summarized
below. IEG suggests one additional lesson, which provides a further elaboration of the sixth lesson.

(1) Ownership and Strategies: Country ownership, including strong alignment of the project with
national policies and strategies, coupled with clear, timebound and sound implementation and
sustainability action plan, especially for an emergency type of project, is crucial to lay a strong
foundation for securing tangible and sustainable results;

(2) Attainable Objectives: Practical and attainable objectives, coupled with coherent components
and prioritized interventions are vital to generate tangible and sustainable results, especially in the
context of a short-term emergency project, taking into account the available timeframe and
resources;

(3) Mixture of Output and Outcome Performance Measures: Emergency-type of projects should
endeavor to include an appropriate mix of output and outcome performance measures, especially
during an expanded phase of financial support, which can contribute to laying a sound foundation for
developmental-type of approaches to sustainable development;

(4) Practical Approach to Emergency Operations: There are strong practical advantages for an
emergency-type of project to utilize, finance, build-on and expand, and strengthen agencies and


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



activities which are already in place and operational, while making the relevant adjustments to
achieve and sustain the project objectives. This approach also balances the need to ensure
implementation readiness, adequacy of fiduciary arrangements and the strengthening of local
capacities, especially to enable the transition from emergency support to developmental support;

(5) Role of Partner Agencies: Emergency-type of operations merit reliance on utilizing partner
development agencies which demonstrate a comparative advantage for helping to meet the project
objectives, which ensuring they carryout appropriate actions to strengthen relevant local entities to
enable the transition to more sustainable developmental approaches and results;

(6) Strategic Nexus: There is a strong nexus between emergency situations and sustainable
socioeconomic development, accompanied by the appropriate type of project interventions. Short-
term emergency operations which are aimed at improving food security of populations in time of
crisis are best accompanied by an operational medium to long-term plan of activities aimed at
strengthening national capacities, resilience, combatting poverty, improving local livelihoods,
creating jobs and generating increased incomes of the target populations. Accordingly, this nexus is
enabled and best achieved when an emergency-type of project devises and operationalizes relevant
action plan and outcome indicators and measures to promote and assess progress toward meeting
the project’s follow up phase, especially with respect to developmental objectives.

An additional lesson arising from this ICRR is that results-focused emergency projects include
explicit action plans, measures and arrangements for helping to scale-up and sustain relevant
emergency and sustainable interventions, especially to ensure tangible pathways to achieving the
above-mentioned nexus between emergency operations and sustainable socio-economic
development.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well written, consistent with the guidelines, analytical, subject to being an emergency
operation with no accompanying ex-ante and ex-post EFA and beneficiary feedback, a strong output-focus,
candid with respect to the project’s “fragile” results and high risks of sustaining the benefits (paras. 102 and
103). While the ICR reconstructs a generally sound ToC, supported by five appropriate outcomes, the
accompanying updated Results Framework lacks relevant indicators to measure the expected changes. Also,
notwithstanding the evaluation report prepared by FAO and IOM, the ICR lacks evidence which measures
progress toward the expected five outcomes, and which can substantiate many of the conclusions made in the
ICR. The RF indicators focus entirely on outputs.

While recognizing the emergency nature of the project, the risk section did not highlight sufficiently and
explicitly the need for clear strategies and interventions to sustain and expand the project’s key outputs,
especially given the likely continued emergency conditions (ICR, paras. 102 and 103). Also, while the PAD


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Food and Livestock Crisis Resp (P151215)



included a detailed Operational Risk Assessment Framework (Annex 4), the ICR did not provide an
assessment of the implementation and results of the proposed mitigation measures.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                              Page 20 of 20
