     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022523

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P133021                                     Value Chain Support Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                        Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9550                                   30-Sep-2019                                           9,191,271.90

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-May-2014                                 31-Jan-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,200,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,200,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          9,192,023.96                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          John R. Eriksson              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement (FA) on page 4, "the objective of the project was to improve: (i) targeted
   aspects of the business environment; and (ii) the performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of
   Chad". The statement of the Project Development Objective (PDO) in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD)
   on page 11 is identical, and was unchanged throughout the period of project implementation.

   During the April 2018 project restructuring, resources were reallocated and the results framework was
   significantly revised, including reductions in a number of target values, and the ICR undertook a split

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



   assessment of the project performance. Owing to the fact that targets were reduced, although total resources
   remained the same, this review will also use the split approach to assess the project performance, and will
   parse the PDO into the two sub-objectives below:

          (i) PDO 1: To improve targeted aspects of the business environment
          (ii) PDO 2: To improve the performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of Chad



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The presentation of the three project components draws mostly from the PAD (page 12-19), which is more
   comprehensive than that of the ICR.

   Component 1: Improving the Business Environment, Cost at appraisal of US$2 million, Cost at
   restructuring of US$1.5 million, with an actual amount of US$1.5 million. The component aimed at
   formulating and implementing business reforms in Chad through specific activities under the two sub-
   components described below:

          The first sub-component was to support the formulation and implementation of business
           environment reforms, and to specifically finance TA aimed at: (i) implementing the
           reform transferring all business creation procedures from the center for business creation to the
           National Investment and Export Agency (ANIE); (ii) formulating reforms simplifying the obligation to
           obtain an administrative authorization before becoming incorporated in the business register, (iii)
           reducing live cattle exports and increasing private investment in meat production; (iv) developing an
           interactive business database, and providing equipment and training for the operationalization of the
           One-Stop-Shop; (v) drafting and implementing a communication plan for the Guichet Unique,
           and (vi) providing TA in support to the ANIE.
          The second sub-component aimed to improve trade logistics procedures by establishing a
           favorable environment in the customs administration. The trade logistics activities were to provide
           TA aimed at: (i) formulating key reforms in administrative procedures and practices relating to trade;
           (ii) building capacity of customs officers and inspectors; and (iii) acquiring modern equipment for
           customs administration.

   Revised Component 1: The first restructuring in April 2018 consisted in dropping the second sub-
   component (improvement of trade logistics procedures) due to lack of progress and focus on the reforms.

   Component 2: Support to the Meat and Dairy Value Chains, Cost at appraisal of US$6 million, Cost
   at restructuring of US$5.8 million, with an actual amount of US$6.40 million. This component intended


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



   to strengthen the meat and dairy value chains by carrying out a program of activities aimed at improving
   meat and milk facilities, enhancing the meat industry to meet regionally accepted certification standards.
   Specific activities were planned under the two sub-components described below:

         The first sub-component aimed to fund: (i) the upgrading of existing slaughterhouses and eligible
          sacrifice areas in greater N’Djamena in order to increase their production capacity and efficiency; (ii)
          the acquisition and installation of solid waste management systems; and (iii) the refrigerated
          transportation equipment for the federations running the slaughterhouses and the slaughter areas.
          The project was also to support women smallholders in the dairy industry in close collaboration with
          existing women’s cooperatives active in the dairy sector.

         The second sub-component aimed to strengthen the domestic meat and dairy industries by
          responding to the growing demands from the local market for high quality and affordable meat and
          dairy products through improving the certification and quality standards. The project goal was (i) to
          provide technical assistance and training to enable the meat industry to achieve certification of
          regionally accepted quality and hygiene standards, and (ii) to develop business in the meat and
          dairy value chain, through a matching grant scheme using a two-window funding approach to
          provide financing with the aim of increasing small and medium enterprise (SME) production,
          improving their performance, and facilitating their access to local and regional markets with top
          quality products.

   Revised Component 2: Changes brought in during the April 2018 restructuring included the following: (i)
   the dropping of the rehabilitation of the Walia slaughterhouse (ii) the project focus on the acquisition of
   equipment for one slaughterhouse (Farcha), the upgrading of the infrastructure of one slaughter area
   including light construction work for a shelter for women, and (iii) the construction of two milk
   centers instead of rehabilitation of three milk centers.

   Component 3: Project Management, Cost at appraisal of US$1.3 million, Cost at restructuring of
   US$2.00 million, with an actual amount of US$2.00 million: This component was to build the capacity of
   national institutions responsible for project management, monitoring and evaluation, particularly to
   support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the areas of Project coordination, supervision, financial
   management, communication and outreach, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and supervision of
   implementation of the Safeguards Instruments.

   Revised Component 3: The activities under this component remained unchanged, but the budget was
   increased through the reallocation of funds from other components.

   Contingencies and Unallocated funds, Cost at appraisal of US$0.9 million, Cost at restructuring of
   US$0.3 million, with an actual amount of US$0.3 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
       Project Cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$10.0 million. Actual total
          project cost is US$9.2 million. As explained above, there were category reallocations and changes in
          costs for each of the three components during the April 2018 restructuring.
         Financing. At appraisal, the project financing was provided by an IDA grant estimated at US$10.00
          million. As the total cost amounted to US$9.2 million, grant funds were disbursed at 92 percent.

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



         Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, there was no planned borrower's contribution and there was
          none reported during project implementation. However, the Government has committed to cover
          equipment and installation cost to ensure full operation of the supported slaughterhouses and milk
          collections centers.
         Dates: The project was approved on May 22, 2014 and became effective on September 18, 2014.
          The project went through three level-2 restructurings as follows: (i) the first restructuring took
          place on April 03, 2018 and brought in changes in the results framework, in components and cost,
          and in the reallocation between disbursement categories; (ii) the second and third restructurings
          took place on September 24, 2019 and on December 05, 2019, extending the loan closing date
          respectively until December 31, 2019, and January 31, 2020. A Medium-Term Review was
          completed on November 13, 2017; and the project was closed on January 31, 2020, 4
          months beyond the original closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: For decades, Chad experienced protracted political instability and had weak political and
economic governance. Its economic base featured structural weaknesses, including electricity
constraints, complex customs and trade regulations, weak transportation systems and a large informal
sector. At project appraisal, the country’s investment and business environment were globally perceived
as unfavorable to the expansion of the private sector. Chad was ranked the lowest out of the 189 countries
in the 2014 Doing Business report. While Chad launched reforms aimed at improving the business climate
in 2012 through the setting up of a one-stop shop for business creation in the National Investment and
Export Agency (ANIE), the cost and time for starting a business remained uncompetitive in comparison to
similar countries. Compliance with taxes and trading across borders remained prohibitive and hindered the
value chains’ competitiveness and development. Because of the above obstacles, most economic
undertakings remained informal, including businesses in the meat and dairy value chains. This project
aimed to improve the business environment in general, with specific focus on upgrading the infrastructure
underpinning the meat and dairy value chains, for which Chad had a comparative advantage (PAD, para 8).

This ICR presented (para 38-39) the consistency between the project's PDOs, the country's priorities and
the World Bank's strategy in the country as summarized below.

The PDO was highly consistent and relevant to the country's priorities. At appraisal, Chad's
economic activity was dominated by the oil sector, and there was an urgent need to diversify its economy
and reduce the country's dependency on the oil sector and prices. The country needed to diversify its
economy to escape vulnerabilities to terms of trade and shocks. The 2013-2015 National Development Plan
(NDP) identified promising agricultural value chains which had the potential for competitiveness and
complementarity to the oil sector. The PDO were therefore consistent with the country’s two-pronged
strategy of improving the business environment and developing select value chains in the agribusiness
sector. There was also the need for improvement of the country’s investment and business environment in
general, starting by meat and dairy chains.




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



               The PDO was aligned with the World Bank's Country Strategy at closure. The project was consistent
               with the key pillars of the FY16-20 Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The project was to contribute to
               the second pillar of the CPF aimed at "improving returns to agriculture and building value chains" which had
               two objectives as follows: (i) "more productive and resilient agriculture" and (ii) "improved environment for
               private sector investment". The PDOs were well aligned with the CPF objectives. In particular, increasing
               the performance of agro-pastoral value chains aimed to achieve a more productive agriculture. The April
               2018 changes did not affect the PDO, but rather narrowed the focus of the project to make the PDO more
               achievable.

               World Bank's limited involvement in Chad and lack of Implementation readiness hindered prompt
               launching of the project activities: The ICR did not indicate if the Bank had ever been active in the agro-
               industry sector prior to the launch of this project. Moreover, technical capacity was generally weak, and
               particularly undeveloped in supervising projects in the meat and dairy sector. While the PDOs were
               congruent with the country's priorities and with the World Bank's program of interventions, the absence of
               earlier Bank involvement, except for some analytical work, which the ICR judged as insufficiently supporting
               project preparation (ICR para 93), and the technical capacity shortcomings lead to a substantial rating of
               relevance of objectives.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve targeted aspects of the business environment

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             There was no theory of change either in the PAD or in the April 2018 restructuring project paper establishing
                             the linkage between the project activities and the PDOs pursued by the World Bank's grant financing. The
                             ICR constructed a result chain (Figure 1), which outlined the mechanism through which project
                             activities were to generate the desired outputs and outcomes. This review draws from the ICR material
                             (Figure 1) to present the results chain underlying the process toward the project development objectives.

                             The theory of change toward improving targeted aspects of the business environment was underpinned by (i)
                             activities aimed at improving the business environment like the operationalization of the One-Stop-Shop

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



window, and the strengthening of the National Investment and Export Agency (ANIE), and (ii) reforms for
improved business environment, including the identification of all legal bottlenecks hindering private sector
development, the simplification of business procedures, and the trade logistics. Expected outputs included an
operational One-Stop-Shop, a strengthened ANIE, and new laws and regulations adopted. Immediate
outcomes included an enhanced technical capacity in the agro-pastoral sector to respond to markets
standards, and an improved business-enabling environment, notably the reduction of time needed to process
the creation of a company.

The theory of change in the ICR did not identify the assumptions underlying the achievement of the expected
results toward the above PDO. Two key assumptions that needed to be in place to create ideal conditions
were as follows: (i) the existence of specialized expertise to design and implement the project, and (ii) a
satisfactory coordination and dialogue among project stakeholders. The above assumptions were unfulfilled
and this was at the core of the limited project outcome under this objective.

The achieved results presented below are drawn from the pages 14-17 of the ICR:

Outputs

      The target of GUCE trained agents in business creation procedures was exceeded, reaching 30
         agents against a revised target 20, and an overseas trip of three executives took place;
      The target of newly created and registered firms in the ANIE/GUCE database was exceeded by 28
         percent, reaching the number of 7,683 private firms against a revised target of 6,000; and a baseline
         of 3,000. The project contributed to the setup of 1900 registered businesses through the reformed
         business registration process at the Single Window.

      Three standard regulations for companies of at least 25 employees were developed and validated;
      Legal texts (bill, package of incentive measures and plan of action) on the statute of entrepreneurs
         were developed and validated;
        The One-Stop-Shop for Business Creation (GUCE) offices were rehabilitated, allowing staff
         redeployment according to the organizational mode;
        A software application enabling the production of statistics and computerization of business creation
         forms was developed;
        The National Trade and Credit Register was computerized;
        The ANIE was modernized through a website renovation, and the provision of computers, reprography
         and communication equipment; the above ANIE technical improvements led to an expanded public
         outreach, including 24,607 users, 34,953 consultation sessions and 37,717 pages viewed by
         December 15, 2018;
        The following studies were completed: (i) the study on the constraints related to logistics meat and
         milk, and (ii) the study on business licenses and the taxation of exports in the meat sector, and
        The project supported the customs to train about 39 customs officers against a target of 75 for the
         entire project; the training focused on customs modernization, specifically, risk management in
         customs inspections, customs valuation, and post audit control mechanisms, but progress was
         discontinued following the cancellation of activities at restructuring.

Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




      The original target for the start-up process time for a company was missed. It was reduced from 62 to
       58 days, against a revised target of 29.4 days, representing a reduction of 4 days according to the last
       Doing Business 2020 report
      The original target for the direct project beneficiaries was missed (202 against a 543 end target), but
       surpassed the target for women (26 percent against 20 percent end target); and
      The original target indicator for the reduction of the time to export to the level of other sub‐Saharan
       countries was dropped at the April 2018 restructuring, and no results were reported.

Overall, achievements were negligible, because all three outcome targets (direct beneficiaries, startup
process time, and time to export) were missed, justifying a negligible rating of the PDO.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve targeted aspects of the business environment

Revised Rationale
Theory of change

 While the theory of change presented in the context of the original project holds for the restructured project,
the resources reallocation within and among categories during the March 2018 restructuring slightly
affected the theory of change of the first PDO. Following the resources reallocation, the activities aimed at
improving trade logistics procedures by establishing a favorable environment in the customs administration
were canceled, and the performance indicator related to reducing the time to export to other sub-Saharan
countries was also dropped.

The achieved results presented below are drawn from the pages 15-17 of the ICR:

Outputs:

      The outputs without targets presented under the original project count for the efficacy of the
       restructured project.
      The number of companies newly registered through the Single Window/ANIE was surpassed at 128.5
       percent at project completion (7,683 number of newly registered companies against 6,000 companies
       expected at restructuring);
      The number of Single Window's employees trained to improve efficiency was exceeded,
       as achievements target (30) represented 150 percent of the revised target (20), and
      The communication plan was prepared and operationalized in April 2016.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



Outcomes:

      The original target to reduce the start-up process time for a company was partially achieved. It was
       reduced from 62 to 58 days, equating to a 5 percent reduction, against a target of 10 percent; and
      There was a total of 2,825 direct project beneficiaries (SMEs, cooperatives and organizations, and
       public institutions), of which 767 women, against a revised target of 350, and the target was largely
       exceeded.

In summary, the outcome was modestly achieved, as one outcome indicator was exceeded, and another one
was partially achieved.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of Chad

Rationale
Theory of change

The theory of change toward improving the performance of agro-pastoral value chains was predicated around
two categories of activities aimed at enhancing the agro-pastoral value chains, and at upgrading existing
infrastructure facilities. Those activities included (i) strengthening the food quality control center, the provision
of matching grants for SME and business development services for agro-pastoral value chains, and (ii) the
provision of refrigerated transportation equipment and installation of solid waste management systems.
Expected outputs included (i) the number of matching grants approved for selected value chains, (ii) the
number of workers working in the value chains trained, and (iii) standard operating procedures developed.
Expected outcomes were (i) improved competitiveness of the two selected value chains, (ii) increased
value added to agro-pastoral products, and (iii) adequate critical infrastructure for the meat value chain.

The theory of change in the ICR did not identify the assumptions underlying the achievement of the expected
results toward the above PDO. Two key assumptions that needed to be in place to create ideal conditions
were as follows: (i) the existence of specialized expertise to design and implement the project, and (ii)
satisfactory coordination and dialogue among project stakeholders. The above assumptions were unfulfilled
and this was at the core of the limited project outcome under this objective.

The achieved results presented below are drawn from the pages 17-19 of the ICR:

Outputs (most of them have no targets)

      The target of the volume of milk produced and sold in targeted zones was missed, reaching
       540,000.00 liters against a target of 1,080,000.00 liters. Due to implementation delays, the milk
       collection and marketing centers’ staff was not trained on how to operate the milk production
       equipment.

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




      The Diguel Nord slaughterhouse was rehabilitated; with the addition of inter alia of a slaughter area, a
         hangar, and the construction of a water tower with a submersible pump and an electric supply system;
        The Guilmey and Linia milk collection centers were constructed and equipped, including inter alia a
         local collection center; a drinking water supply, and the construction of a water tower with a
         submersible pump and a solar panel power supply system;
        The milk conservation and marketing center of Tacha Moussoro was constructed and equipped,
         including inter alia: a main building covering an area of 156 m², a room for sterilization of spoiled milk,
         a reception platform, an analysis counter, and a room for pasteurization and packaging, and the
         construction of a water tower with a submersible pump and a solar panel power supply system;
        The above infrastructure (slaughterhouse and milk collection centers) were not operational a closure,
         because of shortcomings in the supervision and control of works, and in the compliance with
         environmental and social norms;
        The Farcha refrigerated slaughterhouse was equipped and is now operational, resulting in 13,587,747
         tons of processed meat delivered to the four markets of the capital city;
        67 producers including seven women were trained in health monitoring, veterinary care and
         preparation of multi-nutritional blocks;
        A second training session in favor of 135 dairy farmers, including 21 women, took place in 2018,
         covering veterinary care, food making, and milking hygiene and breeding practices;
        Veterinary services and complementary fodder for about 1000 dairy cows of 21 cooperatives of milk
         producers (including women) were provided;
        The matching grant funded 26 micro-projects through window 2 (support to the implementation of the
         microproject in the targeted value chains) and 8 activities through window 1 (business development
         support). The selected micro-projects were intended to boost the development of micro-SMEs in the
         meat and milk sector; and

Outcome

      The target for the meat produced in the slaughterhouses and slaughter areas in target zones was
       exceeded (+49 percent), reaching 30,587,748 tons of meat produced against an original target
       of 23,542 tons, and a baseline of 18,542 tons. The meat production resulted from the rehabilitation
       and equipment of the Diguel slaughterhouse, an increase in a number of slaughtered animals, and the
       supply of two refrigerated vehicles to distribute meat from the Farcha and Diguel areas to the four
       selling markets of the capital city; however, attribution is partial as most supplied equipment was not
       installed yet at closure;
      The target related to the contribution to the private sector through the matching grant scheme
       was missed (only 35 percent of target achieved), reaching an amount of US$511,081, against a target
       of US$1,450,000.00.

In all, results were mixed, with some progress toward improving the performance of the country's agro-
pastoral value chains, but implementation delays hampered the early acquisition of critical infrastructure and
the training of needed staff. Consequently, a key outcome target (the contribution of the private sector
through the matching grant) was missed, leading to a modest rating of the achieved outcome.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of Chad

Revised Rationale
Theory of change

While the theory of change presented in the context of the original project holds for the restructured project,
the resources reallocation within and among categories during the March 2018 restructuring slightly
affected the theory of change of the first PDO. Following the resources reallocation, the activities aimed at
improving trade logistics procedures by establishing a favorable environment in the customs administration
were canceled, and the performance indicator related to reducing the time to export to other sub-Saharan
countries was also dropped.

The achieved results presented below are drawn from the pages 17-19 of the ICR:

Outputs

      The outputs without targets presented under the original project and presented above count for the
         restructured project.
        The target of the volume of milk produced and sold in targeted zones was missed, reaching
         540,000.00 liters against a target of 1,080,000.00 liters;
        Five infrastructure facilities were modernized against a target of three: (i) the Farcha slaughterhouse is
         now operational; (iii) a second slaughter house (Diguel) was totally rehabilitated, equipped and fully
         functioning; and (iii) three milk collection and marketing centers in Guilmey, Linia and Tacha Moussoro
         were constructed and equipped, but they do not fully function due to technical problems;
        The target of number of workers active in the value chain having received technical assistance was
         exceeded, reaching 1778, of which 588 were women, against a target of 200. The project provided
         direct support for business development in the meat and milk value chains through capacity building
         for quality control and hygiene services in the meat and milk production and marketing industries;
        The target for the number of SMEs in the meat value chain and dairy subsector supported through the
         matching grant program was exceeded, reaching 78 SMEs supported though the MGF. By sector, 35
         beneficiaries of 38 micro-projects were in the milk sector, 36 beneficiaries of 37 micro-projects were in
         the meat sector, 4 farms (5 percent) and 3 private veterinary clinics (3.8 percent).
        The target related to the contribution of the private sector through the matching grant scheme
         was practically achieved, reaching US$973,849, or 97 percent of the revised target of US$1,000,000.
        The target for the volume of milk produced and sold in targeted zones was 1,000,000 liters against a
         baseline of 540,000 was missed. The centers could not be fully functional due to (i)
         the noncompliance with technical standards and (ii) the staff was not trained in producing and selling
         milk. Therefore the amount of milk produced so far is not fully attributable to the project.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



                              Outcome

                                    The target for the meat produced in the slaughterhouses and slaughter areas in target zones was
                                     exceeded (+56 percent) , reaching 30,587,748 tons of meat produced against revised target of 19,500
                                     tons, and a baseline of 18,542 tons. The meat production resulted from the rehabilitation and
                                     equipment of the Diguel slaughterhouse, an increase in a number of slaughtered animals, and the
                                     supply of two refrigerated vehicles to distribute meat from the Farcha and Diguel areas to the four
                                     selling markets of the capital city; however, this outcome could have been much higher if all
                                     equipment had been installed;
                                    The target for the contribution of the private sector through the matching grant scheme was exceeded
                                     (+200 percent) reaching US$511,081 against a revised target of US$250,000, reflecting the impact of
                                     the MGF;
                                    Finally, beneficiaries interviewed confirmed that the project support resulted in a decreased risk of
                                     animal diseases, and significant increase in the daily quantities of milk produced from about 2 liters to
                                     4 liters per cow (ICR, pages 15-16).
                                    On balance, the achieved outcome is rated as substantial.




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy under the original project was overall modest.

                            Project performance toward an improved business environment was negligible, because all three outcome
                            targets (direct beneficiaries, startup process time, and time to export) were missed. Outcomes toward the
                            second objective was modestly achieved, as the targeted contribution of the private sector was missed, while
                            the target of meat produced in the slaughterhouses and slaughter areas was largely exceeded. On balance,
                            the efficacy of the original project is rated modest.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



  Efficacy under the restructured project was overall modest

  Project performance toward an improved business environment was mixed, with a key outcome target
  missed, and another one achieved. Achievement under the first objective for a reduction in time to register a
  business fell short of the revised target, while the revised target for direct project beneficiaries was largely
  exceeded. Efficacy under the first objective is rated modest. Toward the second objective of modernizing
  the agro-pastoral value chains, efficacy is rated as substantial as a result of achievements in the number of
  SMEs in the meat value chain and dairy subsector, the meat produced in the slaughterhouses and slaughter
  areas in target zones (attribution is partial as most supplied equipment was not installed yet at closure), the
  contribution of the private sector, and the increase in the daily quantities of milk produced. Efficacy under the
  second objective is rated as a weak substantial. On balance, the overall efficacy of the restructured project is
  rated modest.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
  Modest                                                    Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

The economic and financial efficiency of the project was discussed on para 46-47 of the ICR, and the findings
are summarized in the following lines. At appraisal, the analysis aimed to quantify the net benefits projected to
be realized after the implementation of the second component supporting the meat and milk value chains.
Expected economic benefits were to arise from increased private investment and additional income for
stakeholders in the meat and milk value chains, jobs creation; and reduction of household food insecurity. Main
costs included the capital expenditure on the construction and installation of facilities and equipment. Based on
the above, the project was to generate an Economic Internal rate of Return (EIRR) of 32 percent and an
Economic Present Value (ENPV) of US$1.746 million.

The ICR indicates on para 47 that there was no update ex-post of the economic analysis conducted at appraisal,
because the relevant information was not available at the time of ICR preparation. Given that a number of
outputs and outcomes were derived from the implementation of the second component, notionally some level of
positive economic benefits was achieved, however unquantifiable and unknown. The economic efficiency of the
project is unknown.

Administrative and Implementation Efficiency

The key weakness of the project was the absence of the required expertise to appraise, design and implement a
project in the meat and milk value chain, which resulted in a flawed costing of the project components,
implementation delays and restructurings. Because of shortcomings in the supervision and control of works,
and in the compliance with environmental and social norms; the project was not implemented smoothly, and
major equipment funded by the project was neither delivered nor installed. At appraisal, the planned closing date
was September 30, 2019, and the planned implementation period was 60 months. The closing date was
extended to January 31, 2020 to allow for completion of project activities, and the actual implementation period
was 64 months, 4 months longer than planned. The appraised project cost was US$10.20 million. The actual
project cost at completion was US$9.19 million. The project team indicated that an extension of six months

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



would have allowed full procurement of remaining equipment, elevating the chance of achieving the project
outcomes.

Because of the major operational and administrative shortcomings described above and that there was no
update of the project economic efficiency, efficiency is rated as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Outcome under the original project. Relevance of objectives to the country and Bank strategies was
substantial. Efficacy of the original project with the two objectives - to improve targeted aspects of the business
environment, and -to improve the performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of Chad- is rated as
Modest. Efficiency is rated as Negligible, as the there was no update of the project economic efficiency and
there were operational and administrative shortcomings. The overall outcome performance of the
original project is rated as Unsatisfactory.

Outcome under the restructured project. Relevance of objectives to the country and Bank strategies was
substantial. Efficacy of the restructured project toward the two objectives -to improve targeted aspects of the
business environment, and -to improve the performance of agro-pastoral value chains in the Republic of Chad-
is rated as modest. Efficiency is rated as Negligible. The overall outcome rating for the restructured project is
rated as Unsatisfactory.

Taking into account the ratings discussed above, the overall rating is Unsatisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Results achieved toward improving the business environment might be sustained, given that the GUCE and
the ANIE are operational and accepted by the business community, and that further sector support is
expected from the Government and the donor community. However, sustainability in the meat and milk value
chain is more susceptible to facing technical risks owing to capacity weaknesses, such as the lack of
expertise needed to run and modernize the supported value chain, given that the acquired equipment to
boost the milk collection centers and the Farcha and Diguel slaughterhouses was not yet installed, and that
the refrigeration system was neither in place nor to be handled by qualified personnel.

The following actions might contribute to sustaining achieved outcome: (i) the Bank team hired a local private
firm to provide training and technical follow-up and ensure that the milk collection centers are functional; (ii)
an Emirati private company has committed to buying out the Farcha slaughterhouse if the Government is
favorable to this initiative, and (iii) the Government has written a letter in February 2021 to the World Bank
requesting a follow-on project supporting the private sector development in the amount of US$100 million.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The material provided in the ICR on pages 57-67, and 93-94 was the assessment base of the quality-at-
  entry summarized below, and covers the aspects of strategic relevance, implementation and M&E
  arrangements, and risks assessment at project appraisal.

  While the PDO was consistent with Chad’s priorities at the time, the project design had the
  following weaknesses related to strategic relevance: (i) the design did not rely on lessons learned
  from previous World Bank operations, particularly the need for any project design to reflect the
  Government commitment and to have an established implementation capacity, (ii) the design was not
  supported by sound research and appropriate risk assessments, including risk mitigation measures, to
  better understand the meat and milk sector during preparation, it was rushed and it underestimated the
  real cost of project components, particularly the rehabilitation of planned infrastructure works, (iii) the
  project objectives were overambitious, as the project did not mitigate sufficiently the weak technical
  capacity, the political environment and security threats, and the environmental and social risks of
  rehabilitating slaughterhouses, (iv) the project appraisal did not serve to establish a good rapport with the
  Government and other stakeholders, and finally (v) as developed under the Section 9, the M&E system
  was poorly designed.

  Project implementation readiness was insufficient, given the technical complexity of the project, and the
  lack of adequate expertise in the PCU and the Government. Project implementation monitoring was
  interrupted by a lack of adequate competencies of the staffs appointed by the Government. On the Bank

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



  side, there was an unjustified rush to closing the project instead of extending for a few months to increase
  the likelihood of achieving the project outcomes.

  While risks were generally identified in the PAD, some were underestimated and others had insufficient
  mitigation measures. Particularly, the Government commitment and capacity risks were
  underestimated, and the limited intergovernmental coordination delayed project implementation. Political
  risks were beyond the government’s capacity to mitigate, including the Boko Haram activity which
  materialized during implementation and prompted the dropping of the component supporting customs at
  the restructuring phase. The Government’s ownership risk was rated as substantial, which ended up
  being a significant underestimation, given the poor PCU capacity, the Government's inability to address
  terrorisms and transnational crime in the country. Finally, the selection of stakeholders was inappropriate,
  because although the target population of butchers and veterinarians was highly relevant, that category
  of stakeholders could not understand and embrace the Matching Grant model.

  Overall, there were significant shortcomings during project appraisal and preparation, justifying a
  Moderately Unsatisfactory rating of the quality-at-entry.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The assessment of the Bank supervision is summarized below based on the material provided in the ICR in
 paragraphs 68-83, and 95-96. It discusses the focus on impact, adequacy of inputs and processes for
 project implementation, fiduciary and safeguards, and performance reporting.

 While the Bank team remained focused on the development impact, cooperation between the WB and the
 Government was difficult throughout, hampering the quality of delivery. The rehabilitation of the
 Farcha slaughterhouse was not completed as the equipment was not installed because the Government
 did not disburse the expected funds to provide the additional equipment despite the regular follow up from
 the PCU and the Bank team. Moreover, the political instability and undue Government interference affected
 the smooth running of the Project Coordination Unit. To illustrate this, some ministers suggested the
 interruption of the project, illustrating the lack of ownership and political support to continue with
 the project. Lack of sufficient resources due to underestimated costs emerged as the project was supposed
 to finance the full rehabilitation of four slaughterhouses.

 During implementation, real cost estimations revealed that the needs had been underestimated and only
 limited rehabilitation of the slaughterhouses could be financed. Moreover, there was a lack of
 understanding by the management of the matching scheme, which was a key component of the project. A
 specialist of Matching grants was hired to establish consistency and better communication among key
 stakeholders. This was partially overcome during the first restructuring that reallocated the resources and
 refined the results framework to enable the project to meet its objectives. The 2018 restructuring
 redesigned activities that were undertaken within the limits of the available budget resources. Improving the
 procedures and strengthening the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) operational capacities strengthened
 project management, and accelerated implementation and disbursement.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



 The limited technical expertise and the absence of a clear implementation road map and guidance as
 regards to environmental and social safeguards problems caused a significant delay in launching the
 infrastructure modernization work. Project supervision was difficult, because of geographical distance from
 the client, as the first Task Team Leader (TTL) was first based in Burkina Faso prior to moving to
 Washington, DC. In addition, the project team had difficulties in establishing a constructive working
 relationship with the PCU, which negatively affected the project implementation. The remote supervision,
 lack of capacity and responsiveness of the PCU, and deepening of collaboration issues, contributed to an
 accumulation of strains between the Government and the Bank in the first three and a half years that could
 not be resolved until the TTL was replaced. Other changes that improved project implementation were (i)
 the change of the project coordinator, (ii) the designation of a steering committee to oversee the work of
 the PCU, (iii) the competitive recruitment of a sub-coordinator prior to restructuring; and (iv) more frequent
 supervision missions from the WB team.

 The Bank team progressively developed a more collaborative approach to finding solutions to social and
 environment issues, but because of serious safeguards issues not properly identified during the project
 design, the rehabilitation of the Walia slaughter area was dropped at restructuring. Delays and low
 disbursement in early years were raised in multiple aide-mémoire's and ISRs. While the team qualitatively
 accelerated project activities and disbursement, the Bank teams and PCU did not resolve the issue of lack
 of technical expertise in the milk and meat sectors. In the post-restructuring period, World Bank
 supervision significantly improved during the last two years and was proactive, but the abrupt project
 closing did not allow the delivery and installation of key components of the meat and milk value chain.

 Based on the above, there were significant shortcomings in the proactive dentification of opportunities and
 resolution of threats, pointing to a Moderately Unsatisfactory rating of the Bank supervision.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The assessment of the M&E design, implementation and utilization draws from the ICR material presented
 on pages 27-28.

 The PDOs were clearly stated and were sustained from design until closure and through the 2018
 restructuring. The goal was to upgrade the business environment in general, and more specifically to
 modernize the infrastructure and improve the efficiency and sustainability of the meat and milk chains.
 However, there was no stated theory of change at appraisal.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



 The original M&E system was poorly designed to collect, analyze, and provide decision makers with
 methodologically sound assessments. Moreover, a low level of engagement by the Government and weak
 technical capacity caused delays in preparation of the M&E Manual. Despite the eventual M&E Manual,
 there was no sound system for accurate data collection on physical progress for all activities. The outcome
 indicators did not have baseline values and end-target values to assess outcomes. The project monitoring
 arrangements were embedded mainly in the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) and ANIE and captured
 information on project/activity-based inputs, processes, outputs, and outcomes

 The original Results Framework was ambitious and the selected indicators to measure the project
 performance were complex and not fully realistic. In many cases, it required data that were not readily
 available without additional beneficiary surveys. The absence of an experienced M&E specialist in meat
 and dairy industry in the PCU team during the project preparation negatively impacted the M&E system
 design.



b. M&E Implementation
  The original M&E framework was revised and significantly improved during the project’s restructuring in
  2018. Some performance indicators were changed, dropped and aligned with the revised project
  activities. For instance, the indicator related to the reduction of time to export was dropped following the
  cancellation the sub-component supporting the reforms of the customs logistics. The recruitment of an
  M&E specialist to support the full-time M&E officer in the PCU strengthened the implementation of the
  results framework. Quarterly and annual reports recording the progress of the project were prepared by
  the PCU. Customized reports were also created by the PCU to track indicators which ultimately fed into
  the results framework. By the end of the project a total of 22 activity reports were created by the PCU.

  The collection of the M&E data on performance and results progress toward the PDOs was negatively
  affected by (i) the fact that the acquired computerized system of planning and monitoring was not
  installed yet, (ii) the lack of a baseline study that could facilitate the benchmarking of the project result
  framework, and (iii) the lack of competencies for the M&E expertise until after the MTR mission.



c. M&E Utilization
  The data presented by the implementing agencies, (notably ANIE and PCU) during regular missions
  contributed to understanding the level of achieved outcomes, and outputs of the multiple
  interventions and were used to chart the midcourse corrections during the 2018 restructuring. However,
  the project was abruptly closed, losing the possibility to complete ongoing activities that could have
  improved the project outcomes.

  There were both significant and moderate shortcomings in the M&E system's design, implementation
  and utilization as described above, justifying an overall modest rating of the project's M&E quality.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                        Page 17 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project, signaling that environmentally adverse impacts may
   occur during project implementation, but the impacts were expected to be minor and easily manageable. As
   a result, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, and only one
   safeguard policy is triggered by the project, the OP/BP 4.01 on environmental assessment. To ensure
   efficient implementation of safeguard instruments, the project was to support the training of stakeholders,
   especially the PCU, on Bank safeguard policies and the monitoring of safeguard aspects.

   The project experienced environmental and social challenges, arising from the lack of adequate risk
   mitigation measures and the absence of a designated social and environmental expert, and included the
   following: (i) the Walia slaughterhouse site was closed because of serious groundwater pollution risks; (ii)
   the construction on the Diguel North slaughter area presented social risks for the local population in
   pursuing their commercial activities. A project supervision mission noted the presence of minors
   entering the exiting slaughter site, and potentially being involved in productive activities. The Bank’s
   Country Management Unit (CMU) received in 2019 an official complaint by Diguel inhabitants highlighting
   the poor waste management around the slaughter area. The Environmental Social Incidence Response
   Tool was triggered, after which the World Bank Environmental Specialist recommended closing the site,
   regardless of the completion of intended activities. The conflict between the Diguel local inhabitants and the
   slaughterhouse was amiably resolved through the Ministry of Livestock. An audit dedicated to project
   environmental and social risks was completed, and found that the project was subsequently in compliance
   with all social and environmental safeguards.



   .




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management

   The fiduciary function was handled by the PCU and the establishment of FM systems and internal controls,
   and the preparation of periodic external audits and financial reports were timely. As regards to the
   matching grant management, an internal audit done by the PCU revealed: (i) managerial capacity issues at
   the PCU; (ii) conflict of interest for some members of the selection committee; (iii) noncompliance with the
   fundamental principles of the matching grant and international best practices in a few cases. As a result of
   the audit, mitigation measures were taken to avoid further mismanagement. The financial audits reports
   were regularly done and sent to the Bank. A final external audit was completed in January 2020 and was
   unqualified.

   Procurement

   The ICR assessment of procurement performance was sparse. It only reported that there were some
   weaknesses in the procurement system, with procurement delays amounting to 7 months on

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



   average against 3 months accepted under Bank standards. The experienced slow disbursement was
   attributed to weak procurement, including misunderstandings between contractors and the PCU, lack of
   technical expertise and delays in submitting request for non-objections. However, procurement
   performance was rated as Satisfactory at project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR identified an unintended impact arising from the performance of the One-Stop-Shop for Business
   Creation (GUCE). The visibility gained by GUCE was an unintended consequence of the project because
   of the successful communication plan developed through private-owned and public media. People now
   have a single access point for information and service transfer.



d. Other
   The ICR did not identify any.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                            ICR              IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Relevance of objectives is
                                                                                substantial;efficacy is modest;
                                   Moderately
Outcome                                             Unsatisfactory              and efficiency is negligible,
                                   Unsatisfactory
                                                                                resulting in an overall outcome
                                                                                rating of Unsatisfactory.
                                                                                IEG rates Quality at Entry and
                                                                                Bank Supervision as Moderately
                                   Moderately       Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                Unsatisfactory (MU). There were
                                   Satisfactory     Unsatisfactory
                                                                                significant shortcomings at entry
                                                                                and during supervision
Quality of M&E                     Modest           Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---              Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR chapter (p.31-34) on lessons learned was expanded unduly, and was a mix of evaluative
material, findings and recommendations. From that material, this review identified four lessons


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



summarized below, which are common to most projects implemented in a Fragile, Conflict and
Violence (FCV) context.

(i) Bank knowledge is an important ingredient to address the multiple design and
implementation challenges in an FCV context. Knowledge for this project refers specifically to the
appropriate lessons learned by the World Bank in implementing projects in similar environments
and sectors, and to any recent analytical work on the country and the sectors of interest. The design
of this project did not rely fully on lessons learned from previous World Bank operations, particularly
the need for a project design to reflect the Government commitment to the project objectives, and
to have in place an effective implementation capacity. Moreover, the design was not supported by
sound research and appropriate risk assessments to better understand the meat and milk
chains during preparation, and it underestimated the real cost of rehabilitation of planned
infrastructure. These shortcomings related to limited knowledge were a main source
of implementation challenges and the modest outcome achieved by this project.

(ii) Specialized expertise is indispensable to design and implement a project aimed at
improving a value chain: This project was about modernizing a specialized meat and milk chain,
and was to use a matching grant facility. Modernization of a specialized value chain with an
innovative instrument, specialized expertise commensurate to the complexity of the sector and new
instrument is required. Implementation of this project encountered a lack of competences in the
Bank and borrower teams, faced delays of activities and needs for extensions, and poor choice of
construction site locations, to name a few of the challenges. This underscores that the project
raised sensitive matters of healthy nutrition and the risk of contamination through meat and milk, and
the critical consequent need for the project preparation to draw from accurate sectoral technical
studies. Therefore hygiene-related technical studies and technical specifications for infrastructure
needed to be ready before effectiveness. Similarly, when establishing a Matching Grant Facility
(MGF) in a low-capacity environment, implementation should have included prior mandatory training
on the scheme itself. Neither the PCU staff nor the beneficiaries were clear on what the two windows
of matching grants were and how they could access them. A Matching Grant consultant was hired
after the project restructuring to help strengthen the PCU staff capacity in managing the Matching
Grant scheme. The absence of the required specialized expertise affected negatively the project
performance and efficiency.

(iii) Project efficacy is negatively affected by a limited dialogue among stakeholders and the
absence of a Bank team on the ground: Since the outset, the Bank team had difficulties to
establish a strong rapport with the Government, which did not take full ownership of this project,
despite several efforts from the WB teams to engage them (ICR para 68-69). To illustrate this, the
rehabilitation of the Farcha slaughterhouse was not completed because the Government did not
disburse its contribution. The lack of Government commitment affected the smooth running of the
Project Coordination Unit, notably through the quick rotation of project coordinators and financial
specialists, some of whom lacked the required expertise, and the infrequent coordination
meetings. On the Bank side, the project supervision was difficult, because of geographical distance
from the client, as the first Task Team Leader (TTL) was first based in Burkina Faso prior to moving
to Washington, DC. The remote supervision, lack of capacity and responsiveness of the PCU, and
deepening of collaboration issues, contributed to implementation delays in the first three and a half
years that could not be resolved until the TTL was replaced.




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Value Chain Support Project (P133021)



(iv) Fully associating key project stakeholders and the private sector in particular can pave
the way to sustainability of the project outcome: The project needed to create stronger
engagement with key players, including the Government officials, the private sector representatives,
and experts in the targeted value chains at the different phases of project appraisal, design, and
implementation. The project design should have incorporated more gender-related activities,
including the training of more females who are in charge of the milk value chain. Toward
increased sustainability and client’s ownership in a fragile and politically volatile environment like
Chad, ensuring the participation of private sector stakeholders is a critical factor. One major
component of the project aimed at rehabilitating slaughterhouses and building milk collection
centers. While some of these activities were not completed, the ICR reports (para 105) that two
private companies might take them over. More time and full support by the CMU would have helped
increase sustainability and client ownership given the nature of the business environment.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR has strengths and weaknesses. The ICR is comprehensive and results-oriented, but it could have
been more concise. It provides a detailed narrative of the project context and the achieved results, and
is generally evidence-based as it is supported by the latest data, information and annexes that cover key areas
of the project interventions. The ICR has weaknesses as follows: (i) the internal consistency, the quality of
analysis and the storyline could have been improved if efficacy was not limited only to reporting the
performance of outcome and outputs indicators. Summarizing all achieved outputs and outcomes under the
efficacy heading would have provided a more consistent storyline; (ii) the section 12 presenting lessons and
recommendations derived from the project experience was a mix of descriptive findings, evaluative material,
and recommendations and could have been more systematically presented, and (iii) the split rating assessment
was not justified.

On balance, ICR quality is just rated Substantial in view of its strengths.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Value Chain Support Project (P133021)




                                                                     Page 22 of 22
