     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0022387

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P131440                                  UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Uruguay                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-82070                               30-Jun-2019                                        260,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Nov-2012                              30-Jun-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        260,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                         260,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                     260,000,000.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Sara Johansson de         Paul Holden                   Jennifer L. Keller             IEGEC
 Silva



2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Oriental Republic of Uruguay Public Sector Management and Social Inclusion Development (PSMSD)
   DPL-DDO aimed to “support the development and implementation of policies aimed at strengthening resilience
   to external shocks and improving growth opportunities, with a focus on poor and vulnerable groups" (Program
   document [PD], p.27).
   For the purpose of this evaluation, the PDO has been unpacked to clarify the underlying objectives against
   which actions can be gauged. The three objectives are as follows:



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



     •  Objective one: Strengthening public resources management (Policy area one: Public resources
     management [PRM]).
     • Objective two: Strengthening coverage of social protection for the poor and vulnerable (Policy area two:
     Social policies).
     • Objective three: Reducing informality and promoting financial inclusion (Policy area three: informality and
     financial inclusion).




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The operation was structured around three policy pillars (PD, p. 27 and p. 68), spanning public resource
   management, social sector policies, and informality and financial inclusion.
   Policy area/pillar one: Achieving more efficient and strategic public resource management (PRM).
   This policy area supported Objective one. The prior actions under Objective 1 aimed to increase fiscal
   space and raise resilience of the economy through effective and strategic PRM.
   Pillar one had three prior actions:

     • PA1: Implemented detailed reporting on budget results in the Budget Reporting Law (2010, 2011) in
     seven priority areas: (i) housing; (ii) infrastructure; (iii) public security; (iv) education; (v) productive
     development; (vi) social protection; and (vii) health.
     • PA2: Through the Central Bank (i) agreed with five private banks on specific procedures to allow the
     Borrower’s treasury to make payments, on behalf of the Borrower’s ministries, to providers of goods and
     services through bank accounts held in said private banks; and (ii) reduced the number of bank accounts
     held by the Borrower's ministries in Banco de la República Oriental del Uruguay (BROU) from 1900
     accounts on December 31, 2011 to 1695 accounts as of August 31, 2012.
     • PA3: Issued National Tax Directorate (DGI's) Resolution No. 798/2012, dated May 8, 2012 which
     establishes the framework that regulates the use of electronic invoices (factura electrónica) in the
     Borrower’s territory.

   Policy area/pillar two: Rendering social policies more effective in promoting social inclusion,
   supported Objective two. The prior actions under Objective 2 aimed to increase poor and vulnerable
   groups' resilience to shocks through inclusive social policies.
   Pillar two had three prior actions:

     • PA4. The Borrower, through MIDES (Ministry of Social Development), has: (i) completed phase 1 of
     SIIAS (Sistema Integrado de Información para el Area Social); and (ii) signed an inter-institutional
     agreement, with the nine public institutions participating in SIIAS, to define their roles and responsibilities
     thereof.
     • PA5. The Borrower: (i) through Ministry of Social Development (MIDES), Ministry of Economy and
     Finance (MEF), and Banco de Prevision Social and Oficina de Planeamiento y Presupuesto, has updated
     the eligibility criteria of individuals that may receive benefits under the Borrower’s social programs,


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 13
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



    including Asignaciones Familiares-PE and Tarjeta Uruguay Social; and (ii) through MIDES, has assessed
    at least 40,000 households, from September 1, 2011 until August 31, 2012, to determine if said
    households met said updated eligibility criteria.
    • PA6. The Borrower has expanded health insurance coverage to: (i) individuals who: (a) are spouses and
    domestic partners of public and private sector workers with health insurance coverage; and (b) have two
    children; (ii) retirees that, as of December 2010, were covered by a private insurer; and (iii) retirees that,
    as of December 2010, were not covered by a private insurer, but are older than 74 years old and whose
    total income is below three Bases de Prestaciones y Contribuciones (BPC).

  Policy area/pillar three: Reducing informality and promoting financial inclusion, supported Objective
  three. Prior actions under Objective 3 aimed to mitigate risks and increase opportunities for growth of
  marginalized groups through financial inclusion. In addition, lower informality would be expected to lead to
  higher tax compliance and tax revenues and indirectly foster productive inclusion.

  Pillar three had two policy actions:

    • PA7. The Borrower has (i) Promulgated Law No. 18.910, which, inter alia, permits the Borrower to
    reduce the value added tax for transactions paid with credit cards, debit cards and other electronic means
    of payment; and (ii) granted an elimination of VAT for transactions paid with: (a) debit cards for food
    support (TUS); and (b) debit card for family allowances (TBPSP), through the issuance and publication of
    Decree No. 288/012, dated August 29, 2012.

  The first activity under PA7 is linked to promoting e-trade and reducing informality. The second activity under
  PA7 is linked to financial inclusion. Each has a relevant results indicator. In what follows, the two sub-actions
  under PA7 are considered separately, as PA7a and PA7b.

    •PA8. The Borrower has introduced fiscal incentives for the installation of electronic points of sale (puntos
    de venta) in small businesses to permit customers to make payments through electronic means of
    payment, through the issuance and publication of Decree No. 459/011.



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
  The UPSMSI DPL was a USD 260 million Stand-alone Development Policy Loan (DPL) with a Deferred
  Drawdown Option from the IBRD.
  The project was approved on November 12, 2012, and was due to close on June 30, 2016 (Loan
  Agreement [LA], p.8] effective January 13. As with the previous programmatic DPLs, the Government
  requested an extension to keep the DDO (Draw Down Option) alive, and the project was extended until
  June 30, 2019. (The Implementation Completion and Results Report [ICR] mistakenly states that the
  original closing date was June 30, 2019 – ICR, p.2.) The financing was allocated as a single withdrawal
  tranche of 260 USD million. The Government requested, but was not granted, a third period of extension.
  Given the worsening global economic climate, the Government chose to execute the DDO in June 2019,
  just before closure.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



   Structured as a single operation, this DPL followed a programmatic series of two DPLs, approved in 2010
   and 2011, that had supported the government’s reform efforts in the areas of tax reform, business climate
   and capital market development, and social protection. The second DPL under the was extended by 3
   years in 2015 but was never disbursed as the economic situation in 2018 was considered relatively
   stable. The program was also accompanied by The Institutional Building Technical Assistance Loan (IBTAL)
   operation (ID: P097604 [Original Loan] and P123461 [Additional Financing]), which was approved in 2007
   and closed in 2016. IBTAL supported core elements of the Government’s plan to modernize public
   administration included in the DPL, including fiscal, financial, and social reform.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  By the time the DPL was approved in November 2012, Uruguay had recorded a decade of high and sustained
  economic growth, achieved a robust fiscal position, and reduced the gross public debt-to-GDP ratio from
  nearly 100 percent in 2002 to 56 percent in December 2011. Prudent macroeconomic management including
  an effective debt management strategy and a comprehensive set of structural reforms helped Uruguay build
  the fiscal space needed to successfully weather the international financial crisis in 2008-2009 and expand
  social programs that helped reduce poverty by two thirds (ICR, p.6).
  In 2012, strengthening the resilience of the economy (through effective resources management and
  contingent financing, and strengthening the resilience of poor and vulnerable households, through greater
  inclusion) were central priorities for the Government of Uruguay (GoU). Strong macroeconomic management
  notwithstanding, the economy remained vulnerable, due to both commodity price volatility and a high risk of
  trade and investment-induced contagion from Argentina, Brazil and Europe (PD, p.7). Securing significant
  levels of low-interest, contingent financing from multilateral financial institutions - such as the series of DPLs
  provided by the World Bank –formed part of GoU’s strategy (PD, p.8). The GoU envisaged broad-based
  reform of the state (Reforma del Estado) to strengthen the reach and quality of public services and social
  inclusion, all the while maintaining prudent fiscal and monetary stances (PD, p.16). A large part of the
  population remained vulnerable to relapsing into poverty (PD, p.9) and many in the population were
  unbanked, lacking means for mitigating household risk and increasing investment (ICR, p. 17). Improving
  public resources management on both expenditure and revenue sides and strengthening policies towards
  social and financial inclusion were thus highly relevant priorities.
  The DPL was also fully consistent with the World Bank’s CPS for 2010-2015. The operation was aligned with
  two of the four pillars outlined in the CPS: reducing macroeconomic vulnerability and strengthening public
  sector administration (pillar one) and increasing inclusion and social equity (pillar four) (CPS, p.19). A review
  of the previous country assistance strategy concluded that the programmatic nature of DPLs had provided the
  flexibility that helped Uruguay weather the global financial crisis 2008-2009. The World Bank was seen as
  adding value by providing customized global knowledge and implementation support.
  These objectives remained largely relevant between 2012 (DPL approval) and 2020 (ICR), throughout which
  the Government program continued to maintain macroeconomic balance, modernize public resource
  management, and improve outreach of social programs. Reform achievements were sustained through the

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 13
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



       new administration in 2014, with policy priorities moving towards increasing the competitiveness of the private
       sector and, on the social agenda, inclusion of poor and vulnerable children and youth. The World Bank’s
       program for 2016-2020 supported the new Government’s agenda with specific emphasis on efficiency of
       public expenditures, inclusive early childhood interventions and education, and international competitiveness.
       Thus the strategic purpose of the PSMSD was relevant to the development priorities of the country
       throughout the operation



       Rating
       ---

   b. Relevance of Design
         ---



       Rating
       ---


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Strengthening public resources management (Policy Area 1: Public Resources Management); Supported by
     PA 1-3; Progress measured by RI 1-6.

    Rationale
    Under PA1, the steps being taken towards results-based budget processes were already underway when
    the operation was launched, as the Government had begun organizing the budget around programmatic
    areas and had begun formulating objectives and indicators in the Five-Year Budget 2010-2014. During the
    project’s regular and extended phases (2012-2015, 2015-2018), budget reporting on these 7 areas became
    well established and budget execution was reported on each year, thus meeting the target of at least 7. The
    efficacy of establishing results-based budget contributing to stronger PRM as measured by RI1 is rated
    High.
    A system of regular evaluations was established and made operational, through OPP’s evaluation units, as
    well as evaluation units within different line ministries (ICR, p. 15). By 2015, OPP had undertaken 17
    performance agreements with different units, above the RI2 target of 10 by 2015; and by 2018, the number
    had increased to 37, showing that the reform process had maintained momentum. This review confirms that
    evaluations as well as follow-up commitments continue to be regularly published on the website of AGESIC
    (Agency for E-government and the Information Society). The efficacy of establishing performance
    management processes as measured by RI2 is rated High.

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



    Under PA2, the share of government payments conducted via bank accounts (RI3) increased from 82
    percent at the outset. By 2015 the target of 90 percent was “overachieved”, at 97 percent, and by 2019,
    stood at 100 percent. RI2 did not measure the impact of opening up for private banks. The efficacy of
    improving treasury and cash management, as measured through RI3, is rated Modest.
    Against a target of 1400, the number of government accounts (RI4) fell from 1900 in 2010 to 1695 in 2012,
    further to 1485 in 2015, and 1432 in 2018. This level still falls slightly short of the target of 1400 set for 2015.
    RI3 is relevant for the objective and targets have almost been achieved. The efficacy is rated Substantial.
    Under PA3, the share of firms with commercial transactions undertaken through e-invoices (RI5) increased
    rapidly, from one (1) firm in 2012, to 1801 firms in 2015, and 18,405 and 41,699 firms in 2018 and 2019
    respectively. This represented an increase from an unknown baseline to 41% in 2015, passing the target of
    25%. However, these achievements are more strongly related to commercial development than to the
    objective of strengthening PRM. The efficacy of strengthening PRM as measured through RI5 is rated
    Modest.
    Progress on e-government services also far exceeded the target of 50 percent of for the share of
    administrative processes and services that can be completed on-line (RI6). By 2019 1396 processes and
    services could be undertaken online, representing about 80 percent of all processes provided through
    Central Administration. This must be considered a significant advance in providing public services in a client-
    oriented and resource efficient manner. RI6 represents progress towards the pillar’s key objectives. The
    efficacy of the DPL in achieving more effective public resources management and social inclusion by
    increasing access to public services is rated Substantial.

        • Pillar one efficacy: 4 out of 6 RI targets were rated as substantial or high. All targets for pillar 1 but one
        (number of accounts) were overachieved. Not all RIs or PAs were relevant to the PRM objectives.
        However, significant and sustained progress on critical areas such as budget reporting, evaluations,
        strengthening of treasury cash management, and access to online government services, supports a rating
        of the efficacy of pillar one in meeting objective one as Satisfactory.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Strengthening coverage of social protection for the poor and vulnerable (Policy Area 2: Social Policies)
     Supported by PA4-6. Progress measured by RI7-9

    Rationale
    Over the course of the DPL, the SIIAS expanded from 9 signatory institutions to 16 institutions with full
    access to data by 2015, surpassing the RI7 target (9 institutions). By 2018 and 2019, the system
    incorporated 26 and 32 participating institutions respectively, pointing to a rapid and steady process of
    reform, in fact higher than anticipated by RI7. The efficacy is rated High.

                                                                                                             Page 6 of 13
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



    By 2015, “practically all” (ICR, p. 23) Social Protection programs in MIDES had access to the updated
    beneficiary registry, and this was still the case in 2018 and 2019, fulfilling the target (All MIDES programs).
    Visits to households to determine eligibility are now continuously undertaken by MIDES, with ongoing
    revisions to the registry (ICR, p.16), suggesting that the practice of regular updating has indeed become
    institutionalized. The efficacy is rated High.
    Under PA6, the Government had increased coverage from 22 percent in 2007, to 47 percent in 2011 (the
    baseline for RI9); coverage more than reached the target of 70 percent by 2015 (72 percent by 2019). The
    social inclusion aspect of health policy cannot be fully assessed since it is not possible to confirm
    whether the remaining uncovered 28 percent of the population are non-poor. However, the careful expansion
    and accompanying reforms on the governance of the health sector has ensured that public spending on
    health has been kept at sustainable levels (currently approximately 6.5 percent of GDP [ICR, p. 16]). The
    efficacy is rated Substantial.
    Pillar two efficacy: Pillar two’s targets, which largely were relevant for the strengthening coverage of social
    programs for the poor and vulnerable, were more than achieved. The Covid-19 pandemic provided the
    ultimate stress test and Uruguay’s health system and social safety nets system were credited with having
    managed the pandemic very well by June 2020. This supports the overall rating of the efficacy of pillar two
    as Satisfactory



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective

     Objective three: Reducing informality and promoting financial inclusion (Policy Area 3: Informality and
     Financial Inclusion). Supported by PA7-8. Progress measured by RI10-12.

    Rationale
    In 2012, no beneficiaries received family allowances via debit cards (RI10 baseline). The launch and
    expansion of these debit cards connected with social programs, was initially much slower than foreseen and
    reached no more than 15 percent by 2015, compared to a target of 50 percent of recipients. However, the
    rate of take-up of social program debit cards increased rapidly after 2015, reaching 75 percent in 2018 and
    81 percent in 2019. The digitization of payments of benefits proved extremely efficient in 2020, when the
    Government needed to rapidly scale up benefits to mitigate the impact of Covid-19 on vulnerable
    groups. Efficacy is rated Substantial.
    The move towards electronic forms of payment, measured through the number of electronic payments by
    credit cards (RI11), and the number of POS in small businesses (RI12), increased dramatically during the
    operation. Electronic transactions increased from 2 to 34 million per year by 2015, compared to a target of
    10 million. By 2019, the number of yearly credit-card transactions reached over 200 million. The number of
    POS was targeted to increased by 80 percent, from 13,000 to 23,400, but de facto increased by over 300


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 13
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



    percent by 2015, and by nearly 600 percent by 2019. RI11 and RI12 are imperfect measures of lower
    informality/higher tax compliance or financial inclusion, and progress depend on many different factors
    beyond the PAs. In fact, the ICR suggests that the fiscal incentives (PAs) were not the main contributing
    factor to these increases (ICR, p. 19, fn 11). Nonetheless, the ICR estimates that VAT evasion fell from 20.8
    to 14.8 percent between 2011 and 2016 (ICR, p. 18), suggesting lower informality. The efficacy of achieving
    tax compliance/reduce informality is rated Substantial.
    Pillar three efficacy: The efficacy of Pillar 3 in reducing informality and promoting financial inclusion is
    comparatively high given that the take-up of social program debit cards and the expansion of POS. The
    overall efficacy of Pillar 3 is rated Satisfactory



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome


    The overall relevance of prior actions is rated Satisfactory, as is the achievement of objectives. The operation
    was relevant to Uruguay and outcomes often more than achieved. The underlying rationale for the operation,
    fully consistent with the Government’s reform priorities towards strengthening resilience, was that stronger
    public resources management practices around transparency, accountability and performance evaluation, a
    focus on increasing fiscal incidence and more inclusive social policies, lower informality and higher financial
    inclusion would assist in providing inclusive growth opportunities and strengthen resilience of the overall
    economy as well as individual households. Most prior actions were credible steps towards intermediate and
    final outcomes. They were consistent with, and built on, previous DPLs. A few prior actions could contribute
    indirectly to inclusion or PRM, but were more clearly aimed at increasing overall e-trade, reducing
    opportunities for tax evasion, and promoting financial sector deepening.
    The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.



  a.      Outcome Rating
          Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The ICRR concurs with the ICR in rating that the risk to development outcomes is low.
  First, the political will not to reverse priorities is high. Government reform priorities have not changed materially
  during the course of the operation which included a change in presidents, and a significant deterioration in

                                                                                                          Page 8 of 13
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



economic growth. The overall consensus-building and gradual approach to reform has paid off in terms of
sustainability of the overall reform agenda across administrations and to a wider set of stakeholders.
Second, financial and economic risks have indeed materialized through, first, a global economic slowdown and,
more recently, the sharp downturn caused by Covid-19. The DPL financing formed part of the Government’s
overall debt management strategy, which aimed at reducing Uruguay’s vulnerability in access to global private
capital markets in turbulent times by guaranteeing access to contingent finance from international finance
institutions such as the WB and the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB). The operation was specifically
designed to increase Uruguay’s capacity to build fiscal space and a social protection system that effectively
could protect the population against systemwide or idiosyncratic shocks. By weathering the global recession of
2008-2009, Uruguay had proven the validity of its overall structural reform agenda. Accompanying reforms,
such as in financial sector oversight and health governance systems, have also contributed to building
additional resilience to protect the outcomes of the reform. The Uruguay social safety net system and health
system had, by June 2020, managed the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic well. These achievements have also
built support for sustaining outcomes.
However, capacity constraints proved a binding constraint to reform implementation in one area and may
continue to constitute a risk to sustained outcomes as e-government reforms and data-driven resource
management require technical capacity. The operation was accompanied by a technical assistance operation,
but this could not mitigate the shortage of public sector staff with technical capacity. The digital platform to
consolidate and disseminate information on budget performance has not been fully operational across all areas,
due to capacity constraints within line ministries.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    ---

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   ---


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  ---

b. Quality of supervision
   ---


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  ---

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
   Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)




a. Government Performance
    ---


  Government Performance Rating
  ---

b. Implementing Agency Performance
   ---


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  ---

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
   ---


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
   ---


b. M&E Implementation
   ---


c. M&E Utilization
   ---


  M&E Quality Rating
  ---

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
   ---




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                          Page 10 of 13
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



 ---


c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
       ---


d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory               ---
Relevance of Results
                                                       Moderately Satisfactory    ---
Indicators
Quality of ICR                                         Substantial                ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

This review concurs with three lessons drawn by the ICR:

  • Evaluations should be undertaken closer to program closure, even in the case of extensions. The time
  lapse between design and evaluation makes it difficult to track knowledge.
  • Technical assistance is a critical contribution by the World Bank and a strong comparative advantage
  among Uruguay’s development partners. Capacity constraints are a serious risk, especially in a country of
  Uruguay’s size, and did materialize. The IBTAL, which spanned several DPLs, hence provided critical
  complementarity to the DPL.
  • Finally, the DPL served an important purpose for strengthening Uruguay’s resilience, as shown by the fact
  that the Government did execute the DDO in 2019. At that time, economic growth had stagnated, due to
  contagion from Argentina and Brazil and lower global commodity prices – all of which had been identified as
  substantial risks to Uruguay’s stability.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)



IEG adds the following lessons:

  • To facilitate M&E, PAs should be unpacked when they contain several actions that have different
  objectives. This was the case for PA7 which involved VAT reductions and exemptions, but with two different
  purposes and with very different outcomes.
  • There may be a trade off between the pace of reform and the level of ambition of targets. Although targets
  were considered low for some RIs, the reforms have been maintained and have continued to advance
  throughout the extension of the DPL.
  • Program design needs to clarify relationships to previous operations. The DPL is a stand-alone operation,
  and yet, some PAs appear more closely associated with previous DPL reform areas than to the present one.
  Examples include reforms related to e-invoices, involving private banks in government payments, and raising
  e-transactions through credit cards which appear to foster financial deepening. Where reform areas still
  overlap between operations, the relationship to previous DPL targets could be explicitly clarified.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a clear and logical assessment of the operation. Due to Covid-related traveling restrictions,
no ICR field mission could take place. The ICR uses the findings from an ICR mission from June 2019 for the
assessment, together with interviews and relevant documents. Despite these limitations, the ICR provides a
comprehensive and evidence-based review. It situates the rationale of the operation clearly in the context of
World Bank and Government strategies, Uruguay’s long term reform process, the experiences from previous
operations, and the international environment. It highlights some weaknesses in design, such as insufficient
links between PAs and the overall development objective or inadequate results indicators. The ICR provides
significant detail on the broad achievements within reform areas, backed up by evidence beyond the RIs. The
ICR could have emphasized more the difficulties with unpacking the high-level Program Development
Objective to correspond to policy areas, prior actions, and outcomes, especially with respect to vulnerability
and inclusion. Two errors occur in the results framework presented on p. 23 of the ICR: RI2 target is set to 17
(should be 10); for RI7, the ICR lists 9 (institutions) as baseline and 16 as the RI target in the results
framework (ICR, p. 23), but this baseline and target are not supported by the policy matrix in the PD (PD, p.
68).



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
UY-Public Sct Mgt & SocInclusion DPL/DDO(P131440)




                                                                                 Page 13 of 13
