     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022457

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P123323                                   CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82500                                31-Mar-2019                                          80,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2013                               31-Mar-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             80,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         80,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur              Victor M. Vergara             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to assist selected districts in Ningbo Municipality to increase
   the volume and proportion of municipal solid waste recycled with processes for waste separation at source
   and recycling (Loan Agreement page 4 and PAD para 17).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised of four components (PAD para 20:

   Component 1. Municipal Solid Waste Separation, Collection, Sorting and Transportation (appraisal
   cost US$178.68 million; actual cost US$166.50 million). This component aimed at strengthening the waste
   management system in six urban districts (Haishu, Jiangdong, Jiangbei, Beilun, Zhenhai, and Yinzhou,
   including the National Hi-tech Park and (Dongqian Lake Recreation Area). This component included four
   subcomponents:

   (a) Residential waste separation through the provision of separation bins and bags;

   (b) Public place waste separation through the provision of bins for recyclable and nonrecyclable waste, and
   recyclable material collection structures;

   (c) Waste storage, transfer and sorting through: (i) the construction of about four medium to large and two
   small transfer stations (including a sorting facility for recyclable materials within one transfer station); and (ii)
   conversion of about 22 smaller transfer stations for parking space for smaller vehicles, rest areas for
   sanitation workers; and temporary storage space for compression equipment and bulk municipal wastes;
   and

   (d) Waste collection and transportation through the provision of vehicles for produce market and household
   kitchen food waste, and bulk waste transfer trucks.

   Component 2. Kitchen Waste Treatment (appraisal cost US$41.86 million; actual cost US$60.46 million).
   This component included the construction of a treatment plant in Yinzhou district to process kitchen waste
   from households and markets.

   Component 3. Project Implementation Support (appraisal cost US$24.21 million; actual cost US$24.13
   million). This component would provide technical advisory services and support for the introduction of:

   (a) A citywide program for public and community mobilization, education, awareness-raising to encourage
   waste separation throughout the project period;

   (b) Output-based Incentive Payments (OBIP) to Neighborhood Residents Committees (NRCs) to encourage
   waste separation;

   (c) OBIP for restaurants that install and operate oil-water separators;

   (d) Rules and regulations for solid waste separation;

   (e) Municipal solid waste pricing policy;

   (f) Assessment of bio-chemical characteristics of domestic solid waste and new treatment technologies; and


                                                                                                          Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



  (g) Solid waste management information system (SW-MIS).

  Revised component 3. The April 2017 restructuring dropped the OBIP for restaurants that install and
  operate oil-water separators because subsequent to project appraisal, Ningbo implemented regulations on
  treatment of wastewater discharges from restaurants, thus eliminating the need for this activity (ICR para
  27).

  Component 4. Capacity Building and Project Management Support (appraisal cost US$1.41 million;
  actual cost US$0.97 million). This component would provide technical advisory services for: (i) design
  review, advisory services, construction supervision, project management and monitoring; (ii) training in
  waste minimization and municipal solid waste management for staff at neighborhood, sub-district, district,
  and municipal levels; and (iii) external monitoring and evaluation of performance in waste separation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The actual total project cost was US$252.2 million, slightly higher than the appraisal estimate
  of US$246.2 million. The ICR does not explain why the actual cost was slightly higher than the appraisal
  estimate. The project team clarified that there was no major cause and that this was a nominal increase of
  3% (over a seven-year period) and was financed by the borrower.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$80.0 million. The loan was fully disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The actual Borrower Contribution was US$172.2 million, slightly higher than the
  appraisal committed of US$166.2 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on May 31, 2013, became effective on September 3, 2013 and closed on
  March 31, 2020 after a delay of one year (see details below under restructuring).

  Restructuring: The project underwent two level 2 restructurings, first on April 12, 2017 and second on
  March 13, 2019.

  The first restructuring involved changes in: (i) implementing agency and institutional arrangements;
  (ii) results framework (the description of the PDO Indicator “Total amount of recycling materials separated at
  sorting centers” was amended to include collection through informal workers in addition to formal channels);
  and (iii) reallocation between disbursement categories.

  The second restructuring extended the project by one year and revised the closing date from March 31,
  2019 to March 31, 2020. The extension allowed time to: (a) fully operate the newly completed Kitchen
  Waste Treatment Facility (KWTP); (b) operationalize the six new transfer stations and sorting plant; (c)
  achieve the targets for quantities of separately collected kitchen waste and recyclables; (d) procure
  additional solid waste collection vehicles; (e) fine-tune the OBIP; (f) approve the draft solid waste
  regulations; and (g) complete resettlement (ICR para 28).

  Split rating: This evaluation will not conduct split rating as neither the PDO nor the outcome targets were
  revised. As mentioned above, the description of the PDO Indicator “Total amount of recycling materials
  separated at sorting centers” was amended to include collection through informal workers in addition to
  formal channels. The target value for the intermediate indicator “Amount of hazardous waste delivered to


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



   hazardous waste processing facilities” was revised from 950 ton/year to 175ton/year. These revisions do
   not require split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. All Chinese cities have been experiencing a rapid increase in solid waste
generation and increasing pressure for solid waste management. The quantity of municipal solid waste
collected and transported had increased more than five-fold nationwide from about 31 million tons in 1980
to about 157 million tons in 2009, and was projected to continue to rise exponentially, reaching 585 million
tons in 2030 (PAD para 4). A large part of municipal solid waste was residential waste, with little separation
at source. The collection and recycling of some valuable recycling materials was being carried out by the
private sector, but residential waste disposed through incineration or landfill contained a large proportion of
recyclable materials, which private recyclers was not collecting due to low profit margins. To combat this,
China was exploring alternative approaches for solid waste management, such as promoting the concept of
circular economy, through the adoption of “reduce, reuse, and recycle (3R)” strategy. Although several
cities were attempting to implement source separation, none had succeeded owing to low public awareness
and participation, and inadequate waste collection, transportation and treatment infrastructure (PAD para
6).

Local Ningbo Context. Ningbo city is an important port city on the southeastern coast of China. Ningbo
City produced 1.19 million tons of total municipal solid waste in 2009 (about 3,260 tons/day). It has two
incineration facilities with processing capacity of 1,600 tons/day and two sanitary landfills with a capacity of
1,300 tons/day. With the steady growth in Ningbo municipal solid waste, inadequate landfill and incineration
capacity were becoming severe constraints. Without waste minimization efforts, the economic and financial
burden of solid waste treatment would continue to be high and uneconomical. Moreover, 85% of
households were not separating waste at home. For those who were separating waste, their separated
waste was not been transported, transferred and treated separately due to lack of facilities for waste
separation and treatment.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. At the national level, the National People’s Congress (NPC)
passed the national Solid Waste Pollution Prevention and Control Law in 2004. The law focused on
supervision, management and pollution prevention, and regulated dumping, collection, transport,
reuse/recycling and disposal of municipal solid waste (PAD para 2). The China Circular Economy
Promotion Law, promulgated by the NPC, became effective on January 1, 2009 to promote the 3R. The
project objectives were fully aligned with the government's Circular Economy Promotion Law.

The project was aligned with the developmental priorities of China’s 12th Five Year Plan for environment
and natural resource efficiency, which explicitly required “establishing a sound collection and recycling
system for separated waste, improving the systems for separated waste collection, enclosed transportation
and centralized waste treatment, and promoting resource utilization and hazard free treatment of foods and
other waste” (ICR para 8).




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



               The Ningbo City's Five Year Plan emphasizes waste separation and minimization, material recycling, and
               environmental management of recycling materials processing, and institutional and capacity strengthening
               (PAD para 12). The project objectives are aligned with this plan.

               Alignment with the Bank Strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the first strategic theme of the
               Bank's China Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY13-16 "Supporting Greener Growth" and Outcome
               1.2: Enhancing Urban Environmental Services, which sought to improve sanitation, solid waste, and other
               basic urban services in selected second-tier cities. The project’s objectives are consistent with the current
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY2020-2025), which identified solid waste management as a
               significant challenge for local and national authorities and a source of pollution. The CPF, under its
               Engagement Area Two: Promoting Greener Development, Objective 2.2: Reducing Air, Soil, Water, and
               Marine Plastic Pollution, envisages that the Bank will support efforts to tackle land-based sources of marine
               plastic pollution, i.e., predominantly residential solid waste and refers to China’s Waste Free Cities initiative
               aimed at reduction and recycling of solid waste.

               Development Problem. To control the large and growing problem of municipal solid waste, China needs to
               move from the traditional waste management to minimize the amount of waste that needs to be disposed
               by promoting 3R (reduce, reuse, and recycle). The project objectives are therefore pitched at a level that
               adequately reflect a potential solution to a development problem - proper municipal solid
               waste management will generate substantial economic benefits, such as improving the environment and
               the quality of life, reducing emissions of pollutants, and improving the livelihoods of those employed in the
               material recycling sector. Without waste minimization efforts, the economic and financial burden of solid
               waste treatment would continue to be high and uneconomical.

               The project addresses the critical municipal solid waste management issues and there is a clear alignment
               between the project’s development objectives and the country, city level and World Bank strategies. The
               relevance of the objectives is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To assist selected districts in Ningbo Municipality to increase the volume and proportion of municipal solid
                             waste recycled with processes for waste separation at source and recycling.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC).



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



The project’s ToC was based on the premise that a more efficient waste separation will make more recycling
material readily available for collection and recycling and would lead to waste minimization. The project
activities included kitchen waste treatment facility (KWTF), provision of municipal solid waste residential
separation and collection equipment, transferring/sorting stations, collection vehicles, the implementation of
incentive based municipal solid waste program for Neighborhood Resident Committees (NRCs) roll out of
public awareness programs on separation and recycling, training programs on waste minimization for
municipal solid waste management staff, development of solid waste management information system (SW-
MIS), and development of municipal solid waste pricing and separation rules/policies. These activities were
expected to result in outputs and intermediate outcomes such as increased awareness of separation and
recycling, an operational kitchen waste treatment facility; collection, transfer and sorting facilities; and
capacity building of government staff in municipal solid waste management through: (a) municipal solid waste
pricing policies and rules for waste separation, and (b) a solid waste information management system that
would assist the staff to monitor and manage waste separation. The project activities were directly linked to
outcomes such as increased municipal solid waste (residential) separation at source, as well as collection,
sorting, and transfer of separated waste and improved government capacity and enabling environment for
municipal solid waste management. These outcomes were in turn expected to contribute to the overall PDO
of increased volume and proportion of municipal solid waste recycled in selected districts in Ningbo
Municipality.

The achievement of the project outcomes was underpinned by the following assumptions: (i) separated
residential solid waste is collected and then transferred to recycling facilities in a timely manner, (ii) the
recycling facilities recycle the delivered residential solid waste, (iii) separated kitchen waste is collected and
transferred to the KWTP, (iv) the kitchen waste delivered to the KWTP is treated, (v) communication and
incentive programs are effective in increasing the willingness of households and restaurants to participate in
source separation programs; (vi) there is a sustained leadership and institutional capacity to develop,
establish, and sustain the new collection, transportation, and treatment systems.

The ToC is convincing and the stated assumptions were logical.

Outputs

      A kitchen waste treatment facility (KWTF), with a capacity of 400 ton/day was constructed and is
       operational. The facility includes pretreatment workshop, dry fermentation facility, biogas purification
       facility, wastewater treatment facility, biogas residual composting workshop, boiler rooms, public
       educational center and supporting installations including water supply and drainage, roads and
       greeneries, administrative facilities. The biogas produced by the anaerobic digestion process is
       transported to the Yinzhou Landfill Gas Power Plant for utilization. The GHG emissions reduction
       through the KWTF is estimated around 50,404 ton/year. The biogas produced at the KWTF was
       29,000 cubic meters compared to a target of 30,000 cubic meters.

      Six large transfer stations were built and fully operational (Dongqian lake, 220 ton/day capacity;
       Jiangbei District Municipal Solid Waste Separation and Transfer Station with 790 ton/day capacity
       including the sorting center with 150 ton/day capacity; Zhenhai District Transfer Station, 750 ton/day
       capacity; Yinzhou District Municipal Solid Waste Separation and Transfer Station, 680 ton/day
       capacity; Jiangdong District Municipal Solid Waste Separation and Transfer Station, 610 ton/day
       capacity; and Haishu Transfer Station, 300 ton/day capacity.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)




  The original small transfer stations were transformed into large waste storage sites and parking for
    environmental sanitation vehicles.

  357 waste separation and collection vehicles were procured and deployed.
  The project deployed 955,700 separate waste bins to residents, exceeding the target of 636,000.
    About 7.3 million specialized waste bags were also provided. This aided the households in practicing
    waste separation at source - the number of households were 905,000, exceeding the target of
    636,000.

  The number of separate containers deployed in public places were 104,800, far exceeding the target
    of 20,000.

  The project rolled out 868 recycling collection points throughout the project districts, achieving the
    target of 862. The project team clarified that these points had automated/reporting system, and
    containers were emptied when they were full.

  The waste sorting center was constructed and fully functional. However, the facility is not processing
    waste due to the success of the segregated campaign. Materials collected through this campaign are
    of high quality and not in need of further segregation (ICR para 42). Ningbo municipality has plans to
    relocate it to another section of the city where incoming mixed recyclables need further separation.

  The amount of hazardous waste delivered to hazardous waste processing facilities at project closure
    was 187 tons/year, compared to a revised target of 175 tons/year (original target was 950 tons/year).
    The target value of this intermediate indicators was reduced during the April 2017 project restructuring
    due to: (a) overestimation of hazardous waste quantities at appraisal, (b) adoption of subsequent
    policies which reduced the generation of such waste (for instance policies which reduced the use of
    mercury containing batteries), and (c) service agreements entered between individual districts and
    licensed operators for hazardous waste which reduced the volumes captured at communal points
    (ICR para 29).

  The project assisted in the development of municipal solid waste management regulations for Ningbo
    Municipality. They became effective in 2019.

  Output-based incentive program system to neighborhoods was established and operational. The
    program rewards communities that separate well their wastes and the funds are used for community
    projects.

  An extensive public outreach campaign was carried out to promote separation at source, inform the
    public about waste management and increase its environmental awareness. This included large-scale
    public communication campaign via multiple channels (schools, radio, TV, community groups, and
    promotion conferences). More than 1.2 million promotional material were produced and more than
    87,000 publicity posters were erected around Ningbo to support a city-wide event called “I influence”
    and “Correct action”.

  A Smart Sanitation Information system was established. The system is internet based and includes
    data related to waste collection, transfer vehicles and transfer stations. it is used for monitoring: (a) the


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



       number of household kitchen waste bags distributed; (b) the quality of kitchen waste separation; and
       (c) volume collected and transported, etc.

      Capacity building trainings for the city government officials and the municipal solid waste separation-
       related personnel were carried out. This included 5800 domestic trainings, 21 domestic survey trips,
       and 4 overseas survey trips.

      A tariff study was carried under the project and a charging mechanism was devised applying elements
       of a charge-by-volume approach. Charges are expected to be attached to the water bill identified as a
       suitable mechanism by the study.

Outcomes

Collection of Separated Waste

With the support of project activities, the proportion of solid waste separated at project closure was 17.5%
compared to the target of 15%. As discussed below under 'recycling', in absolute terms the achievement is
very significant. The total amount of recycling materials separated at sorting centers was 71,600 tons/year
(March 2020) compared to the target 39,000 tons/year. This was achieved by having 905,000 households
participating in waste separation; the waste separation rate of government institutions, state-owned
enterprises and schools had reached 100%. This achievement is by far the most impressive in the relevant
Bank portfolio for any city.

The total amount of separated kitchen waste collected was 193,200 tons/year (March 2020) compared to the
target 150,000 tons/year. The separated kitchen waste was transported to the KWTF (constructed under the
project). This was achieved due to the deployment of separation collection bins and rolling out recycling
collection points. The ICR reports that the quality of separated kitchen waste improved over time, from 55% in
November 2019 to 60% in March 2020. The ICR notes that not all separated kitchen waste was processed at
the kitchen facility, the volumes processed at the kitchen facility as of July 2020 was 90% of target due to
issues with the discharge limits into the sewer network, which have been resolved. The receiving waste water
treatment plant was undergoing renovation and had been delayed due to Covid-19.

Recycling

Prior to the project, all generated municipal waste in Ningbo municipality either ended up in the landfills or
was incinerated (with the exception of small volumes of recyclables sold directly by households to
traders). The project resulted in increased material to be recycled. The total amount of recycling materials
separated at sorting centers was 71,600 tons/year (March 2020) compared to the target 39,000 tons/year
(these figures do not include recyclables captured through the informal sector even though the definition of
this indicator was revised at the time of the first restructuring because the client could not guarantee the
accuracy of reporting). The separated recycling material constituted dry residential material such as paper,
cardboard, plastic, metal, glass, and textile, which was sorted by residents using the project-financed waste
separation equipment and facilities, and collected and transferred to the sorting centers by project-financed
transfer stations and vehicles. A client satisfaction survey carried out in November 2019 by the Ningbo
Municipal Statistics Bureau showed increase in the awareness on waste separation from 35% in 2015 to
94%.



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project financed the development of a comprehensive waste separation, collection, transportation and
                            recycling system, and raised public awareness and participation in separation at source. As a result, the
                            share of recycling within the overall waste treatment mix has increased. By March 2020, 905,000 households
                            had started participating in waste separation. The waste separation rate of government institutions, state-
                            owned enterprises and schools had reached 100%.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis.

   At appraisal, the main benefits included: (i) avoided transportation and disposal costs, including land resource
   saving and pollution reduction, due to waste reduction through waste separation at source and recycling; (ii)
   value generated by recycling materials separated from solid waste; (iii) global environmental benefits of CO2
   reduction due to solid waste minimization; and (iv) value of energy (biogas) generated from kitchen food waste
   treatment. Economic costs included capital investment for equipment and facilities for solid waste separation,
   transportation and treatment, and operation and maintenance costs.

   A cost-benefit analysis was carried out, which yielded an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of 13.98% and NPV of
   US$64.5 million. Sensitivity analysis showed that the ERR would be 9.23% under the assumptions of 10%
   decrease in economic benefits and 10% increase in total costs; hence the investment was economically robust
   (PAD para 36).

   The appraisal methodology was applied at completion. The ex-post ERR was 17.58%, higher than the ex-ante
   estimate of 13.98%. This was due to: (i) higher project coverage among households; and (ii) higher productivity
   of the project-financed platform (the solid waste collection, separation and recycling platform established under
   the project managed to operate at higher productivity, collecting and recycling more residential wastes than
   estimated at appraisal, thus raising the economic value generated from recycling materials, and more savings in
   transportation cost.

   At completion, the total CO2 emission reduction attributable to the project was estimated at 1.94 mmtCO2, 7.2%
   higher than the estimated 1.81 mmtCO2 at appraisal.


                                                                                                                           Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



Administrative Efficiency. The project experience delays due to: (i) land acquisition issues for the transfer
stations and the KWTF during the first two year of implementation; and (ii) the design-build-operate (DBO)
contract approach for the anaerobic digestion processing facility was replaced by a PPP arrangement. The
project closing date was extended by one year. However, the administrative costs were less than planned (ICR
para 55). The ICR does not provide data to support this.

Overall, efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     89.00
 Appraisal                                                 13.98
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     90.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.58
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project development objective was highly relevant to the China and Ningbo Municipality priorities and
was aligned with the Chinese and Bank strategies. Efficacy is rated substantial; the project supported the
development of a comprehensive waste separation, collection, transportation and recycling system, and raised
public awareness and participation in separation at source, and as a result, the share of recycling within the
overall waste treatment mix has increased. By March 2020, 905,000 households had started participating in
waste separation. The waste separation rate of government institutions, state-owned enterprises and schools
has reached 100%. Project efficiency is also rated substantial. The overall outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the development outcome can be classified into the following broad categories:

Financial Risk. The user fees in Ningbo are being subsidized by tax revenue and governmental transfers.
The financial risk is modest because Ningbo is the transitioning towards full cost recovery of operating costs.

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



The project supported a tariff study for residential users and developed pricing mechanism to attach solid
waste user charges to the water bill. This was delayed but is expected in 2021. At the national level, NDRC
issued a policy guidance on fees for recurrent costs in 2018 (ICR para 91).

Also, Ningbo plans to continue to finance the Output-based Incentive Payments (OBIP) through its own
resources. It will likely be phased out in the medium-run as the population internalizes fully the requirements
of the new system.

Government Ownership/Commitment Risk. The Government’s 13th Five-Year Plan explicitly requires
improvement of solid waste management and development of circular economy measures. Several policy,
sectoral documents, and national laws have been issued to support these goals. The experience of waste
separation in Ningbo is being studied by other provinces. The Government commitment risk is assessed as
low.

Ningbo Municipality Ownership Risk. This risk is low as the Ningbo Municipality had developed a
comprehensive regulatory environment in support of the separate collection and recycling system in place
and instituted municipal ordinances and regulatory instruments to govern the sector.

Social Risk. The social risk is assessed as low because the Ningbo Municipality has continued public
information campaign to encourage residents to participate in waste separation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was informed by high quality analytical work. The project design benefited from three studies
  carried out by the Bank during preparation: (i) an Overview of China’s Regulatory and Institutional
  Framework and Development Plans for Municipal Solid Waste Management, (ii) Ningbo Solid Waste
  Situational Analysis, and (iii) E-waste in China (ICR para 64). The technical design emphasized the
  importance of integrated planning, enabling institutional and regulatory environment, and public
  awareness and participation, which are key elements of an effective solid waste management system
  (ICR para 86).

  The overall implementation risk was assessed as substantial. The main risk identified at appraisal was
  effectively mobilizing about 3 million residents in Ningbo to adopt waste separation at source. To mitigate
  this risk, project design includes a sustained community education and awareness-raising campaign to
  promote waste separation throughout the project period. However, the risk associated with the time
  required for land acquisition was not assessed. The M&E design and safeguards identification were
  appropriate.

  Overall, the quality at entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



  Satisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports (para 88) that the project team comprised of an appropriate mix of technical and
 operational experts who provided consistent technical and operational inputs; adequate implementation
 support; capacity building; and maintained a broader policy dialogue. The project team proactively
 supported Ningbo Municipality’s decision to establish a PPP for the development and operation of the
 KWTP and restructured the project accordingly. The Bank agreed to extend the closing date of the project
 to allow sufficient time for the KWTF to start functioning smoothly. As a result of continued dialogue, the
 Ningbo Municipality has expressed interest in a possible new project in waste management, recycling, and
 improved resource efficiency.

 Overall, the quality of supervision was satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The outcome of the project was to increase the volume and proportion of municipal solid waste recycled.
 The three outcome indicators: (i) proportion of waste separated; (ii) total amount of separated kitchen
 waste collected; and (iii) total amount of recycling materials separated at sorting centers, were appropriate
 for monitoring the achievement of the PDO. Targets were set for the three indicators, but no baselines were
 provided as there was no waste separation in Ningbo. An indicator related to gender was also included as
 one of the result-based indicators, to measure the satisfaction rate of women and men with solid waste
 separation and collection (PAD para 58).

 The PAD (para 26) specified that the data for monitoring would come from the participating districts and the
 waste treatment facility. The project also included a subcomponent to develop a solid waste management
 information system (SW-MIS) for the City Administration Bureau (CAB). The SW-MIS would also
 capture additional information related to truck routing, the utilization rate of equipment, and residual
 volumes. The incremental cost of the project M&E arrangements would be assumed by the CAB, with
 financial support from Ningbo Municipality (PAD 52).




b. M&E Implementation

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



  The ICR reports (para 75) that most data collection was computerized (as planned), i.e., electronically
  collected from the various points of entry to a centralized system. One exception was the collection
  of kitchen waste separation at source. This resulted in some errors in reporting. The ICR suggests the
  option for including optical sensors at receiving points to distinguish the quality of material and link it to
  the incentive system in place but acknowledges that this is a highly sophisticated system and challenging
  internationally and in China.

  Overall, the collected data was properly and timely analyzed and included in progress reports.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 76) that the data generated by the M&E system was utilized to capture
  implementation issues and propose adjustments and restructurings. For example, during implementation
  the M&E system found that the informal sector was involved in collecting material to recycle. Therefore,
  the definition of the relevant indicator was revised. It also captured issues related to the quality of
  separation, resulting in the allocation of more supervisors and an increase of communication activities.
  The Ningbo authorities used the M&E system for planning and management.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Category "B" and the following two safeguards policies were
   triggered: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12.

   Environmental Safeguards. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was carried out and an
   associated environmental management plan (EMP) was prepared to determine the mitigation measures,
   environmental monitoring program and necessary institutional arrangements, as well as capacity building
   (PAD para 59). The EIA and EMP were disclosed locally and in the World Bank’s InfoShop on November
   19, 2012. During implementation, the EMPs were included in the bidding documents and monitored for
   compliance (ICR para 79). No additional information is provided in the ICR.

   Social Safeguards. According to the PAD (para 54), the negative social impacts were mainly related to
   land acquisition. The project would involve 187.1 mu (12.5 ha) of permanent land acquisition, 42 mu (2.8
   ha) of temporary land use, and demolition of 5360 square meters of houses and 55,300 square meters of
   business buildings. The project would affect 683 persons. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared
   in compliance with the relevant government policies and the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement. The
   summary of RAP was disclosed through the Bank InfoShop on November 19, 2012 and its full document
   was disclosed on November 23, 2013. A community participation manual was prepared at appraisal
   and updated and followed through during implementation (ICR para 81).




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



   During implementation, annual resettlement monitoring reports were prepared. In total, 1,249 persons were
   affected due to the construction of the transfer stations, the KWTF, the Ningbo municipal waste disposal
   center and Reconstruction of Dongqiao Town, Xuanpei Village. The project team clarified that Dongqiao
   Town was demolished due to KWTF and had to be rebuilt at a new site. The ICR notes (para 80) that by
   project closure all land acquisition and resettlement related compensatory activities were completed. The
   ICR reports (para 82) that the grievance redress mechanism on resettlement was appropriate, and the
   complaints that were received were recorded and addressed properly. The ICR does not discuss the
   magnitude of land acquisition.

   The project team provided following information on land acquisition: the actual resettlement impacts
   included 650 mu (43 ha) of permanent land acquisition with impact on 478 farmers’ and 370 workers’
   livelihood, and relocation of 167 households with 395 persons, among which 51 households moved into
   their replacement apartments and 116 households got cash compensation. The final external monitoring
   report in June 2020 concluded that all the resettlement task was fully completed, including the allocation of
   the replacement house, in consistent with the prepared resettlement plans, and that all implemented
   resettlement exactly followed the RPs. Its survey of 40 sampled household indicates that their income and
   housing are fully restored and the affected are satisfied with the relocation result without no pending issue
   or complaints.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The financial management of the project was satisfactory throughout
   implementation. The Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and the annual audit reports were submitted to the
   World Bank on time. The annual external project audits were unqualified (ICR para 83).

   Procurement. The procurement performance was largely satisfactory during implementation except for
   one year (mid-2015 to mid-2016) due to procurement delays related to land acquisition issues. For the
   Kitchen Waste Treatment Facility and some transfer stations, new locations or changes in plots required
   securing of land availability, which was a lengthy process and significantly delayed procurement. The
   procurement complied with the World Bank’s procurement guidelines (ICR para 84).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provides a number of useful lessons (paras 93 to 97). The following are highlighted by IEG
with some modification to the language:

      Separation at source can be introduced at a large scale over a relatively short time but
       requires right conditions. The project experience shows that these conditions are: (i)
       strong government commitment, (ii) capacity to roll out an integrated waste management
       system that supports separation at source, and (iii) effective public outreach. In Ningbo, while
       the higher levels of government were engaged with planning, securing resources and
       addressing implementation difficulties, the neighborhood committees were working on
       explaining the separation process and requirements and guiding households how to best
       comply with the new program. The Bank project helped to establish a well-integrated
       infrastructure and system including: equipment at the front end where the waste is
       separated; the separate containers are serviced timely; separated waste is handled as a
       separate stream and not mixed; the cleanliness and appeal around the disposal areas - all of
       which contributes to the willingness of households to comply with the new separation
       program. The community awareness and engagement campaign was far-reached and
       intensive.

      A public-private partnership (PPP) arrangement for solid waste treatment can be
       promoted through a two-staged procurement process which allowed inputs from
       prospective bidders to shape the design of the technical solution and explore what
       contractual arrangements could be supported by the market. The PPP for Kitchen
       Waste Treatment Facility used this approach and was successful and is been studied for
       replication within China. The experience confirmed that a market test could inform both the
       design, the aptitude and willingness of the market to share the risk with the public sector
       within a PPP arrangement.

      Ningbo’s kitchen waste treatment facility has proven the viability of treating
       household kitchen waste through anaerobic digestion processes at scale and can be
       used as a reference for other projects. Anaerobic digestors for municipal/household
       kitchen waste might be challenging to operate due to fluctuating composition of the
       feedstock. Ningbo’s experience shows that large capacity digestors for less homogeneous
       household kitchen waste can be successful.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Recyclin (P123323)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation, was internally consistent
and concise. The ICR was outcome driven and included a good discussion on the theory of change and
economic analysis. The ICR provides relevant lessons learned from the project experience. The ICR does not
discuss though the magnitude of land acquisition.

Overall, the ICR provides a good basis for assessing the project's outcome. The quality of the ICR is rated
substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
