     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022445

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P097985                                    IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47650,TF-91901                         31-Dec-2015                                          178,929,383.50

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jun-2010                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           221,965,000.00                                        100,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            189,973,333.61                                           8,332.17

 Actual                                        178,929,383.50                                           8,332.17




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl              Maria Vanessa                Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 5) and the Financing Agreement of July 22, 2010 (p.
   4) the two objectives of the project were to “assist the Recipient (The Government of India) in building national
   capacity for the implementation of comprehensive coastal management approach in the country, and piloting
   the integrated coastal zone management approach in the project states”.

   Project states included Gujarat, Orissa and West Bengal, which were selected to represent both, the east and
   west coast of India. Selection was based on the state's different levels of development and Coastal Zone

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



   Management (CZM) challenges. According to the ICR (p. 7) the selection process included extensive
   consultation among government ministries and was based on the range and significance of CZM issues local
   communities faced.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component one: National ICZM Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$87.3 million, actual
   US$77.44 million): This component was to finance the following activities: i) mapping, delineation and
   demarcation of the hazard lines, and delineation of coastal sediment cells all along the mainland coast of
   India; ii) mapping, delineation and demarcation, as required, of the ecologically sensitive areas (ESAs), as
   well as along the mainland coast of India; iii) capacity building within the Ministry of Environment and
   Forests (MoEF), specifically within the secretariat for the National Coastal Zone Management Authority
   (NCZMA). Also, this component was to finance a nation-wide training program for ICZM; and iv) setting up
   and operationalization of the new National Center for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM).

   Component two: Piloting ICZM Approaches in Gujarat (appraisal estimate US$74.1 million, actual
   US$58.18 million): This component was to finance capacity building of the state level agencies and
   institutions, including preparation of an ICZM plan for the coastal sediment cell that includes the Gulf of
   Kachchh, and pilot investments. The pilot investments were to be designed to demonstrate integrated
   management of ecological, economic and social concerns in the Gulf of Kachchh (a stretch of 180
   kilometers or 10 percent of the Gujarat coast, containing two of the world’s largest refineries; two major
   ports and several smaller facilities accounting for 70 percent of India’s import of crude oil; the largest of
   India’s salt industries; several booming industrial and urban centers; India’s first marine national park;
   significant parts of remaining coral reefs of the country, and important patches of protected forests).

   Component three: Piloting ICZM Approaches in Odisha (appraisal estimate US$49.3 million, actual
   US$44.56 million): This component was to finance capacity building of the state level agencies and
   institutions. These institutions were to include the Forest and Environment Department (the secretariat for
   the Orissa SCZMA), the Orissa State Pollution Control Board (for monitoring and enforcing pollution
   control in the coastal areas), and the Chilika Development Authority (for species and wetland
   research). Investments were to focus on the stretches of Paradip-Dhamra and Gopalpur -Chilika due to
   their significant ecological and economic resources and were to include: a) conservation and protection of
   coastal resources including protection of olive ridley turtle and other aquatic wildlife, mangrove and
   shelterbelt plantation, conservation of archeological heritage (of which some serve as cyclone shelters), and
   a pilot activity in shoreline protection for the village of Pentha; b) environment and pollution management by
   completing the solid waste management system for the coastal town of Paradip to reduce pollution load
   on the coastal stretches known to be nesting habitats; and c) livelihood security of coastal communities




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



  including allied farming improvement support in 60 fishing villages, support to fisher-people groups in
  developing small-scale and community-based tourism and industrial and marketing activities.

  Component four: Piloting ICZM Approaches in West Bengal (appraisal estimate US$75.0 million,
  cost changed to US$53.98 million during Project Restructuring (2015), actual US$48.78 million): The
  component was to finance capacity building of state level agencies and institutions in West Bengal,
  including the preparation of an ICZM plan for the coastal sediment cells in the coastal areas. Investment
  activities were to include: a) conservation and protection of coastal resources including mangrove and
  coastal shelterbelt plantation; pilot works in shoreline protection for Digha beach and the southern end of
  Sagar Island; and rehabilitation of the marine aquarium at Digha; b) environment and pollution management
  by completing the sewerage system for Digha to prevent flow of sewage onto the sandy beach; cleaning
  and environmental improvement of the Digha beach, and solid waste management in Digha; improvement
  of the fish auction centre at Digha; and distribution of grid electricity on Sagar Island to replace diesel
  generation and prevent soil and water pollution; and c) livelihood security of coastal communities in Sagar
  Island including support to CBO coordinated livelihood improvement activities; afforestation-based livelihood
  improvement; promotion of local small-scale tourism and ecotourism activities; and provision of cyclone
  shelters in the coastal villages.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$285.7 million. Actual cost was US$228.9 million.

  Financing: The project was to be financed by a Bank credit in the amount of US$221.9 million of which
  US$178.9 million was disbursed. Also, the project was to be financed by a Trust Fund in the amount of
  US$100,000 of which US$8,332 was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$63.7 million. Actual contribution was US$50.0
  million.

  Dates: The project was restructured five times:

        On December 16, 2015 the project was restructured to: i) revise three out of the four PDO indicators
         to provide more clarity and focus on achieving tangible results; ii) add three intermediate outcome
         indicators; iii) extend the project’s closing date from December 31, 2015 to December 29, 2017 to
         allow for the completion of project activities; iv) change in components and costs due to revised
         cost estimates due to excess bid premiums, and cost escalations in Indian Rupee currency; and v)
         reallocate between disbursement categories.
        On December 21, 2017 the project was restructured to: i) change the project’s closing date from
         December 29, 2017 to December 29, 2018 to complete activities that took longer than planned such
         as mapping the hazard line, preparing the ICZM plan for West Bengal through NSCM and initiate the
         preparation of the follow-on project (“Enhancing Coastal and Ocean Resource Efficiency Multiphase
         Programmatic Approach” – P167804).
        On December 21, 2018 the project’s closing date was extended from December 29, 2018 to March
         31, 2020 to: i) allow the Bank team to identify with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
         Change (MoEFCC), the Society of Integrated Coastal Management (SICOM), and other relevant
         implementing agencies opportunities to scale up initiatives to enhance the livelihood security and


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



          resilience of coastal village communities; and ii) reallocate credit proceeds among disbursement
          categories.
         On March 25, 2020 the project was restructured to: i) cancel savings in the amount of US$32 million
          due to a significant devaluation of the rupee; and ii) reallocate between disbursement categories.
         On May 9, 2020 the project was restructured to change the closing date from March 31, 2020 to
          June 30, 2020 to complete activities amid constraints resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic.

   The original closing date of the project was December 31, 2015. The actual closing date was June 30,
   2020. In total, the duration of the project was expanded by 54 months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) India has a coastline of about 7,500 kilometers (less than 0.25 percent of the
world’s coastline), which, at the time of appraisal, was home to about 63 million people (11 percent of the
global population living in low elevation coastal areas). The coast also includes some of the biggest and
most dense cities and urban areas such as Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Kochi and Visakhapatnam.
Sustainable management of the coastal zone has been critical for India’s economic growth due to its rich
and diverse eco-system including large mangroves and major stocks of corals, fish and marine mammals.
Also, the coast has a potential for future ocean thermal energy and locates substantial placer mineral and
heavy metal deposits and several cultural and archeological sites. Also, a significant share of infrastructure
such as maritime facilities, petroleum industries, and import based industries are located at the coast. At the
time of appraisal, about one million people were employed in the coastal fishing area and about 1.2 million
in the post-harvest fishery sector.

However, the PAD (p. 1) stated that despite its ecological and economic importance, the coast had not
been sufficiently protected. Rapid urban industrialization, maritime transport, marine fishing, tourism,
coastal and sea bed mining, offshore oil and natural gas production, aquaculture, and the recent
establishment of special economic zones led to a significant increase in demand for infrastructure, resulting
in the over-exploitation of natural resources. Over the last five decades, 34 percent of mangroves were
destroyed, almost all coral areas were endangered, marine fish stocks declined, and several types of fish
disappeared negatively impacting the livelihoods of the local population and sustained economic growth.
However, according to the PAD (p. 2) diverse stakeholders have been competing for coastal and marine
resources. Furthermore, unplanned but competitive economic activities have resulted in conflicts among
stakeholders, misuse, abuse and overuse of resources resulting in the degradation of ecosystems with
some coastal landscapes entirely destroyed by commercial aquaculture. Given this problem the GoI issued
in 2005 the National Environment Policy, and the Swaminathan Committee report, which envisioned
reforming the regulatory framework for integrated management of coastal and marine areas and developing
the institutional arrangements, capacity and adequate knowledge systems to enable the desired shift to
ICZM approaches. The objective of the project was in line with the government’s 12th Five Year Plan
(2012-17) which focused on inclusive growth of coastal communities and conservation of marine resources
as well as India’s three year action agenda (2017-20) which aimed to develop a policy and regulatory
framework to enhance sustainable tourism and foster growth in coastal areas, establishing scientific



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



               capacity to support disaster and climate-resilient development, enhancing livelihood opportunities for low-
               income coastal communities and promoting science based decision making on ICZM.

               The objective of the project was aligned with the three pillars of the Bank’s Country Strategy for India
               (FY09-12) which aimed to achieve rapid and inclusive growth; ensure sustainable development and
               increase the effectiveness of service delivery. Also, the objective supported all three focus areas of the
               Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY18-22) which aims to: i) promote resource-efficient
               growth; ii) enhance competitiveness and enable job creation; and iii) invest in human capital.

               According to the ICR (p. 7) the Bank was asked to support the government in piloting the ICZM approach,
               given the Bank’s ability to mobilize international expertise, proven experience and knowledge of ICZM, and
               financial resources.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To assist the government of India in building national capacity for implementation of comprehensive coastal
                             management approach in the country:

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as establishing the
                             National Center for Coastal Zone Management, demarcating hazard line, sediment cells, and ecologically
                             sensitive areas (ESAs) were to result in outputs such as the National Center for Coastal Zone Management
                             being established and functioning, mainland coastline being mapped and coastal sediment cells, hazard lines,
                             ESA and critically vulnerable areas being delineated. In addition, project activities such as developing
                             knowledge products for ICZM and supporting MoEF’s medium-term capacity building plan, and training
                             of coastal zone managers from all states were to result in outputs such as knowledge products and science-
                             based guidelines being prepared for ICZM plans and MoEF capacity building plan being implemented and
                             training of coastal zone managers being conducted. These outputs were to result in the project’s objective of
                             national capacity for integrated coastal management approach being built.

                             The project made the following assumptions: i) timely flow of funds and hiring of adequate quality staff; ii)
                             coordination among central, state and local agencies; iii) participation of local stakeholder groups; iv) National
                             Center for Coastal Zone Management adequately staffed and sustainable. These assumptions seem
                             adequate.

                             The theory of change of the objective and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the extended
                             outcomes was sound. However, all PDO indicators included in the original Results Framework lacked clarity

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



and were not sufficiently specific such as the original PDO 1 “ Existence of an appropriate national
institutional structure for guiding and coordinating implementation of ICZM approaches” which did not provide
a definition of “appropriate”.

PDO Part 1: Building national capacity for implementation of a comprehensive coastal management
approach in the country:

Outputs:



      The number of skilled staff in ICZM planning and implementation at the national level increased from
       10 staff in 2010 to 117 skilled staff at the National Center for Sustainable Coastal Management
       (NCSCM) and SICOM, surpassing the original target of 66 staff and the revised target of 75 staff
       (target achieved). In addition, the project established laboratories along with coastal pollution
       monitoring vessels with modern instruments for analysis. Furthermore, the project supported capacity
       building of staff to facilitate regular and real-time monitoring of physical, chemical and biological
       parameters of sea/river water. As a result, the Odisha State Pollution Control Board (OSPCB) was
       able to monitor 169 kilometers of coastal stretch and monitored and assessed oil spills, mass fish
       killings in coastal areas, and furnishing health status reports of the Gahirmatha-Bhitarkanika stretch to
       the global conservation team of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
       Furthermore, the scientific capacity was enhanced for the Chilika Development Authority (CDA-
       Odisha) and Gujarat Ecological Education and Research Foundation (GEER-Gujarat) for coastal and
       marine ecological monitoring and conservation.
      Knowledge and planning base in integrated coastal zone management was established according to
       defined criteria. ICZM plan preparation guidelines were prepared by NSCM in 2014, which were used
       to prepare ICZM plans for the pilot states of Gujarat, Odisha, and West Bengal as directed by SICOM.
       The guidelines were updated and revised in 2020 based on the recent ICZM plan preparation
       experience of NCSCM in West Bengal. Also, knowledge-base to facilitate sustainable development
       included: i) database for the entire Indian coast for coastal, marine biodiversity network: High Tide
       Line (HTL), Low Tide Line (LTL), Hazard line, sediment cells, 11 types of eco-sensitive areas (ESAs),
       Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas (CVCAs) were prepared; ii) National Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
       emission database: an assessment of GHG net emissions (unit measures CO2 equivalents) from all
       mangrove and sea grass ecosystems along the mainland coast and the islands of India was
       conducted to assess natural and human-induced stress on these ecosystems; iii) delineation of
       baseline coastal sediment cell as a benchmark with coastal maps was completed; iv) futuristic
       research framework with the output delivered on Offshore Renewable Energy potential assessment
       including computing the potential for Offshore Wind energy along the coast of India; v) Coastal
       Cumulative EIA methodology – a five step process aiming to improve management planning as input
       to the adaptive management process and CEIA guidelines were developed (an input for the
       preparation of an ICZM framework).
      5,500 kilometers of mainland coastline were mapped and delineated in terms of coastal sediment cell,
       hazard line and ecologically sensitive areas, achieving the target of 5,500 kilometers (Target 5,500,
       Target achieved).
      15 skilled staff are working on ICZM planning and implementation in Gujarat State, not achieving the
       original target of 17 staff and the revised target of 20 staff.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)




        109 research papers were peer-reviewed and published in internationally acclaimed publications,
           surpassing the original target of 10 ICZM knowledge outputs and the revised target of 13 ICZM
           knowledge outputs. Furthermore, three databases for baseline planning documents were established,
           achieving the target of three databases. Also, several knowledge products were established: i)
           coastal, marine biodiversity network; ii) coastal sediment cell delineation with coastal erosion maps;
           and iii) ICZM guidelines.

Outcomes:

        The National and State Level Coastal Zone Management Authorities (NCZMA and SCZMAs) were
           established and are functional to support coastal zone management at the national level and coastal
           states level, achieving the target of institutional structure at national and state level supportive of
           integrated coastal zone management being established according to defined criteria.
          The National Center for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) was established to be
           responsible for coastal and marine area research and management. The Society of Integrated Coastal
           Management (SICOM) was established within the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
           Change (MoEFCC) in order to provide national guidance and coordination of Integrated Coastal Zone
           Management Plans (ICZMPs) in all coastal states and union territories (UTs) of India. The target of
           establishing national and state level technical capacity for ICZM planning was achieved. SICOM
           organized 17 training programs for government departments, Non Governmental Organizations
           (NGOs) and ICZM academicians.
          The plan for institutional structure at National and State level supporting integrated coastal zone
           management was not prepared and submitted to the government for approval, not achieving the
           target.
          An ICZM plan for Gulf of Kachchh was prepared, reviewed, finalized and approved by the government
           of Gujarat, achieving the target.
          BISAG started a School of Integrated Coastal Zone Management to train students and government
           officials.
          NCSCM has collaborated with 15 consortia and more than 11 institutions from India’s coastal states

Efficacy of the first objective is rated high given its achievement in institutional reform as demonstrated
through the establishment of critical agencies to support coastal zone management at the national level and
coastal states level. Also, several knowledge products were developed to inform decision making.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Piloting the integrated coastal zone management approach in states of Gujarat, Orissa and West Bengal.
Integrated Costal Zone Management:

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



Piloting the integrated coastal zone management approach in states of Gujarat, Orissa and West Bengal.
Integrated Costal Zone Management was defined as “a process to promote security of life and livelihood of
the coastal communities, and to protect the ecosystems that sustain productivity of the coastal areas while
promoting sustainable development”.

Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as preparing ICZM
plans for selected coastal stretches in three states and implementation of pilot investments across three
states including: a) conservation and protection of coastal resources; b) environment and pollution
management; and c) livelihood security of coastal communities were to result in project outputs such as: a)
shoreline protection strengthened; b) environmental and pollution management strengthened; and c)
livelihood security strengthened. These outputs were to result in the project’s objective of integrated coastal
zone management approach being piloted in Gujarat, Orissa, and West Bengal.

The theory of change of the objective and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the extended
outcomes was sound. All PDO indicators included in the original Results Framework were unclear and and
lacked specificity such as the original PDO 3 “Number of pilot ICZM activities demonstrating cross-sectoral
and spatial integration completed”.

Outputs:

      17 skilled staff are working on ICZM planning and implementation in Odisha State, surpassing the
         original target of 16 staff but not achieving the revised target of 20 staff.
      Five pilot investment projects were implemented in Gujarat, not achieving the original target of seven
         projects and the revised target of six projects.
      19,503 hectares of area under mangroves was restored or re/afforested, surpassing the target of
         12,000 hectare. Out of this area 16,000 hectares were re/afforested surpassing the target of 12,000
         hectares.
        196 kilometers of coastline and freshwater were brought under biodiversity protection, not achieving
         the target of 400 kilometers.
        71 metric tons of industrial and municipal waste disposal capacity was created under the project, not
         achieving the target of 80 metric tons.
        ICZM plans for Paradip-Dhamra and Gopalpur-Chilika were prepared using the designed participatory
         process and were submitted to approval by the government of Odisha, achieving the target.
        An ICZM plan for West Bengal Coast was prepared (using a designed participatory process) and was
         submitted for approval by the government of West Benegal, achieving the target of doing so.
        Eight technical positions were approved for ICZM planning and implementation in West Benegal
         State, not achieving the original target of 17 skilled staff and the revised target of 15 skilled staff.
        Nine pilot investment projects were implemented in Odisha, surpassing the original target of eight
         investment projects and not achieving the revised target of 10 investment projects. Activities included:
         a) building capacity in the Odisha Pollution Control Board and the Chilika Development Authority; b)
         development of monitoring and surveillance infrastructure and capacity enhancement of wildlife and
         forest division including research facilities in five locations. Also, turtle and crocodile hatcheries were
         established; c) conservation of six out of eight coastal archeological and heritage sites; e) building
         shoreline protection at Pentha village; f) constructing 14 multi-purpose cyclone shelters, achieving the
         target of 14 cyclone shelters; g) building mangrove plantation; h) establishing 600 self-help groups to
         provide support alternative income opportunities during the annual fishing ban; i) establishing eco-
         tourism involving coastal communities through eco-development committees at five coastal sits along

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



       Chilika; j) the planned integrated solid waste management facility in Paradeep municipality was not
       implemented.
      10 pilot investment projects were implemented in West Bengal State, surpassing the original target of
       nine pilot investment projects and the revised target of ten projects. Pilot investment projects included
       the following: a) building capacity at Calcutta University and Institute of Environmental Studies and
       Wetland Management; b) establishing sewerage and storm water drainage system in Digha; e)
       installing beach infrastructure at Digha beach and rehabilitation of more than 1,272 hawkers to
       regularize vending zones; f) distributing grid electricity in Sagar island, resulting in schools and
       colleges to operate computer and science labs and surgical facilities were installed in island hospital;
       g) constructing 24 (out of 25 targeted) multi-purpose shelters; h) creating eco-tourism infrastructure in
       Sagar island; i) improving livelihood opportunities for Sagar island communities through forming
       community organizations; and j) restoring and augmenting the Marina Aquarium and Research Center
       (MARC) in Digha

ICZM pilot activities were carried out, achieving the target. Activities included: a) Coastal conservation and
protection pilots such as: i) mangrove plantation totaling 199.41 square kilometers in Gujarat, Odisha, and
West Bengal; ii) infrastructure and research facilities established for coastal wildlife protection (including
wildlife hatcheries, research and conservation centers in Gujarat and Odisha and Laboratory facilities for
Gujarat and Odisha Pollution Control Boards); iii) multipurpose cyclone shelters (14 shelters in Odisha and 24
in West Bengal), which benefitted 151,701 vulnerable persons during five cyclones; iv) technology
demonstration via geo-tube embankment for protection from coastal erosion in Odisha benefitting 41,222
vulnerable people during weather disaster events; and v) demonstration of transplantation and regeneration
of degraded coral reefs in an area of 1050 square meters in the Gulf of Kachchh (Gujarat) using experimental
and innovative methodology; b) pollution abatement pilots include: i) sewerage system consisting of piped
network and treatment plant with capacity to service about one million people (71 million liters per day) with
recycling potential for 60 million liters per day of treated water in the coastal city of Jamnagar (Gujarat). While
the project funded around US$ 10.6 million Jamnagar sewage treatment plant (STP), the risk of financing was
assumed by the operator for the 15-year duration as part of the Design-Build-Operate-Transfer (DBOT)
contract. Under the terms of the contract, the operator can sell treated water to industries to maintain the
treatment plant and pay an annual royalty of US$ 0.27 million) to Jamnagar Municipal Corporation during the
contract period. In turn, the demonstration of this first of its kind STP DBOT informed Gujarat’s adoption of
industry requirements for water re-use and conservation. ii) solid waste management for coastal town of
Paradeep (Odisha) was not implemented but appropriate land and access for a treatment and disposal facility
was facilitated; iii) 100 percent household electrification to minimize diesel generators in Sagar island (West
Bengal) benefitting 206,844 residents and numerous local enterprises; iv) SICOM implemented Beach
Environment and Aesthetic Management System (BEAMS) providing infrastructure facilities, pollution
abatement & safety/surveillance services for pilot beaches of India.

Outcomes:

      A survey showed that 94 percent of visitors to Digha were satisfied with the new infrastructure and
       facilities.
      A survey of 638 self-help groups involving 2,912 households showed that they were able to generate
       income of about US$2.17 million involving an investment of US$0.62 million;
      The restoration and augmentation of the MARC resulted in an increase of visitors from 9,130 people in
       2014/15 to 376,758 visitors in 2018/19. According to the Bank team (February 12, 2021) tourist visits
       from 2014 onwards were attributable to project activities, as MARC (which is not close to the Digha

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



                                     Beach, the most important tourist spot in the region) became an important tourist destination with its
                                     upgrading under the project.
                                    The 100 percent electrification of Sagar Island in West Bengal benefitted 206,844 persons and visiting
                                     pilgrims. Also, the hospital’s rate of successful deliveries increased to 84 percent. According to the
                                     Bank team (February 12, 2021) the hospital / institutional delivery rate in Sagar Island was zero, as it
                                     was away from the mainland and had no electricity until the project.
                                    The development of eco-tourism infrastructure and opportunities increased tourist arrivals by 20 to 25
                                     percent. According to the Bank team (February 12, 2020) ecotourism was first initiated in the project
                                     areas under the project. Hence, all increases in ecotourists can be attributed to project activities.
                                    Beaches improved under the project and eight in seven coastal states were awarded international
                                     blue flag certification.
                                    The project benefitted 17.8 million beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 11.0 million beneficiaries.
                                     48.2 percent of the beneficiaries were female, not achieving the target of 51 percent female
                                     beneficiaries.

                             In terms of conservation and protection of coastal resources the project was able to restore or re/afforest
                            large areas of mangroves and bring almost 200 kilometers of coastline and freshwater under biodiversity
                            protection. Furthermore, the project was able to improve beaches resulting in the awarding of the international
                            blue flag certification.

                            In terms of environment and pollution management the project was not able to achieve the target for the
                            creation of industrial and municipal waste disposal capacity.

                            The project was able to achieve substantial outcomes for the livelihood security of coastal communities. For
                            example, the development of eco-tourism infrastructure and opportunities increased the number of tourists in
                            the area.

                            Taking everything together, the achievement of the second objective was Substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was High given the achievements in regards to its achievement in
                            institutional reform and the development of knowledge products. The achievement of the second objective
                            was Substantial. While there is evidence that the project was able to improve conservation and protection of


                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



  coastal resources and improve livelihood security of coastal communities, the project did not achieve the
  target for improving environment and pollution management.

  Taking everything together, the project’s overall efficacy rating is Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis in the PAD:

Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 19) included benefit-cost analysis. The project’s total cost was estimated to be US$285.67 million
with long-term recurrent costs of US$17 million. Revenue streams related to targeted investments were
identified at the state-level at US$31 million annually. The project’s minimum financial internal rate of return
(FIRR) was calculated at 4.8 percent. The FIRR was low since it did not include other induced revenues such
investments can enable. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was calculated at 20.2 percent.

The PAD conducted an economic analysis for the following activities:

Capacity-building investments: It was suggested that these institutional investments were to protect coastal
values of about US$400,000 annually for each kilometer of coastline affected, translating into US$2.1 billion
annually for peninsular India as a whole; even if only one percent of this value were to be captured under the
project, the EIRR on the institutional investment was to be about 20 percent.

Pilot investments: The project was to invest US$131 million at the state level to address local priorities relating
to conservation and protection of coastal resources, environment and pollution management, and community
livelihood interventions.

    a. Investments for conservation and protection of coastal resources: Approximately US$36 million in such
       investments were to achieve an FIRR of 8.8 percent and EIRR of 20.9 percent.
    b. Investments for environment and pollution management: To improve pollution management and public
       health, US$49 million of interventions were to contribute to the distribution of grid electricity, completion
       of sewerage systems, sanitation and solid waste management. These investments were treated as cost-
       of-service utilities; stand-alone analyses of tariffs showed that the projects were cost-effective in
       generating an FIRR of 10.0 percent. The EIRR as considerably higher (21 percent), as there remains an
       unmet demand for power in rural India; health benefits from improved water quality and sanitation were
       also to generate incremental value to households.
    c. Community livelihood activities: About US$39 million in community livelihood investments were expected
       to generate an FIRR of 10.7 percent and an EIRR of 20.5 percent.




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



Economic Analysis in the ICR: The ICR (p. 19) conducted an ex-post benefit-cost analysis which used
disburse rather than estimated costs and analyzed four types of benefits generated from the pilot activities: a)
conservation and protection of coastal resources; b) environmental and pollution management; c) livelihood
security for coastal communities; and d) carbo emission averted. The analysis used three discount rates (4
percent, 6 percent, and 10 percent), three lifespans (20, 20, and 30 years), and with and without accounting for
carbon sequestration benefits. When carbon benefits were excluded from the analysis, using a discount rate of
10 percent over 30 years reached a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$303 million, an EIRR of 32 percent and a
Present Value of Benefit over Cost Ratio (PVBCR) of 4.1 (versus an EIRR of 20.2 percent in the ex-ante benefit-
cost analysis). If the analysis takes the global carbon benefits as a result from this project into account, the
analysis calculated an NPV at US$472 million, an EIRR at 41 percent and a PVBCR of 5.8.

These analyses indicate that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

Due to the depreciation of the rupee, allocations for components 2,3, and 4 were reduced. Some of the savings
were used for additional MSME-based livelihood activities in Gujarat, SICOM’s BEAMS initiative and to prepare
the ENCORE MPA. A total of US$32 million was cancelled during the project restructuring in March 2020. In
total, the project’s implementation period was extended by 4.5 years to allow for the completion of project
activities, which were delayed to financial management and procurement issues.

Taking everything together, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   20.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                32.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)




Relevance of objective was rated High since it supported all three focus areas of the Bank’s CPF at appraisal
(FY09-12) and most recent CPF (FY18-22). Efficacy of the first objective was High and efficacy of the second
objective was rated Substantial, resulting in an overall efficacy rating of Substantial. Finally, Efficiency was rated
substantial resulting in an overall outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the development outcome can be classified into the following broad categories:

Political/ government commitment: The government remains committed to the project’s objective. Also,
the government continues to collaborate with the Bank through a new project (“Enhancing Coastal and
Ocean Resource Efficiency project”), which focuses on scaling up adoption of ICZM across all coastal states
and union territory and will build on outcomes achieved under this project such as the various maps and
databases. According to the ICR (p. 30) political commitment for ICZM is also gaining support at the local
and state level. The government defined the ICZM approach in its National Coastal Mission under the
National Action Plan on Climate Change as key for its strategy to adapt to climate change and rising sea
levels. Furthermore, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry released The Blue
Economy Vision 2025 which states the Blue Economy as key driver for growth.

Financing: According to the ICR (p. 30) the project put in place operation and maintenance plans with
contingency arrangements for infrastructure investments implemented under the project for periods during
and after disasters. Also, costs for maintaining small infrastructure projects have been added to the local
government registries. Large environmental infrastructure project such as the Sewage Treatment Plant in
Jamanagar are being financed by public-private partnerships, which support operation and maintenance.
Furthermore, livelihood interventions and self-help groups are being supported by government programs to
ensure their sustainability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project built on lessons from previous multiple sector investments in
  India. The Bank team (February 12, 2021) stated that these lessons included; i) to ensure a successful
  implementation and sustainability, capacity building projects need strong demonstration of improvements
  in environmental quality; ii) project impacts are achieved only if the institutional capacity created is put



                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



  into practice; iii) project impacts are linked to the leverage and ability to influence environmental
  protection and bring about actions.

  The Bank collaborated with the government, state governments, coastal communities, and other critical
  stakeholders to have a clear understanding of institutional arrangements. The ICR (p. 23) stated that
  beneficiaries were identified through a participatory rural appraisal to increase the chance that the project
  would meet the target to directly benefit coastal communities and women. The project design was simple
  and integrated capacity building, scientific research, and pilot activities. However, the interlinking project
  activities presented a challenge in case any single activity experienced a delay, it could negatively impact
  the implementation of any other activity.

  According to the PAD (p. 16) the Bank team identified the following risks to project implementation: i)
  reputational risk due to the project’s wide range of stakeholders and the need to ensure transparency in
  interactions at many levels; ii) implementation capacity and sustainability risk related to weak
  implementation capacity of staff, hiring constraints resulting in implementation delays; and iii) systematic
  misuse/misappropriation of funds.

  The ICR (p. 24) stated that the project included several mitigation measures such as ensuring
  transparency in implementation through access to legal recourses for vulnerable people in case of
  dissatisfaction with the project’s grievance redress mechanism. The risk of implementation capacity and
  sustainability was addressed through setting up the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) and State
  Project Management Units (SPMUs) as independent entities to facilitate implementation efficiency and
  flow of funds. Also, the two entities’ capacity was strengthened through the provision of training programs
  in specific technical areas such as financial management and procurement. However, mitigation
  measures for financial management and procurement were not sufficient since the project experienced
  several implementation delays related to these areas (see section 10b for more details).

  The project’s M&E had several shortcomings such as the initial targets not being sufficiently specific and
  ambitious resulting in the need to revise the Results Framework during the first project restructuring in
  December 2015. Also, the project design did not sufficiently sequence activities and due to the interlink of
  project activities under such an integrated approach (the completion of one activity affected other
  activities) resulted in implementation delays. As a result, the time to achieve the PDO needed to be
  extended by 4.5 years.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 29) the Bank conducted in total 20 bi-annual implementation supervision missions
 including field visits and multi-stakeholder discussions. Also, the Bank enabled south-to-south knowledge
 exchange visits between states to allow officials to learn from international experience in ICZM. The Bank
 team assessed implementation progress regularly and restructured the project five times to address
 institutional, fund flow, and procurement challenges. The Bank team conducted an independent review and
 assessment mission in 2014 when implementation progress slowed down. According to the ICR (p.
 24) reasons for implementation delays were lack of staff at the NPMU and hazard line mapping delays as a

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



 result of difficulties in obtaining government security clearances for aerial photography. Also, procurement
 delays for innovative ICZM private-public partnership activities and delayed/insufficient budget allocations
 for the SPMUs.

 The project benefitted from only having two Task Team Leaders (TTLs) throughout project implementation,
 which allowed for consistency. The project underwent five restructuring processes.

 However, the project experienced implementation delays due to a lack of procurement staff and sufficient
 capacity to oversee the procurement of many small, medium and large contracts. These issues resulted in
 delays in contract execution and payment. According to the Bank team (February 12, 2021) the Bank
 addressed these issues through preparing and implementing a separate community procurement manual
 (in addition to the project-procurement manual) and conducting regular training for staff to ensure
 continuity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the extended outcomes
 was sound. According to the PAD (p. 14) the project developed a Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning
 (ME&L) framework which aimed to facilitate: a) results and outcome-based management; b) learning and
 process enhancement (through participatory methods, beneficiary satisfaction surveys, and independent
 technical financial and social audits); and c) impact evaluation. The ME&L framework was designed to align
 with the existing government systems to avoid information overload. An operation unit including a ME&L
 specialist and staff within the NPMU were to be responsible for the project’s M&E activities. Quarterly
 progress reports were to be generated by NPMU based on inputs from the three states and its own MIS
 system for tracking progress of the national component. In addition, the NPMU and SPMUs were to
 prepare respective annual action plans detailing the achievements and lessons learned in the previous
 year, and proposed implementation plan and budget for the following year.

 The project’s objective was not sufficiently specified. All indicators had targets. The project conducted a
 Baseline for indicators, when appropriate. However, all PDO indicators included in the original Results
 Framework lacked clarity and were not sufficiently specific resulting in the need to revise them during the
 first project restructuring. The selected intermediate outcome indicators were adequate to capture the
 contribution of the project’s activities and outputs such as the intermediate outcome indicator on the size of
 hectares of mangroves restored/reforested.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



b. M&E Implementation
  As stated above, the project’s Results Framework was revised during the first restructuring in December
  2015 to revise all PDO indicators to make them more specific and measurable.

  According to the ICR (p. 26) the NPMU collected regularly reports on physical and financial progress from
  SPMUs (which received updates from the PEAs). Also, the Bank team undertook regular field visits,
  verified documents, and carried out multi-stakeholder consultations to verify such information and data.

  The ICR (p. 26) stated that the project would have benefitted from conducting a third-party impact
  evaluation at mid-term and collecting data for all subsidiary activities in a centralized and systematic way
  using predetermined and validated data collection formats.

  According to the Bank team (February 12, 2021) all the indicators were continuously measured and
  reported for the duration of the project. The Results Framework was restructured to further granulate and
  make the respective indicators more measurable and specific. Measurements were carried out based on
  sub-indicators and reports were reviewed during each supervision mission. The Bank team stated that
  the M&E implementation followed a bottom-up approach, and was embedded with the NPMU, with
  dedicated resources allocated to ensure continuous M&E. Furthermore, the data was found to be of good
  quality. However, the project’s M&E functions were limited to the project duration.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the Bank team (February 12, 2021) the M&E supported documenting cumulative progress
  made in the project, identifying outstanding issues and agreeing on next steps. Thus, M&E outputs were
  used towards continuous adjustment and improving of the various sub-components of the project,
  including capacity-building programs, learning and exchange programs, delivery of livelihood programs,
  and inclusion of a broader set of socio-economic and ecological issues to be addressed by the project.

  For example, the M&E results and subsequent discussions with the coastal communities in Odisha
  showed that the impact of livelihood interventions on household incomes was limited. A key factor was
  the need for credit by poor households who borrowed money from private money lenders at exorbitant
  interest rates. After multi-stakeholder discussions, the project set up a Revolving Fund that addressed
  the credit needs of the community at reasonable interest rates and the incomes of the households
  experienced a commensurate rise.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was qualified as category A and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), OP/BP 4.40 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.11
   (Physical Cultural Resources), and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The project prepared an

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



  Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), which was reviewed, approved and disclosed. Also,
  the project prepared Environment and Social Management Plans (EMPs) for all potential environmental and
  social issues and impacts related to project activities. The ICR (p. 27) stated that the project complied with
  all safeguard policies.

  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project developed a solid redress grievance system, which provided legal
  support for vulnerable people in case they were dissatisfied with the project’s grievance redress
  mechanism.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 28) the project complied with the Bank’s reporting, auditing policies and standards
  and did not encounter any financial management related issues. The flow of funds between the different
  government entities (NPMU, SPMUs, and PEAs) worked smoothly. Also, the project’s unaudited Interim
  Financial Reports were submitted to the Bank on a regular basis and were adequate. The project’s
  external auditor provided timely and unqualified opinions.

  Procurement:

  The ICR (p. 28) stated that the project complied with the Bank’s procurement rules and updated and
  published procurement plans on a regular basis. However, the project experienced implementation delays
  due to a lack of procurement staff and sufficient capacity to oversee the procurement of many small,
  medium and large contracts. These issues resulted in delays in contract execution and payment.
  According to the Bank team (February 12, 2021) the Bank addressed these issues through preparing and
  implementing a separate community procurement manual (in addition to the project-procurement manual)
  and conducting regular training for staff to ensure continuity.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  According to the ICR (p. 21) the project was able to reach women through its capacity building programs,
  which encouraged higher levels of participation from women experts and officials. Women were presented
  at all organizational levels. In addition, at the community level, women formed SHGs to focus specifically
  on alternative livelihoods that met their requirements. Furthermore, the project enabled government
  agencies and regulatory bodies to improve their performance in regard to CZM. They were able to improve
  their knowledge, skills, and approaches, which they developed under the project in their daily activities.

  According to the ICR (p. 22) the project was also able to attract private-sector interest through the
  implementation of state-level ICZM demonstration investments. For example, the project provided US$10.6
  million for the Jamnagar sewage treatment plant (STP). However, the risk of financing was taken by the
  operator for the 15-year duration as part of the Design-Build-Operate-Transfer (DBOT) contract which
  defined that the operator can sell treated water to industries to maintain the treatment plant and pay an
  annual royalty of US$0.27 million to Jamnagar Municipal Cooperation during the contract period. In turn,

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



   the demonstration of this first time STP DBOT informed Gujarat’s adoption of industry requirements for
   water reuse and conservation.

   Furthermore, the project was able to achieve outcomes that had not been envisioned during project
   preparation. The NCM was established under the government’s National Action Plan on Climate Change
   (NAPCC) and ICZM is being recognized as a key approach for climate-resilient development policies and
   initiatives. Finally, the project was included in India’s NDC for the Framework Convention on Climate
   Change in 2015 and the government of Gujarat developed a policy for reuse of treated wastewater based
   on the Jamnagar STP funded by the project.



d. Other
   NA



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                Shortcomings in the project’s
                                                                                results framework and lack of
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                sequencing of activities resulting
                                                                                in implementation delays.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 31-32) included the following lessons learned:

      Adopting a flexible and participatory approach is critical when the development issues
       are multi-sectoral and require cooperation from several stakeholders at different
       levels. This project was flexible and innovative when attracting private-sector interest
       through the implementation of state-level ICZM demonstration investments. While the project
       funded the approximately US$ 10.6 million of the Jamnagar sewage treatment plant, the risk
       of financing was assumed by the operator for the 15-year duration as part of the Design-
       Build-Operate-Transfer (DBOT) contract.
      For ensuring system-wide and policy-level changes it is critical for development
       projects and programs to provide sufficient resources and allow for engagement,
       support and collaboration with and between decision-makers, technical experts and
       civil society. This project was able to generate scientific knowledge to support the



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Integrated Coastal Zone Mgmt Project (P097985)



         development of policies and the planning, designing, implementing and managing of project
         activities and foster engagement and collaboration between different stakeholders.
        An integrated approach, with a regional and comprehensive outlook that goes beyond
         administrative boundaries, agencies or sector is critical for ensuring overall
         development and sustainability. This project demonstrated that sustainable,
         scientific management of coastal resources can increase the income of local communities
         and businesses.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation, was internally consistent,
was sufficiently outcome driven and the evidence presented was adequate. The ICR included a traditional
economic analysis and useful lessons learned that can be applied to other projects in this area. The ICR was
outcome driven but did not sufficiently specify if the outcomes can be solely attributed to project
activities. Overall, the quality of the ICR was rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                Page 19 of 19
