     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0022438

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P144139                                       Statistical Capacity Building Project

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 South Sudan                                   Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55370                                     30-Jun-2020                                            4,533,922.18

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jul-2014                                   30-Jun-2020

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                   9,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                    9,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                                4,533,922.18                                            0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg               Clay Wescott                   Sengphet Lattanavong           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project's development objective was to strengthen the capacity of the statistics producers in the territory
   of the Recipient to produce and disseminate official statistics (Financing Agreement [FA], Schedule 1, page
   4). The PDO statement in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) is consistent with the FA, with a slight
   modification replacing "the territory of the Recipient" to "South Sudan." This review will use the PDO in the FA.




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had five (5) components:

   1) Legal Reforms and Institutional Development ($0.34 million at appraisal; $0.31 million actual). This
   component had three sub-components involving the following: (i) update Recipient’s legal and regulatory
   framework governing statistics; (ii) improve governance and accountability of statistics producers, facilitating
   producer cooperation and strengthening the dialogue between official statistics producers and user
   community through relevant forums and working groups; and developing policies, protocols, and
   memoranda for collaboration; and (iii) reorganization of National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) structures,
   policies, and procedures to align with corporate priorities. All the sub-components were to be achieved
   through training and provision of technical advisory services.

   2. Human Resource Development and Training ($0.86 million at appraisal; $0.6 million actual): This
   component was to support building the capacity of data producing agencies, including: (i) the human
   resource function of the NBS (review of scheme of service of government statisticians, implement
   performance-based compensation system, and improve human resource policies and procedures); (ii)
   training plan for NBS staff and managers; (iii) statistics curriculum for public universities in South Sudan and
   placement program for students to NBS; (iv) mentoring program for key staff and managers of NBS; and (v)
   assessment of competencies and training needs.

   3. Information and Communication Technology and Statistical Infrastructure Development ($1.2
   million at appraisal; $0.39 million actual). This component was to build the recipient's capacity on
   information and communications technology (ICT) and statistical infrastructure, including: (i) production of
   sample frames for surveys; (ii) development of registers to supplement or facilitate statistical operations; (iii)
   development of standards, concepts, definitions, and protocols for statistical operations; (iv) database
   development; (v) ICT investments; (vi) development of Geographical Information Systems (GIS); (vii)
   development of census tools; and (viii) establishment of quality assurance frameworks for official statistics.

   4. Data Development and Dissemination ($4.7 million at appraisal; $1.14 million actual). The
   component was to support the main data generating activities for this project, including the following: (i)
   statistical surveys and censuses; (ii) poverty maps and other analytical products; and (iii) data compilation
   frameworks, such as the system of national accounts.

   5. Project Management ($1.9 million at appraisal; $2.069 million actual). This component was
   to support strengthening capacity for project planning and budgeting, management, coordination, and
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed through an investment loan of $9 million. There were exchange rate losses
   of $0.847 million between the U.S. dollar and SDR. At closure, the total amount disbursed was $4.53

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



   million, or 55% of what was planned, due to planned actions being cancelled due to political volatility and
   conflict. No Borrower contribution was envisaged.

   A Project Preparation Advance of $1.97 million became effective on March 4, 2014. The project was
   approved in July 2014 and became effective on February 13, 2015. It closed at the original closing date of
   June 30, 2020. There were no restructurings.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project's objectives were clearly articulated. They were highly relevant to country context, government
strategy, and Bank strategy at appraisal through closing. At the time of approval, South Sudan was
emerging from 50 years of conflict. Complementary to the other activities of nation building, there was a
pressing need for reliable data to guide the government's reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts.
Implementation of the priorities articulated in the government's 2011-2018 South Sudan Development Plan
(SSDP) would not be monitorable without timely, reliable, and accurate statistical data. The objective of
strengthening the capacity for statistics production and dissemination was therefore highly relevant to
country context.

The project's objectives were also highly relevant to government strategy. Prior efforts to develop the
statistical system had been patchy, uncoordinated, and partly driven by availability of external resources.
There had been few opportunities to develop a long-term, sustainable, coherent, and realistic strategy for
development of a national statistical system. Development of such a system was listed as an important
priority under the governance programmatic area of the SSDP. In 2013, the government adopted a National
Strategy for Development of Statistics (NSDS) 2014-2019 as a vehicle for bringing structure and medium-
term strategic planning to the statistical service. The Strategy's main objectives were strengthening the
legal and institutional framework for the statistics system, improving human resource capacity for
production and management of statistics, developing statistical infrastructure, developing and
managing data, and improving physical infrastructure and equipment. The NSDS was the guiding document
for the project. Implementation of the NSDS was to establish the NBS as the apex organization of the
country's statistical system. NBS was to set standards and policies, coordinate all official statistics
production, and serve as a one-stop shop for users of official statistics.

At the time of appraisal, the Bank aimed to support two clusters of activity in the country: improving
economic management and governance for effective local service delivery, and expanding productive
employment opportunities. Support for the statistics sector fell under the first cluster. One of the pillars
of the Bank's early analytical and advisory program was governance-improving activity to build public sector
capacity. Prior support had included strengthening the South Sudan Center for Census and helping with the
development of poverty studies, census statistics and evaluation, statistical capacity, and the use of
innovative techniques for opinion polling. The project's objectives were a logical next step in the Bank's
support, appropriately pitched for the country's development status and capacity. The Bank's Interim
Strategy Note, published in January 2013, noted that building systems for data collection and utilization to
inform policy decisions was a key area of focus in the short to medium term. The Country Engagement
Note (CEN) for the FY2018-2019 period responded to the crisis facing South Sudan following an
intensification of violence, aiming to support stabilization, recovery, and peace where opportunities arose.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



               Support for statistical capacity building, particularly data collection, was critical to achievement of the CEN's
               first objective to support basic services for vulnerable populations. The Bank's Country Engagement
               Concept Note for FY2021-2022 highlights the importance of investing in institutions, underscoring the
               importance of strengthening national capacity for data collection and dissemination (ICR, p. 11).




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthened capacity of statistics producers in South Sudan to produce official statistics

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was comprehensive and credible. It assumed that the key challenges
                             to be overcome were an inadequate legal and regulatory framework governing statistics, out-of-date statistical
                             methodologies, inadequate human resources and institutional capacity for statistical systems, and lack of
                             necessary technological, physical, and statistical infrastructure. Capacity to produce and disseminate
                             statistics was to be developed through an integrated support package delivered to the national statistical
                             system, focusing on building human capital as well as physical and statistical infrastructure at the NBS and
                             ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs). Support for legal reforms and institutional development, in the
                             form of development of a legal framework for official statistics, review of the existing statistics act, and drafting
                             of a bill to amend that legislation, was reasonably expected to lead to strengthened capacity. Provision of
                             technical assistance and training for NBS and data producing agencies, through development of
                             organizational structures, human resource policies, and training for NBS and other MDAs, would also produce
                             relevant capacity strengthening. The development of a quality assurance framework for statistics that would
                             include new policies, procedures, and tools, as well as investments in ICT and plans for a new headquarters
                             building for the NBS, were to provide the necessary technological and physical infrastructure to support the
                             new governance frameworks and enhanced human resources.



                             Outputs

                             The project financed the development of an NBS human resources strategy, training needs assessment, and
                             training plan. A total of 557 staff from NBS and MDAs (of whom 110 are female) were trained in basic
                             statistics and computer applications. The government approved and implemented a 40% salary increase for
                             NBS staff. Statistics units were established at key MDAs, which hired new statistics graduates as part of the
                             project's graduate placement program. The NBS worked with the University of Juba to develop a statistical

                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



training program including a curriculum, syllabi, and an internship program. A Statistics Bill was developed
and revised, and the ICR (p. 14) reports that it has undergone a second reading and is ready to be enacted
by the Parliament. The project team confirmed that the bill has not yet passed, at least in part because South
Sudan’s Parliament was dissolved and/or not at all active for a large portion of the last two years of the
project’s life. A national compendium of statistical standards, classification, concepts, and definitions was
developed and adopted to improve harmonization and consistency in data sets among producers of statistics.
A Crisis Recovery Survey (CRS) and Integrated Business Enterprises Survey (IBES) were conducted with
project support. However, the planned Household Budget Survey (HBS)—whose budget was 28% of the
overall project budget—was not conducted due to ongoing political volatility and insecurity. According to the
ICR (p. 16), the HBS was the most important and relevant planned survey activity under this objective, as it
would have provided key statistical data needed for compiling national accounts (including GDP).



Outcomes



The Statistical Capacity Score (SCI) is a Bank rating system of countries' statistical capacity. South Sudan's
SCI improved from 26.0% in 2013 to 45.6% in 2020, exceeding the target of 44.0%. Scores improved across
all three components of the SCI: methodology, source data, and periodicity.

The Tool for Assessing Statistical Capacity (TASC), developed by the United States Census Bureau,
measures institutional capacity, census/survey planning and management, mapping, sampling, questionnaire
design and testing, field operations, data processing, data analysis and evaluation, and data dissemination.
South Sudan's TASC score improved from 47.5% in 2015 to 54% in 2020, exceeding the target of 52.3%. The
TASC assessment assigns equal weight to sub-ratings for institutional capacity and combined operational
modules (including mapping, sampling, questionnaire content and testing, field operations, data processing,
data analysis and evaluation, data dissemination, publicity and mobile data capture summary, and
administrative records). The ICR (p. 13) reports that progress on the institutional capacity score drove overall
improvement in the TASC indicator, with disproportionate gains in the data confidentiality/protection,
human/physical capital, and stakeholder coordination dimensions, all of which were driven by the project's
interventions.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthened capacity of statistics producers in South Sudan to disseminate official statistics

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was logical and credible. It assumed that the key challenge to be
overcome was low quality and limited access to statistical data. The project's support for a new NBS website,
a GIS web-database, and revived micro-data library, as well as the conducting of new surveys whose data

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



sets and analytical reports would be documented, archived, and made publicly available, was to increase
capacity to disseminate statistical data and analysis.



Outputs

An NBS ICT needs assessment was conducted. Computers and licenses for a GIS laboratory were
purchased, and a GIS web-database with GIS data-layers and a revived micro-data were made available on-
line. The number of GIS data-layers accessible through the GIS web-database increased from 4 in 2013 to 16
in 2020, meeting the target of 16. Eight micro-datasets were made available on-line (currently available in the
World Bank Microdata Library), almost meeting the target of nine datasets. The NBS website
(https://ssnbs.org) was upgraded. The project supported statistical advocacy and sensitization through
printing and distributing the NSDS, a statistical compendium, NBS strategic plans, annual reports, statistics
regulations, a code of practice for official statistics, an ICT policy, statistical yearbooks, and CRS and IBES
data sets and analytical reports. The NBS library was renovated and equipped with computers, furniture, and
statistics books and materials; it is now open to the public. Where internet connectivity was a challenge, the
NBS disseminated products through workshops and physical distribution of its products to relevant users. The
project supported the NBS's first User Satisfaction Survey in 2017.



Outcomes

The ICR uses the SCI and TASC scores as indicators of achievement for both statistics production and
statistics dissemination. The SCI includes a dimension for data dissemination, but no specific information on
this dimension is provided. Furthermore, no information is provided on the results of the 2017 User
Satisfaction Survey. Nevertheless, the output indicators on statistical advocacy, sensitization, and distribution
are sufficient, together with the overall SCI and TASC ratings, to constitute evidence of substantial
achievement for this objective.


Although not directly a part of the project's objectives, the project team also provided information on the use
of statistics for evidence-based policy making. CRS data fed directly into the Bank's South Sudan Poverty
Assessment. Data from the CRS were incorporated into the Project Targeting Index online platform that was
developed to support a sound methodological approach to the selection of project sites (responding, in part,
to observations that projects were being placed only in government-controlled areas). Data from the CRS also
fed into the updated Country Engagement Note and the Risk and Resilience Assessment. The CRS was the
first survey that collected comprehensive welfare data on the country's internally displaced population, and
the project team reported that there were many engagements on using this data for programming with donor
partners in Juba, particularly UNICEF. Similarly, IBES data fed directly into a recent overarching policy
document for the government's Jobs, Recovery, and Peacebuilding agenda, one of four formal input pieces
assessing various aspects of jobs and employment in order to formulate policy for recovery. The project team
did not report on use of statistics by universities, think tanks, or non-governmental organizations.




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The level of improvement on two key statistical capacity indices, as well as information on statistics
                            dissemination activities, are convincing evidence of substantial achievement of both objectives under
                            extremely challenging circumstances. Even without the planned HBS, the project achieved significant outputs
                            (training and regulatory) that led directly to achievement of intermediate outcomes (national compendium of
                            standards, CRS, IBES); a convincing results chain led from Bank-financed interventions to improvements in
                            the SCI and TASC. Improvement in the TASC rating was driven mostly by gains on the institutional capacity
                            dimension, which was directly supported by the project.

                            The PAD and ICR note that several other development partners (DPs) were active in South Sudan's statistics
                            sector, but no information is provided in the ICR on division of labor. The project team later added that project
                            planning and implementation carefully avoided duplication of efforts with other DPs. The NSDS was
                            adopted in close collaboration between the Bank and other DPs. The main DP working with NBS was the
                            United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), working mainly to update the sampling frame for the national
                            census. The Bank team coordinated closely with UNFPA both during missions and virtually in between
                            missions.

                            The strong conceptual linkages between the project's implemented activities and observed outcomes, as well
                            as smooth collaboration with DPs, make it plausible to attribute observed outcomes, at least in part, to the
                            project.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   A traditional cost-benefit analysis was not attempted at appraisal, as it was not possible to assign a specific
   value to enhanced ability to make better decisions based on improved statistical data (PAD, p. 14). The PAD
   observed that South Sudan was a relatively high-cost environment for statistics, meaning that few administrative
   procedures were in place to record household interactions with government, and internet-related data sources
   were scarce or incomplete. This meant that the only way to obtain statistics on social and economic phenomena
   was to survey households and enterprises at the source, at home or at the place of business. The most cost-
   effective way to conduct such surveys is to maintain adequate sampling frames from which to
   draw appropriately-sized samples and administer questionnaires to a representative subset of the population.



                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



This project's interventions to build capacity to create and maintain adequate sampling frames, and to draw
efficient samples, were intended to save resources and improve data reliability over time.

The ICR echoes the PAD in not attempting a traditional economic analysis. It notes that the completion of the
CRS and IBES, as well as improvement in the informational foundation of the country as evidenced by
improvement in the SCI and TASC scores, can be expected to improve targeting of public services and
infrastructure and to encourage investment that will create jobs.

In terms of operational efficiency, the ICR (p. 17) notes that the sequencing of project activities was carefully
designed and implemented, with training and capacity-building preceding data-generating activities. In addition,
the budget for implemented surveys was efficiently used. The cost per interview for similar surveys taken in
Ghana ($251), Democratic Republic of Congo ($692), and Ethiopia ($90) was higher than that for the IBES in
South Sudan ($68). However, there were significant operational inefficiencies due to the country's political
situation and insecurity. Some areas of the country were inaccessible to NBS staff, presenting challenges to
survey field work. Low oil prices and increased insecurity strained the government's fiscal space, producing
"extremely high" staff turnover at the NBS (ICR, p. 19), low staff commitment, and regular electricity/power and
internet service outages (ICR, p. 23). The planned 2014 Population and Housing Census was not conducted
due to ongoing volatility; that census was to have provided an updated sampling frame for the 2015 National
HBS, which was also not conducted due to the security situation. The government requested in December
2017 that the project be restructured to reallocate funds from the HBS to other activities, including expanded
legal reform, institutional development, training, and additional traditional surveys. Across 2018 and 2019,
delays in acting on this restructuring request were due to negotiations between the Bank, government, and
potential implementation partners about moving to third party implementation across the Bank’s entire portfolio
in South Sudan. The project team for this project advocated for keeping its implementation within the
NBS, arguing that achieving the objectives would be difficult, if not impossible, with implementation from another
entity; ultimately, it was agreed not to move to a third-party implementer for this project only. Shortly after this
decision was taken, the government went into arrears with the Bank, resulting in portfolio-wide suspension of
disbursements in the country across 2019-2020. The project restructuring was never finalized, and it closed
without disbursing funds for HBS and some other planned activities.

Project efficiency is therefore rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to Bank strategy, government strategy, and the country's
development needs. Achievement of both objectives is rated Substantial, based on improvements in key indices
of statistical capacity as well as evidence of gains in the dissemination of statistical data and analysis. Efficiency
is rated Modest due to impacts of the volatile political and security situation on project implementation, including
inability to implement a major planned household budget survey. These ratings are indicative of moderate
shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, producing an Outcome rating of Moderately
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Many of the key risks identified during project design remain relevant after project closure: continued conflict
and macroeconomic instability, the latter resulting in part from the dependence of public revenue on oil
prices; uncertainty around flow of government resources to the statistics sector; the commitment of MDAs to
development of statistical capacity; and the weak capacity of NBS and MDAs' statistics units. The project
achieved important institutional strengthening through updating of legal frameworks around the production of
statistics, improved governance of official statistics producers, and reorganization of the structures, policies,
and procedures of the NBS. Those gains are likely to be sustained. The academic collaboration with Juba
University, as well as the ICT and statistical infrastructure developed to support statistical business
processes, continue to function as the project intended. The Parliament's failure to enact timely passage of
the Statistics Bill stands in the way of sustainable institutional reform and organizational change; passage of
the Bill would increase stakeholder responsibility and accountability. The ICR does not provide information
on the barriers to passage of the Bill or on the likelihood of its adoption in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was based on the goals, gaps, and needs outlined in the NSDS 2014-2019 as well
  as intensive consultations with staff and management of NBS and other statistics producers, main users
  of statistical products, development partners, and other stakeholders (PAD, p. 15). Design was in line
  with international best practice as recommended by the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the
  21st Century, and it was similar to the design of many other statistical capacity building projects financed
  by the Bank over the preceding decade. Overall risk at appraisal was rated High. The most important
  identified risks at appraisal pertained to financial management and procurement capacity. Risk mitigation
  included measures for targeted technical assistance to support weak functions and areas; development

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



  of detailed manuals, policies, and operating procedures in these areas; strong support from the Bank for
  overall project implementation; and efforts to build a coalition of senior government officials to support
  and facilitate implementation of the NSDS. In retrospect, governance risk was underestimated, and more
  consideration could have been given to the fragility context: the government's fiscal situation and
  management capacity, the overall security situation, and the Parliament's willingness to adopt the
  statistics bill.

  Several other development partners were active in the statistical sector in South Sudan, most notably
  UNFPA and Statistics Norway, which had a long-standing cooperation with the NBS. According to the
  PAD, the Bank and Statistics Norway coordinated their programs to focus on separate areas of the
  NSDS, but it was acknowledged during project preparation that further coordination was needed in some
  areas, especially business statistics and ICT development (PAD, p. 50).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Factors under the Bank's control: The Bank team remained committed to project implementation despite
 the challenging context. Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were produced regularly. Beginning in
 2018, this was the only Bank-financed project in South Sudan that was not conducted through third-party
 implementation. Frequent changes in task team leadership (five in total over the course of the project) were
 disruptive, though the ICR (p. 23) asserts that there were no resulting information or decision gaps in the
 project implementation process. Additional fiduciary safeguards implemented by the Bank in August 2016
 slowed disbursement and implementation of activities; the Bank team provided support for implementing
 staff in procurement and project management in order to resolve issues as they arose. The ICR does not
 explain why project restructuring was not acted upon more expeditiously after the government requested it
 at the end of December 2017, as the portfolio-wide suspension of disbursements did not occur until 2019.

 Factors outside the Bank's control: The volatile security situation negatively affected the implementation of
 project activities. The Bank team attempted to mitigate this challenge, in part, by adopting a flexible
 statistical sampling approach that allowed substitution of insecure areas with secure areas, prioritizing
 surveys like the IBES that focused on urban (more secure) areas, and hiring firms to cover inaccessible
 areas. The tight fiscal situation produced delays in government payments to contractors and civil servants.
 The Bank responded by facilitating direct payments to contractors, for which thresholds were lowered.
 However, this approach was not possible for payments to civil servants; as a result, civil servants "showed
 low motivation, unavailability, and contract terminations" (ICR, p. 23). The project attempted to compensate
 for delayed salary payments by providing the project team with improved work environments
 including consistent electricity, internet, and container offices.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives and theory of change were clear and monitorable. According to the project team,
 the Bank calculated baselines and progress on the SCI using inputs from the country poverty economist.
 The TASC involved a more complicated data collection exercise across many different modules and
 questions. For the baseline, a consultant who set up the TASC was hired and went to Juba to work with
 NBS and build capacity to collect and process these scores. The use of composite indicators of statistical
 capacity to measure achievement of the first objective (production of statistics) was appropriate, though
 additional outcome indicators -- including data from the appropriate constituent elements of the SCI and/or
 TASC -- could have provided more precise measurement of the second objective (dissemination of
 statistics). Attributable assessment of project achievement would have been strengthened by the
 specification of intermediate outcome indicators more in line with the project's scope, measuring results
 that were directly dependent on project interventions. The output indicator that measured the number of
 surveys conducted under the project provided no indication of the relative importance of these surveys, and
 therefore it did not capture the magnitude of the gap created by inability to carry out the planned HBS.

 The NSDS Coordinating Team (NCT) of the NBS was responsible for monitoring and reporting, drawing
 data from self-assessments, third-party assessments, and direct feedback from beneficiaries. Baselines
 and targets were to be derived from the TASC.



b. M&E Implementation
  Baselines and targets were developed as planned. The indicators of project performance were thoroughly
  reviewed and assessed during each implementation support mission.The NCT regularly produced
  progress reports covering information on budget, capacity building, data production and dissemination,
  and fiduciary issues. These reports were candid about implementation challenges. The Bank monitored
  progress through regular implementation support missions. However, there were significant M&E
  implementation challenges. Full levels of M&E staffing were only in place for the first two years of the
  project's lifetime. After that point, some NCT staff resigned because of issues with salary payments,
  uncertainty created by the lack of approval of project restructuring, the suspension of disbursements
  across the Bank's portfolio in the country, and a general lack of implementation progress. The ICR does
  not provide information on how M&E reporting managed to continue under these conditions; the project
  team explained that the PIU was able to complete data collection for the composite
  outcome indicators through close supervision from the Bank.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 24) states that data on project indicators were reported in ISRs and used to provide
  evidence on achievement of outcomes. There is no information provided in the ICR on the way that M&E
  data and analysis were used to inform project implementation, communicated to stakeholders, or

                                                                                                Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



  influenced strategic redirection or resource allocation. The project team later added information on use
  of project data and analysis to inform project implementation (the Project Targeting Index) as well
  as national policy and strategy through the South Sudan Poverty Assessment, Risk and Resilience
  Assessment, and Jobs, Recovery, and Peacebuilding agenda (see Section 4, Objective 2).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was Environmental Assessment category C. No safeguard policies were triggered.



   The project team added that there were a number of safeguards implemented against the misuse of data,
   including:

         Informed consent for all individual, household, and enterprise respondents in any survey;
         Full anonymization of datasets in line with the Bank's data privacy policies;
         Programming of questionnaires and storage of responses online in the Bank's Survey Solutions
          system; and
         Anonymization, cleaning, and processing of data from both the CRS and IBES in line with Bank
          policies, and current storage and dissemination through the Bank's Microdata Library, which
          provides necessary background documentation along with the datasets.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At commencement, the project was staffed by an experienced team that provided high-quality
   administrative and procurement documentation, enabling initially smooth review and clearance procedures.
   After the conflict in the summer of 2016, enhanced fiduciary measures were undertaken by the Bank,
   increasing the use of prior review procurements and more scrutiny of Interim Financial Reports and
   Withdrawal Applications. These enhanced measures were put in place not only for this project, but across
   the entire Bank portfolio for the country. At that point, project implementation became "markedly more
   sluggish" (ICR, p. 25). Financial management performance was rated Satisfactory until 2016, when it was
   downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory because of the impact of the conflict and subsequent tightened
   supervision measures. The final project audit flagged weaknesses in the system of internal control, leading
   to inability to account for 64 tablets valued at $15,506. This amount was therefore considered ineligible
   expenditure that should have been refunded to the Bank before the disbursement deadline date of
   December 31, 2020. The project team later stated that, to its knowledge, this amount still has not yet been




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



   refunded. As a result, overall project financial management performance was considered Moderately
   Unsatisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                   Shortcomings in risk
                                                                                   assessment at appraisal, and
                                                                                   delay in restructuring the project
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   when it became clear that key
                                                                                   activities could not be
                                                                                   implemented.
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 28-31) provides numerous detailed lessons emerging from each stage of the project's
life cycle. They include:

Successful implementation of development projects in fragile contexts depends not only on
addressing development gaps, but also on consideration of specific fragility and conflict dynamics. In
this case, delays in project restructuring revealed lack of flexibility in adjusting to evolving realities,
capacity/resource constraints, and risks on the ground.

In fragile settings, the need may arise to incentivize project staff to overcome salary and staffing
limitations. In this case, there was high turnover because NBS staff were not paid enough by the
government to complete implementation of project-financed activities, a situation that grew worse as
the macro-fiscal state of the country deteriorated. When outcomes are at risk due to deterioration of
the security and/or fiscal context in a project that is otherwise performing well, the Bank could
consider working with the client to find ways for key government staff to continue to receive
adequate salaries.


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)



Careful sequencing of activities is an important element of project design. In this case, prioritizing
human capacity development during the project's initial phases fostered the development of
ownership among statistical staff at the NBS and MDAs' statistical units; despite later challenges,
this early strengthening enabled continuation of statistical production even in the face of ongoing
conflict.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  To explore further use of statistical data for improving service delivery, prioritizing the use of scarce resources,
  holding government accountable at all levels, and empowering individuals, in line with the findings of the 2021
  World Development Report: Data for Better Living. Further assessment could also examine issues of data
  sharing, data re-use, and overall privacy safeguards.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, candid, and evidence-based. It follows established guidelines. It presents a comprehensive
and plausible theory of change for the project, and it interrogates thoroughly the quality and adequacy of output
and outcome indicators in the results framework. The ICR cogently assesses the various types of factors that
impacted implementation progress: issues inherent in project design, factors under the Bank's control during
supervision, and exogenous factors that were outside the Bank's control. Its extensive lessons, derived from
the project's experience as described in the main text of the ICR, should prove highly useful for the design and
implementation of other projects in the sector, the country, and other fragile contexts. There were some gaps in
the ICR's information and analysis, including the reasons that the project was not restructured in a timely
manner after the government's request in late 2017, the activities and division of labor with other development
partners in the sector, and details on M&E implementation and utilization. Within the context of an otherwise
strong document, these shortcomings are relatively minor, and the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                         Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)




                                                                               Page 15 of 15
