     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022577

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145634                                    Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Central Asia                               Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55930,IDA-D0300                        31-Aug-2020                                          42,116,727.35

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Feb-2015                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               45,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                45,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                            42,116,727.35                                            0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Peter Nigel Freeman           Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs), as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6), were:

   "To increase transport connectivity between the Republic of Tajikistan and neighboring countries
   along priority cross-border road links in Sugd Oblast, and to support improvements in road
   operations and asset management practices".


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



   This review is based on the two objectives:

   1. To increase transport connectivity between the Republic of Tajikistan (hereafter Tajikistan) and neighboring
   countries along priority cross-border road links in Sugd Oblast.

   2. To support improvements in road operations and asset management practices.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project with interventions in Sugd Oblast in Tajikistan was the second phase of the Central Asia Road
   Links (CARs) program, aimed at increasing transport connectivity between neighboring countries in Central
   Asia along priority cross-border road links, and supporting improvements in road operations and asset
   management practices. The first phase rehabilitated cross-border road links between the Kyrgyz Republic
   and Tajikistan. The second phase of the program, aimed to improve Tajikistan's connectivity with the Kyrgyz
   Republic and Uzbekistan, along priority cross-border road links and to support improvements in
   road operations and asset management practices.

   There were three components (PAD, pages 7 - 8).

   1. Rehabilitation of priority road sections in the Sugd Oblast. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$51.0 million. The actual cost was US$43.6 million. This component aimed at rehabilitating about 70
   kilometers (km) of roads in Sugd Oblast, including and within close proximity of the road linking Kuckkak -
   Kim-Isfara-Gulistan Dehmoi- Proletarsk Madaniyat, and Kanibadam -Patar.

   2. Improvement of Road Operations and Asset Management Practices. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$2.0 million. The actual cost was US$5.0 million. This component aimed at improving road
   operations and road asset management practices. Activities in this component: (i) a review of technical
   standards, norms and parameters on vehicle (truck) weight and axle load limits, developing an axle loading
   control plan, and the equipment required for implementing the plan: (ii) procurement of a roughness profiler:
   (iii) installing about 40 permanent traffic count stations: (iv) support for adapting the road data base to be
   used by 62 maintenance units: and (v) support for deploying a road asset management system in
   the Ministry of Transport (MOT).

   3. Project Management and Implementation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.0 million. The
   actual cost was US$0.8 million. This component aimed at supporting project implementation, through
   providing goods, consultants' services, training, incremental operating costs, and support for the project's
   external audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$54.0 million. The actual cost was US$49.5 million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit and grants of US$45.00 million (IDA credit of
   US$38.25 million, and IDA grant of US$6.75 million). Funding for this project came from both national IDA
   allocation (approximately US$14.5 million) and regional IDA financing (approximately US$30.5 million). The
   amount disbursed was US$49.5 million. There was parallel financing for complementary activities for cross-
   border activities from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the European Union (EU).

   Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$9.0 million at appraisal. The actual
   contribution was US$7.4 million.

   Dates. The project became effective on October 12, 2015, and was to close on August 31, 2020. The
   project closed four months behind schedule on December 31, 2020.

   Other changes. There were three Level 2 restructurings.

   The following changes were made through the first restructuring on October 12, 2018.

         Savings of US$10.5 million were realized due to lower price bids for component one activities.
          These savings were used to: (i) prepare detailed work under the Transport Sector Development
          Strategy (component two), and (ii) financing additional activities such as, installing additional traffic
          counters and solar panels, a server for Weigh-In Motion System (WIMS) , a Road Asset
          Management System (RAMS), and rehabilitation of 6.7 km of the road link from Kanibadam to Patar
          border crossing point.

   Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories through the second restructuring on July 11,
   2019.

   Further changes were made through the third restructuring on July 21, 2020.

         The closing date was extended by four months, in the face of disruptions to cross-border movement
          of goods, due to the COVID - 19 pandemic.
         Savings of US$2.17 million realized during implementation were used for distributing personal
          protective equipment, disinfectants for frontline workers, and COVID - 19 test kits for the transport
          operators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Tajikistan is a remote and poor country in Central Asia, with an
economy dependent on the agricultural sector. Diversification of the economy was hence important in
the country context. Being landlocked and having a largely mountainous terrain, the road transport mode
was important for both passenger and freight traffic, particularly for interregional movements of time-
sensitive goods (such as, fruits and vegetables). Given this dependence on this mode, improving road links
in the Sugd Oblast, which accounted for about a quarter of Tajikistan's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



               40% of the country's overall freight movement and improving asset management practices in the sector
               was important to the Government Strategy.

               Country and regional strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were aligned with the Government's Living
               Standards Improvement Strategy (LSIS) for 2013 - 2015. This strategy recognized the importance of
               transport connectivity for private sector-led growth, developing human potential, energy dependence and
               food security. The socio-economic development program of the Sugd region for up to 2015, highlighted the
               need for improving transport connectivity. The World Bank's doing business trading across border
               indicator, ranked Tajikistan as 188 out of 189 countries. The PDOs were relevant to the development
               priorities articulated in Tajikistan's National Development Strategy (NDS) until 2030. The PDOs
               were relevant to two of the four development goals of the NDS namely: (i) exiting from the communication
               deadlock and turning the country into a transit path: and (ii) expanding productive employment. At the
               regional level, the Transport and Trade Facilitation Strategy and the Action Plan of the Central Asia region
               for 2008 - 2017, endorsed by the Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation (CAREC), identified the
               rehabilitation of six strategic transport corridors, based on their potential impact on regional economic
               growth and poverty reduction.

               Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Country Partnership
               Strategy (CPS) for 2015 - 2018 highlighted the need for improving connectivity for facilitating regional and
               international trade. The Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic issued in 2018, articulated the need for
               strategic infrastructure investments. The PDOs were consistent with the three development priorities of
               the current CPS for 2019 - 2023: (i) building human capital and strengthening social resilience: (ii)
               improving public institutions: and (iii) fostering private-sector growth.

               Bank experience. This project was the first Bank-financed transport sector project in Tajikistan.
               The design included rehabilitating key road links, and institutional strengthening activities for
               improving asset management practices. With the savings realized due to the competitive procurement
               process, the project activities were scaled up appropriately for driving the sector reforms. That said, though
               the PDOs to improve connectivity were important in the country and regional corridor context, the PDOs as
               formulated were unambitious, as compared with the Bank's usual criteria for a regional project (that is,
               having activities in two or more regional countries). The PDOs were focused on rehabilitating priority road
               links in Sugd Oblast (a specific location in Tajikistan). In this case, the Asian Development Bank and the
               European Union have taken responsibility for the cross border facilities. The project timing was less than
               ideal, given the instability in the region, manifested in Tajikistan's border disputes with Kyrgyz Republic. The
               relevance of the PDO, nevertheless, rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)




Objective

To increase transport connectivity between the Republic of Tajikistan and neighboring countries along priority
cross-border road links in Sugd Oblast.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
Rehabilitation of priority road sections in Sugd Oblast - Tajikistan's entry and exit points for trade and travel to
the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan - were likely to increase the volume of freight through the border
crossing points, thereby increasing transport connectivity between Tajikistan and neighboring countries.

Outputs (ICR, pages 30 -31).

      74.40 km of priority roads in Sugd Oblast were rehabilitated. This exceeded the target of 70 km. The
       ICR (paragraph 35) notes that different construction techniques, including resilient infrastructure
       solutions and night reflectors were implemented along the 13 km road section. With this rehabilitation,
       41.33% of roads in Sugd Oblast were reported to be in good and fair condition. This exceeded that
       target of 40%.
      2,658,400 road users benefitted from project activities, exceeding the target of 2,650,400. Of this,
       1,329,400 beneficiaries were females, exceeding the target of 1,320,400.

Outcomes (ICR, page 29 -30).

The outputs described above were expected to increase the volume of freight through Gulistan/Kyzyl-Bel and
Madaniyat/Kairagach, Patar border-crossing points, and increase the market accessibility index of Sugd
Oblast (this index, developed by the Development Research Group (DEC) of the World Bank, is a measure of
potential connectivity between villages/towns and big cities).

      The volume of freight through Gulistan/Kyzyl-Bel and Madaniyat/Kairagach, Patar border-crossing
       points, increased from 359,838 tons/year at the baseline in 2015, to 620,961 tons in 2019, exceeding
       the target of 550,000 tons in 2019. However, due to the travel restrictions due to COVID-19, the
       volume dropped dramatically from 620,961 in 2019 to 113,724 tons in December 2020. The ICR
       (paragraph 31) notes that this significant reduction in traffic volume is expected to be temporary, and
       traffic is expected to rebound once the pandemic is under control. The IEG concurs with this view
       based on evidence from the countries that are recovering from the pandemic.
      The market accessibility for Sugd Oblast improved by 11%, from 4.5% at the baseline in 2015 to 5.5%
       in 2019. This exceeded the target of 5%.
      94% of road users were satisfied with the rehabilitated roads, exceeding the target of 90% (this result
       was based on a survey of 1,150 households who lived within 150- 200 meters from the rehabilitated
       road sections).

Given that the targets were realized, efficacy of this objective is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support improvements in road operations and asset management practices.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
Developing and implementing a long term transport sector development strategy, operationalization of the
Road Asset Management Database System (RAMS), reviewing the technical standards, norms and
parameters on vehicle weight, developing an axle load control plan, buying the equipment necessary to
implement the plan, and installation of addition traffic counters and solar panels, were likely to improve road
operations and road asset management practices.

Outputs (ICR, pages 15 -16).

      A transport sector development strategy for up to 2030 was developed. This strategy was approved by
         the Ministry Of Transport (MOT). This document was published and is being used to develop
         the Government's mid-term development programs, covering two planning cycles 2021 - 2025 and
         2026 - 2030.
        The equipment for the Road Asset Management Database System (RAMS) such as the hardware,
         machinery and equipment (servers, roughness profiler, forty traffic counts along with solar panels on
         the main roads in different parts of the country), were procured. The relevant staff of the MOT were
         trained in using the system.
        The Dynamic Weigh-in-Motion (WIM) was installed as targeted.
        The activity associated with completing a feasibility study and design of investments for the fourth
         phase of the Central Asia Road Links (CAR) program was only partially completed, with an expected
         completion date of April 2021.
        The MOT with the Ministry of Health and Social Protection and customs officers prepared a list of the
         personal protective equipment for COVID -19, to be used by transport operators at border points. This
         equipment is now being distributed at the border crossing points.

Outcomes

The outputs described above were expected to contribute to two outcomes. One, operationalization of the
RAMS, and two, that the MOT approves a strategic plan on weight and axle load control.

      The Road Asset Management Database System was operational when the project closed. The RAMS
       hardware, however, was too near to the closing date due to various delays (including procurement
       delays initially and later due to COVID - 19).
      The MOT approved the strategic plan on weight and axle load control. This plan was presented at the
       regional level (Central Asian Regional Economic Cooperation Program (CAREC).

Given that the intended outcomes were realized and that the RAMS system and a strategic plan on weight
and axle load control is necessary for improvements in road operations and asset management practices,
efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given that the outcomes were realized, and the activities completed with minor shortcomings, overall efficacy
                            is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost- benefit analysis was conducted using the Highway Development and Management
   Model (HDM -4), both at appraisal and at closure for component one activities. These activities accounted for
   94% of the appraisal estimate and 88% of the actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from
   travel time savings and savings in vehicle operating costs.The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate
   was US$27.4 million at closure, as compared to the NPV of US$25.3 million at appraisal using the same
   discount rate. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 26.7%, as compared to the ex ante
   EIRR of 16.7%. The ex post EIRR was higher, due to the higher-than-expected traffic flows on the rehabilitated
   road links.

   Administrative and operational issues. Savings were realized on component one activities due to the
   competitive bidding process. These were utilized for scaling up project activities during the first restructuring,
   and for distributing personal protective equipment, disinfectants, and COVID - 19 test kits for the transport
   operators in 2020. However, there were delays in the initial years due to a combination of factors, including the
   low quality of initial outputs prepared by international consultants for the National Transport Strategy, delays in
   supply of RAMS-related equipment and operationalization of the Weigh-in-Motion (WIM) system and issues
   associated with occupational health and safety issues (discussed in section 10). The delays were exacerbated
   by factors beyond the control of the project, major weather events (above average rainfall, glacial melting and
   subsequent flooding), which caused major damage to the Kim-Kuchkak Road section, and the impact of COVID-
   19 on the timely delivery of imported equipment. However, these factors were rectified, and all project activities
   were completed, with just a four months extension of the closing date.

   Overall, efficiency is rated substantial.


   Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)             *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                           94.00
 Appraisal                                                     16.70
                                                                                            Not Applicable
                                                                                           88.00
 ICR Estimate                                                  26.70
                                                                                            Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies is rated substantial. The overall efficacy is
rated substantial, given the minor shortcomings. Efficiency is rated substantial, given the economic justification
for the project. Taking these ratings into effect, the project outcome is satisfactory, reflecting minor shortcomings
in the achievement of its objectives, in its efficiency and relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The long term sustainability of the Road Asset Management System (RAMS)
established under the auspices of this project could be undermined by the lack of sufficient budget
support. This risk is considered substantial.

Exposure to natural disasters. Climate change induced glacial melting and associated flooding could pose
a risk to the sustainability of this project's investments. This underscores the need for the Government to
monitor these impacts and ensure that the necessary infrastructure investments are made. This risk is
considered moderate.

Political risk. There is a risk to the activities financed under the project, given the political instability in the
region and disputes over borders (over issues such as water for irrigation purposes and pasture grounds).
This risk is considered moderate.

Road safety risk. According to a beneficiary survey conducted during implementation indicated that over
a third (37%) of the respondents (557) cited road safety concerns due to drivers significantly exceeding the
speed limits, as serious concerns. Other issues raised were, pedestrians walking along the road in



                                                                                                            Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



dangerous areas, children crossing the roads not in the pedestrian crossings, and drivers overtaking areas in
areas forbidden for overtaking.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was the first transport sector financed by the World Bank in Tajikistan. The project was prepared in
  close coordination with other donors financing complementary activities at the regional level (PAD,
  paragraph 35). The civil works to be implemented under the project were "climate proof" and took into
  account climate adaptation measures (PAD, paragraph 11). The implementation arrangements were
  appropriate, with the regional coordination mechanism of the Central Asia Regional Cooperation
  (CAREC) responsible for coordination and policy-related issues (such as, harmonization of standards,
  norms and parameters on vehicle weight and axle load limits), and the Project Implementation Group
  (PIG) in the Ministry of Transport (MOT) responsible for project execution (PAD, paragraphs 32 and
  33). Several risks were identified at appraisal, including high stakeholder and governance risks, weak
  implementation capacity, procurement risks, and risks associated recent social tensions along the border
  between Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. Several mitigation measures were incorporated at design,
  including recruitment of a reputable construction supervision consultant, hiring individual consultants with
  prior experience in donor-supported projects, and developing citizen engagement and communication
  activities. Even with mitigation measures, overall project risk was rated high, given that this was the first
  transport sector project in Tajikistan (PAD, paragraph 40). Appropriate arrangements were made for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were thirteen supervision missions during the project, with missions twice a year as per the norm.
 The supervision missions included on-site visits. The supervision team made the appropriate decision to
 restructure the project and ensure utilization of savings to strengthen the institutional strengthening
 dimension of the project. According to the information provided subsequently by the team, the continuity of
 leadership was maintained with two Task-Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime.

 The support provided by the supervision team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
 section 10). A minor aspect to note on M&E: the team could have provided more support through
 training the implementing agency in monitoring the key PDO indicator associated with the market
 accessibility index for Tajikistan (discussed in section 9b).




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change adequately represented the logical framework, and how the project and outputs were
 to aid in realizing the PDO. The key outcome indicators were appropriate for monitoring project
 performance. The two outcome indicators relating to the connectivity component of the project were: (i) the
 volume of freight through Gulistan/ Kyzyl-Bel Madaniyat/ Kairagach border crossing points, and (ii) the
 market accessibility index of Sugd Oblast. These indicators were attributable to project activities. The
 indicators relating to asset management practices were: (i) satisfaction of users with the improvements
 along the completed road users, (ii) the Ministry of Transport (MOT) approves and presents a strategic plan
 on weight and axle load control at the regional level, and (iii) a road asset management system is
 operational for analysis and planning of road works (PAD, paragraph 20). The key indicators although
 adequate, were not ambitious, for a regional project (this pragmatic approach, however, has been due to
 the historical silo mentality between the states concerned). The Ministry of Transport was responsible for
 M&E. There were however no indicators aimed at monitoring road safety features.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that overall, M&E data were collected and analyzed in a methodological
  manner by the Project Implementation Group (PIG). As further noted, although the methodology to
  calculate market accessibility index was detailed in the PAD, the PIG had difficulties in measuring this
  indicator. The ICR notes that while the Bank team supported the PIG group in providing calculations for
  this specific indicator, training the M&E staff would have helped in measuring this indicator. Excepting for
  this, all other indicators were regularly updated during the project lifetime.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E indicators were used by both the PIG and the Bank teams during supervision activities to
  assess performance and ensure that the project was on track towards achieving the development
  objectives.

  Although there were minor shortcomings, including the challenges associated with regular monitoring of
  the market accessibility index, given that the indicators were adequate to track achievement of the PDO,
  the overall M&E is rated as substantial.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was a Category B (Partial Assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard policies. Two
   safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) at appraisal (PAD, page 17).

   Environmental Assessment. The PAD (paragraph 58) noted that the adverse environmental project
   impacts were expected to be site-specific and transient (such as, air pollution from trucks, soil disturbance
   during earthmoving and material extraction, loss of vegetation, and disposal of construction and household
   solid waste). The draft of the site-specific Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was prepared and
   publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 59).

   The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that there was compliance with environmental safeguards during
   implementation. On the positive side, the project provided innovative solutions to environmental issues,
   such as installing oil collection systems and tanks along the road where oil was leaking from the ground at
   the sites of old wells and drip irrigation system for along one section of the road. The ICR (paragraph 76)
   notes that there were periods when environmental safeguard compliance was rated as moderately
   satisfactory, due to an incident in 2018, where a member of the contractor's office was killed by paving
   equipment. This accident reflected a lack of full compliance with occupational health and safety
   measures. The ICR notes that the MOT, the PIG and contractors responded promptly and quickly, including
   through additional safety training.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD noted that there could be land acquisition and compensation for
   assets (such as fences, trees and crops), as well as the demolition and compensation for a small number of
   structures along the section between Kuckkak - Gulistan and Dehmoi - Madaniyat. A site-specific
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the road segments financed by the Bank was prepared and
   publicly disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 57). The RAP described the land acquisition and
   compensation entitlements for the users of the project affected land parcels, as well as specific terms and
   conditions for temporary impacts occurred during construction.

   The ICR (paragraph 78) notes that 48 people were affected by the project activities and that all project
   affected people were compensated by project closure. The ICR (paragraph 79) notes that during
   implementation, public and proactive consultations were held with the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) and
   households living adjacent to the road sections. The project conducted baseline, intermediate and end line
   beneficiary surveys aimed at: (i) identifying general public awareness and beneficiary perception of the
   project activities: (ii) assessing the impact of civil works on the environment: and (iii) assessing
   beneficiaries' satisfaction with civil works. The end-line survey findings showed that the general public
   awareness of the project activities had increased from 65% at the beginning of the project to 87% at the
   end. 83% of the respondents were very satisfied with the civil works and quality of roads.

   The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that the project used the Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs) used by
   the Ministry of Transport (MOT) and the local communities. A GRM was established to register complaints


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



   and provide feedback to beneficiaries. The complaints were filed and addressed at the local level (jamoat),
   regional level (Regional Coordinator of the Project Implementation Group (PIG) and national level
   (MOT/PIG) through existing communication and information channels. The GRM was accessible
   to beneficiaries in the target sites. The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that the GRM of the project was assessed
   as "satisfactory".




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The Ministry of Transport (MOT) was responsible for fiduciary management. A
   financial management assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the financial management
   arrangements did not meet the Bank's requirements at appraisal, but that the arrangements would meet
   the requirements upon meeting two conditions, i.e., installation of software and finalizing the financial
   management chapter of the Project Operational Manual. The overall financial risk was assessed as
   substantial after mitigation measures (PAD, page 33). The ICR (paragraph 81) notes that some
   shortcomings relating to processing payments during implementation were addressed. The quarterly
   interim financial reports under the project were issued in a timely fashion. Annual audits of financial
   statements were submitted in a timely fashion and the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. An assessment of the MOT's capacity to manage was conducted at appraisal. Although
   the MOT had executed several donor-funded projects in the sector, it did not have prior experience with
   Bank-financed projects. The overall procurement risk was rated substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 37).
   The mitigation measures, included creating additional procurement capacity during implementation, and
   continuous training of MOT staff involved in procurement activities. With mitigation measures, procurement
   risk was rated substantial (PAD, page 37). The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that procurement was deemed
   to be satisfactory. There were no procurement issues and the ICR does not report any cases of mis
   procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)



Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pages 26 -27) draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this
project, presented with some adaptation of language.

1. When implementing projects with a new client and in the context of the weak
implementation capacity, the project design needs to be simple. The design of this project was
simple and straightforward to be implemented by the Ministry of Transport and the Project
Implementation Group.

2. In the face of more frequent and intense climatic events occurring in the region, the design
should include climate resilient infrastructure to minimize vulnerability of the physical
assets. While this project was being implemented, glacial melting along with prolonged and heavy
rains caused mudslides and flooding throughout Tajikistan. The cross-coordinated work on the
climate resilient infrastructure by the Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Emergency and other bodies
was key in responding to these climatic events.

3. A road investment's impact on economic growth often depends on a variety of factors
external to the road investment, making the theory of change complex and challenging to
validate through an evaluation. The lesson from this project is that in addition to the improvement
of physical connectivity, important institutional reforms on trade and transport facilitations through
cross-border measures are required to complement the physical connectivity issues.

4. The long term impact of road safety measures could be undermined due to lack of
enforcement of road safety regulations. Although road safety measures were incorporated into
the design of the roads under this project, the results of the beneficiary survey identified road safety
as a major concern. This highlights the need for enforcing road safety strategy and mechanisms for
enforcing road safety regulations in road sector projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and provides a detailed overview of the project. The theory of change is logical and
clearly discusses the links between project activities, their outputs and intended outcomes. It candidly
discusses the issues associated with the indicator on the market accessibility index. The quality of evidence
and analysis is aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR, and the ICR adheres to the guidelines. The ICR
draws solid lessons from the experience of implementing this project. The ICR appropriately includes the
Borrower's ICR in Annex 5 (ICR, page 45).


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Central Asia Road Links - Phase 2 (P145634)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                             Page 14 of 14
