     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022517

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P143842                                    P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18918                                   29-Jun-2019                                        99,968,666.79

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 08-May-2015                                29-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             99,968,666.79                                  99,968,666.79

 Actual                                         99,968,666.79                                  99,968,666.79




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Nigeria Partnership for Education Project as set out on page 5 o
   Credit Agreement and page 10 of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) was to improve access and quality of bas
   education in selected States, with particular attention to girls' participation.

   Achievement of the PDO will be assessed based on each of the following two specific objectives:



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



   - to improve access to basic education in selected states, with particular attention to girls’ participation; and

   - to improve quality of basic education in selected states.

   The focus on girls only in the first objective reflected two considerations: gender disparity in educational outcomes
   mainly in terms of access, with learning outcomes being equally poor for girls and boys; and the absence of
   disaggregation by gender in quality-related indicators.

   “Basic education” included only primary education, not pre-primary or junior secondary education, reflecting absen
   appropriate data to measure the full scope of “basic education." (The basic education system includes one year of
   primary, 6 years of primary, and 3 years of junior secondary education.)

   The selected States include five States in the northwestern part of Nigeria: Sokoto, Katsina, Kano, Kaduna, and
   Jigawa. The focus on Northern States reflected considerable disparities between North and South in access and q
   of education, in favor of the South. States were selected on the basis of commitment to reform, the number of out-
   school children and low girls’ participation in basic education, and to complement gaps in development partner sup
   addressing constraints in basic education.

    A Level 2 restructuring was undertaken during implementation (see below “Significant Changes During
   Implementation"). At that time, the project implementation period was extended, and targets for key indicators were
   modified, expanding the scope of the project; project commitments remained unchanged. Therefore, a split rating i
   warranted.

b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   To improve access and quality of basic education, the project had three components:



   Component 1: Promoting school effectiveness and improved learning outcomes through the provision
   of school improvement grants to be used according to specific manuals (estimated cost at appraisal US$42
   million; actual cost US$48.3 million). There were three sub-components:

   Sub-component 1(a): school improvement grants channeled to primary schools for non-salary
   expenditures to improve school learning and teaching.

   Sub-component 1(b): school improvement grants channeled to pre-primary schools for non-salary
   expenditures to improve school learning and teaching.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



  Sub-component 1(c): support to teachers’ professional development by financing the cost of training
  and related materials to develop the skills of primary school teachers in core areas of literacy and
  mathematics.



  Component 2: Increasing access to basic education for out-of-school girls (estimated cost at
  appraisal US$40 million; actual cost US$32.2 million). There were three sub-components:

  Sub-component 2(a): girls’ access to primary education to increase the demand for girls’ education by
  providing scholarships to families to encourage the enrollment of girls in lower primary schools.

  Sub-component 2(b): scholarships for female teachers to increase the supply of qualified female
  teachers.

  Sub-component 2 (c): community mobilization and training for school-based management
  committees (SBMC), including capacity building and operational support to local education authorities,
  focusing on enrollment and girls’ retention issues, outreach activities, and community mapping, to
  encourage sending children to school and keeping them enrolled.



  Component 3: Strengthening planning and management systems including learning assessment
  and capacity development (estimated cost at appraisal US$18 million; actual cost US$18.5 million). There
  were two sub-components:

  Sub-component 3(a): management and implementation support to provide resources for technical
  assistance and capacity building to the Federal Ministry of Education for the management, monitoring, and
  supervision of the project.

  Sub-component 3(b): monitoring, evaluation and learning assessment to provide resources for
  monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities, including capacity building for M&E data analysis and the
  implementation of learning assessments.



  Significant Changes during Implementation

  One Level 2 restructuring was undertaken, including a 12-month extension of the Closing Date to allow all
  project activities to be completed, and adjustments to key targets to take into account the Closing Date
  extension.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, total project cost was estimated at US$100 million. Actual project cost at closing
  was US$99.97 million, reflecting discrepancies in exchange rate conversions.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



                                       Financing. The project was financed by a US$100 million equivalent Global Partnership for Education
                                      (GPE) Grant, of which US$99.97 million was disbursed.

                                      Dates. The project was approved on May 8, 2015 and became effective on November 2, 2015. The
                                      original Closing Date, June 29, 2019, was extended once, to June 29, 2019, to allow completion of ongoing
                                      project activities.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The PDO was relevant to the country situation, especially as it presented itself in the Northern part of the
               country, and it reflected government strategy for education reform as well as the Bank’s country
               strategy. Project interventions addressed key challenges in Nigeria’s education system, including the
               persistence of poor learning outcomes driven by low access and low quality of basic education due to a
               series of factors: low enrollment numbers, especially in girls’ education; limited teacher availability,
               especially in rural areas and in teaching core subjects; and low quality of teaching. System performance
               was further constrained by weak governance and management capacity, especially at sub-national levels.

               The PDO was consistent with a long tradition of gradual reform in Nigeria’s education system. The PDO
               contributed to programs and priorities in the participating States in addressing education access and
               quality, and in focusing on improving girls’ opportunities for education. They were consistent with Nigeria’s
               2017-2020 economic growth plan that identified access to education as a key strategic goal. Likewise, the
               objectives were consistent with Nigeria’s Vision 20:2020 aimed at achieving universal access to basic
               education, and they are in line with a recently launched Human Capital Development Vision for 2030, which
               includes targets for primary school enrollment rates and increased competence in basic reading and
               mathematics.

               The relevance of the PDO is reflected in the findings of the Bank’s 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic
               (SCD), and the PDO are closely aligned with the current Country Partnership Strategy for FY21-FY25,
               which draws on the SCD. Both documents identify persistent gaps in the quality of education, pointing to
               the shortage of qualified teachers, insufficient teaching and learning resources, and limited school
               autonomy and accountability.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To improve access to basic education in selected States, with attention to girls' participation

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by introducing measures that encourage out-of-school children (especially
girls) to participate in basic education, including through the provision of scholarships to girls to attend school
and to female teachers for skills upgrading, and by stronger school-level planning and management. Success
was to be measured through changes in primary net enrollment rates (NER), an improved gender parity index
(GPI) in primary enrollment, and the number of direct project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender. The
indicators were valid: they are commonly used and measurable, and the data was available.

The ICR (p. 9) pointed to several key assumptions that were likely to have conditioned outcomes under both
Objective 1 and 2: the adequacy of SBMC and teacher training for achieving meaningful results that
mitigated the adverse impact of teacher and student absenteeism, and a project period that might not have
been sufficient to produce sought-after results.



Outputs

417,000 girls received scholarships, exceeding the initial/revised targets of 87,000 and 360,000 girls. The ICR
noted that a reduction of cost per student may have motivated States to encourage families to send their girls
to school.

132,400 primary teachers received in-service teacher training with a focus on skills to teach reading and
writing in early grades. This exceeded the target of 96,000 trained teachers.

14,300 SBMCs were trained, compared to initial/revised targets of 12,000 and 12,130 committees. With a key
focus of SBMCs being the implementation of school improvement plans, often prioritizing girls, increased
SBMC activity in this area may also have contributed to the rise in girls seeking/receiving scholarships. This
may also have been generated by increased competence of female teachers.

School improvement grants to finance school improvement plans were delivered to 46,400 schools,
compared to a target of 27,700 schools. All schools that received grants prepared improvement plans,
implementing at least 80 percent of such plans. This output contributed not only to improved access, but also
to Objective 2 – improved quality. The ICR noted, plausibly, that the school improvement plans also may have
contributed to increases in access. Moreover, stronger education management information systems that were
introduced with the school improvement plans are also likely to have facilitated the monitoring of access-
related outcomes.

Five annual education sector reviews were completed for each State, in line with the target.



Outcomes



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



In project States, primary NER reached 57 percent at project closing in 2020, against a baseline of 48 percent
in 2015 and a target of 54 percent, exceeding the target by 9 percentage points. NER for girls reached 90
percent against a baseline of 72 percent and a target of 76 percent, exceeding the target by 18 percentage
points.

The overall target for enrolling beneficiary children (direct target beneficiaries) reached 6.3 million in 2020,
exceeding the original/revised targets of 5.7 million and 6 million, respectively.



Summary. The project’s achievements – all indicators exceeded their targets – were confirmed with
additional evidence from household surveys. The ICR (p. 15) reported that pre-and post-project comparisons
on access in participating States showed a significant improvement in attendance rates, as did a comparison
with non-project States, where rates tended to decline. This indicates that training may have been sufficient to
overcome the adverse effects mentioned above.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of basic education in selected States

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by promoting school improvement plans and teacher training, and by
strengthening school-level planning and management. Success was to be measured by changes in Hausa
and English language reading rates, introduction of a system for learning assessment at the primary level,
and the utility of that system. The indicators were valid and measurable, and data was available. Reading
fluency is a frequently used measure (ICR, p. 16), and the other indicators are straightforward means of
assessing learning at a system level.

The same key assumptions that were likely to have conditioned outcomes under Objective 1 are also relevant
for Objective 2: the adequacy of SBMC and teacher training for achieving meaningful results that were to
mitigate the adverse impact of teacher and student absenteeism, and a project period that might not have
been sufficient to produce sought-after results.



Outputs

The same school improvement program mentioned as an output supporting Objective 1 contributed to
improving the quality of basic education, as improvements were introduced into the teaching and learning
environment that were likely to encourage both teachers and students.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



                            132,500 primary teachers, compared to a target of 96,000 teachers, received in-service teacher training
                            (professional upgrading) with a focus on teaching reading and writing in early grades.



                            Outcomes

                            The Hausa reading rate of students enrolled in primary 2 and 3 grades, measured as words read correctly per
                            minute, increased by one word from a baseline of 4 words, falling short of the target of 10 words. The English
                            reading rate of primary 3 students increased by 0.6 words from a baseline of 3 words, also falling short of the
                            target of 10 words. While there was considerable variation between the participating States – the ICR noted,
                            for instance, that in Hausa, Kaduna State increased from 2.4 words to 8 words, while Jigawa State remained
                            unchanged at 3 words -- none achieved the end-of-project target of 10 words per minute.

                            A system for learning assessment at the primary level was established for all schools in participating States
                            from a baseline of zero, and one round of early grade reading assessments was implemented. A second
                            round was planned but interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The introduction of a learning assessment
                            system will fill a critical information gap and allow regular monitoring of the quality of education as well
                            as international comparisons.



                            Summary: Early grade reading achievement was consistently below target results, albeit with some variation
                            between States. The ICR (p. 17) pointed to several issues that are likely to have accounted for the modest
                            learning outcomes: a short implementation period, partly due to the onset of COVID-19, that interfered with
                            the early grade reading assessments and with quality interventions (teacher training and the school
                            improvement plans), as well as the effects of increased enrollments on teaching quality, and relatively
                            elevated student and teacher absenteeism. The relationship between increasing enrollments and lower
                            quality has been observed in other sub-Saharan African countries, but so far not in Nigeria. Increasing
                            absenteeism, however, has been observed, and is even raised as a key issue by the ICR (p. 18), noting that
                            on the day of assessment, absenteeism among students in Kaduna State was around 30 percent, while
                            teacher absenteeism rates as high as 55 to 60 percent were observed in Sokoto State.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project included two objectives. The first objective was rated high: all its targets were exceeded, but this
                            achievement raised concerns about quality and student/teacher absenteeism that might arise from strong,
                            rapid expansion of enrollments. The second objective fell short of meeting its quality improvement objectives,



                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



  partly as a result of concerns related to increased access under Objective 1, and partly due to constraints
  imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. On balance, overall efficacy is rated substantial.



  The ICR (p. 19) noted that there were other education projects financed by the Bank and other development
  partners concurrently active in the same States, complicating attribution of observed outcomes to this
  project's interventions. The ICR explained that the parallel Bank-financed project (Better Education Service
  Delivery for All, $611 million, FY2017-2022, P160430), which operates in all States in the country, was
  significantly delayed, and therefore it could not have influenced the outcomes described here. Other projects
  financed by the United States Agency for International Development and the UK Department for International
  Development (DfID) were considerably smaller in scope, and where there was geographic overlap, this
  project worked to leverage the contributions by other partners. For example, this project benefited from
  materials and processes for school improvement grants and SBMCs developed under DfID's Education
  Sector Support Program. This project was therefore a major factor, but not the sole factor, in producing
  desired outcomes, and development partners achieved synergy and complementarity toward achievement of
  those outcomes.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Efficiency analyses were undertaken for the PAD and the ICR. They were, however, not comparable. The
analysis in the PAD drew on evidence from the literature on the impact of similar interventions on the
macroeconomy, labor markets, beneficiaries’ health, and other areas. The PAD also applied multivariate
analysis. It concluded that “project activities were expected to yield high rates of return…[and were] cost
effective." The ICR included a benefit-cost analysis of Objective 1 – access – including the costs of Objective 2,
but not the benefits, as targets for learning outcomes remained unmet. The analysis still showed substantial net
positive returns: the net present value of the project at completion was estimated at US$65.5 million with an
estimated internal rate of return of 16.7 percent, both representing significant positive returns. The ICR (p. 21)
noted that positive returns could also be expected to arise from positive externalities arising from girls’
education, especially in an environment of previously low gender achievement.

The ICR recorded several aspects of implementation with either positive or negative effects on efficiency. On the
positive side are the simplicity of project design and straightforward implementation arrangements; close
engagement with both government authorities and donors; and cost savings, as unit costs turned out to be lower
than appraised, allowing beneficiary coverage to be increased. On the negative side, there were gaps in project
design and capacity causing delays and reducing implementation efficiency. Suitable teacher training programs
were scarce; the project had been designed around scaling up of existing in-service teacher training programs
before suitable programs had been identified. Similarly, school improvement grants were distributed before
school management committees could meet eligibility requirements. Implementation was also delayed by the




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



insurgency and, early on, by national elections. A year-long extension of project closing also raised costs,
but the extension also allowed the project to raise its targets in some instances.

On balance, considering operational inefficiencies, efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated high, noting the project’s strong relevance to country conditions and its
alignment with government and Bank priorities. Achievement of the first Objective is rated high, with targets
achieved or exceeded. Achievement of the second Objective is rated modest, reflecting limited progress on
learning outcomes. Overall efficacy is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated modest due to significant
operational inefficiencies. Taken together, these ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the
project's preparation and implementation, leading to an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

At appraisal, the overall risk rating for the project was high, as was the rating for implementing agency
risk. Project risk was rated substantial. While mitigating factors were introduced (governance-related
reforms to counteract corruption and leakages in service delivery, such as stronger local education
management, enhanced M&E, and stronger fiduciary oversight), the ICR still rated the risk of not maintaining
achievements post-completion as substantial. A number of challenges remain after project completion. A key
assumption underlying project design was the availability of quality teacher development programs that could
be “easily” scaled up, but this turned out not to be the case (ICR, p. 28), and such concerns about teacher
training remain post-project. There are continued disruptions from the Boko Haram insurgency. Most

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



recently, COVID-19 caused all schools to close in March 2020, and (as of the time of this review) they have
only partly opened since then. Limited distance learning options are unlikely to compensate adequately for
the absence of classroom learning, and inequities in the system across States, in income levels and gender,
are likely to have increased again, potentially reversing positive project outcomes. The government remains
committed to improving education outcomes; it has launched a COVID-19 Plan and has increased its
dialogue with development partners to build back basic education after the pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, having been introduced to support an ongoing process of
  education reform by focusing on creating equitable access to quality education. It was concentrated in the
  North, giving it a strong poverty focus as it was intervening in an area of high poverty where the share of
  out-of-school children was high and girls’ participation low. It was also an area that was falling behind as
  a result of the Boko Haram insurgency. The project objectives aligned well with approaches that were
  being applied by federal and local governments and donors, and the project drew on experience that
  Bank teams had already accumulated through field work and project development. The choice of a GPE
  grant for project financing would prove to be a challenge, as its processes were unfamiliar to the
  participating States, project design was insufficiently adapted to GPE requirements, and approval would
  ultimately take two years. GPE concerns included the decentralized administration of school grants and
  scholarships in an environment that was unfamiliar to the organization, and a project design that initially
  insufficiently emphasized GPE’s priorities such as out-of-school children and girls’ education. Also
  affecting the pace of preparation was the need to coordinate not only with the Federal government and
  five States, but also with numerous development partners active in the same areas and supporting
  activities that also were supported under this project. A revised project design was subsequently
  approved, informed by other ongoing government and donor programs and as a result of effective
  coordination between the Bank team and donors.

  Previously mentioned gaps in design and capacity, insufficiently addressed during project preparation,
  would subsequently influence learning outcomes: quality and capacity challenges in SBMCs and teacher
  training programs, high levels of teacher and student absenteeism, and gaps in schools’ and
  communities’ awareness of project interventions.

  The results chain was straightforward, albeit with some gaps in M&E arrangements. The risk to project
  outcomes did increase as a result of COVID-19. Still, some of the challenges that arose during project
  supervision might have been forestalled, including issues with the Treasury Single Account Policy; low
  awareness about the project among Federal- and State-level officials; school and community awareness
  of project interventions, especially where funds were to be transferred to local levels (grants and
  scholarships); a stronger understanding of the capacity of teachers to fully benefit from project-funded
  training programs; and more attention to eligibility requirements for school improvement grants.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory



b. Quality of supervision
 Project supervision benefited from a team that had the appropriate skills composition to support
 implementation, and was able to identify additional skills as the need arose, including the introduction of an
 education advisor at the Bank’s country office. Early on, the supervision team focused on selected
 implementation challenges: building implementation capacity among technical staff at Federal and State
 levels through workshops and training sessions; raising awareness about the project in communities; and
 addressing weaker-than-expected capacity among teachers to apply the in-service training in the
 classroom – all interventions introduced early in the project cycle and ones that are likely to have improved
 overall project performance and, ultimately, the quality of the teaching and learning experience. The team
 also benefited from Federal and State government commitment to project objectives and oversight that
 contributed to facilitating implementation, as did collaboration with donors active in the participating States,
 including other Bank projects. Nevertheless, performance fell somewhat short of expectations, especially in
 the quality of education component. This may partly have been due to exogenous factors, notably the delay
 in project effectiveness caused by security concerns that hampered school-level supervision, and the 2015
 national elections.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change described in the PAD and detailed in the ICR was straightforward and mapped a
 logical chain of how project inputs were to achieve changes in outcomes through activities and outputs.
 Project objectives were clearly specified and included eight key indicators, four for the first objective and
 four for the second one. They were all relevant, defined, and measurable, and they all had baselines and
 targets; they all measured outcomes. Outcomes were backed up by nine output indicators, also relevant,
 defined, and measurable, and adequate to monitor progress towards outcomes.

 Institutionally, performance was monitored on the basis of existing information systems and aligned with
 the annual process of monitoring and evaluation of States, which was done primarily through an annual
 education sector performance review at the State level. Also at the State level, technical committees were
 responsible for monitoring State-level plans. At the Federal level, the Ministry of Education was responsible
 for oversight. The project included third-party validation to ensure the credibility of monitoring systems and
 results.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



 Although there were (and continue to be) tangible differences among States in key outcome indicators, and
 a key recommendation during project preparation was to disaggregate and tailor endline targets by State,
 according to the ICR, the Bank team chose not to do so and instead focused on keeping the project design
 simple.



b. M&E Implementation
  Data on project indicators was collected and reported regularly in Implementation Status Reports (ISRs)
  and aides-memoire. However, because of the COVID-19 epidemic, end-line early-grade reading could
  not be assessed, limiting final project reporting and the usefulness of the findings under Objective 2 of the
  project. Planned impact assessments and third-party monitoring were undertaken. The latter came to
  include monitoring conducted by a civil society coalition, providing independent and local-level monitoring
  that was extensive, covering some 10,700 beneficiary schools, and complementing earlier project-funded
  verification based on a sample of schools. Supported by the project, all participating States set up their
  own learning assessment systems, generating timely reporting on access outcomes.



c. M&E Utilization
  As noted above, data on project indicators was collected and reported regularly in ISRs and aides-
  memoire. This served to set the agenda for Bank teams on supervision and inform relevant State
  authorities on implementation issues. For instance, the ICR (p. 30) pointed to instances where M&E data
  signaled weaknesses and/or delays in teacher and community training, both key features of the
  project. Impact assessments and third-party monitoring also served to inform course corrections in
  applying and transmitting teacher and community training. Use of project tools was somewhat hampered
  by COVID-19, as end-line early-grade reading could not be assessed, limiting final project reporting.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project's safeguards performance was rated moderately satisfactory for most of the project
   implementation period. The project was categorized as environmental assessment category “B," Partial
   Assessment. The Environmental Policy (OP/BP/4.01) was triggered due to State investment grant-related
   interventions that could finance minor renovations and civil works. During most of the project
   implementation period, no major environmental and social safeguards issues emerged. All States
   established a grievance redress mechanism and developed action plans in response to feedback received
   from the communities in their States. In the last few months of implementation, additional risks related to the
   COVID-19 pandemic emerged. The availability of adequate water, sanitation, and hygiene facilities for
   teachers and students in schools as well as compliance with COVID-19 response protocols were
   emphasized as important measures to keep school communities safe.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). Fiduciary compliance was assessed as satisfactory. There were several
  areas of strong performance by the project in key aspects of FM. First, the existing Federal Project
  Financial Management Unit and its State equivalent (SPFMU) structures were used for project FM. To
  strengthen the SPFMUs, States deployed additional FM staff and resources. Second, annual work plans
  were prepared by States and the Federal Ministry of Education consistently; these were then reviewed and
  approved by the task team. These work plans were the basis for project implementation. Third, flow of
  funds to States was smooth for the most part, while some interruptions occurred in terms of the flow of
  funds to the Federal Project Implementation Unit. Initially, there were some delays in States establishing
  designated accounts. Some challenges limited the effectiveness of FM processes (for example, at the
  State level, manual accounting processes were used during project implementation, which led to delays in
  financial reporting). In most States, interim financial reports were often delayed, in part due to
  the cumbersome manual accounting process. External and internal audits were conducted on a regular
  basis. Regular external audits were produced later in the project life in each State. The main issues
  identified by external audits included unretired advances, inadequate documentation for expenditures, and
  some expenditures being made prior to receiving a no-objection from the World Bank.

  Procurement. Throughout the implementation period, procurement was rated Satisfactory, and no major
  issues on procurement arose.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
  Gender Improving girls’ participation in basic education was one of the primary objectives of the project. In
  many project states, girls faced significant disadvantages in access to quality schooling. Project design
  included demand-side interventions (e.g., to address barriers related to household poverty and social norms
  that undervalue girls’ education) that would be critical for improving girls’ school attendance. Key
  interventions included scholarships for girls coming from the poorest households, and community
  mobilization, advocacy, and sensitization campaigns, including by working with community and religious
  leaders. To strengthen school-community collaboration on girls’ education, the project used SBMCs as the
  main entry point, including by providing training on how to prepare school plans that are responsive to
  challenges in improving girls’ access to education. Committees were strengthened to have an increased
  role in school management, including in the preparation of school investment plans and utilization of school
  resources. This training provided to the SBMCs was intended have a continued positive impact on the focus
  placed on girls’ education at the school and community levels.

  The project also sought to increase the share of qualified female teachers in basic education. It was
  expected that girls’ retention would be positively impacted by an increase in the number of qualified female
  teachers. Recognizing the scarcity of women in senior positions in the education sector in Northern Nigeria,

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



   it was also expected that helping female teachers obtain the required qualifications could be a first step to
   improving their career growth and their rise into leadership and decision-making positions.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  IEG agrees with the ICR that
                                                                                  intermediate results indicators
                                                                                  (output indicators) measured
                                                                                  numbers of outputs rather than
                                                                                  the quality of what was
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Substantial
                                                                                  produced. But the key outcome
                                                                                  indicators did measure sought-
                                                                                  after outcomes of access and
                                                                                  quality as a result of changes in
                                                                                  knowledge and behavior.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

Lesson 1: Demand-side interventions aimed at alleviating key constraints related to poverty
and social norms can be effective in addressing entrenched and complex economic and
social constraints to girls’ education. Experience under the project indicates that the provision of
scholarships and community mobilization initiatives tied to school and community-based initiatives
can raise awareness about the importance of education for all, and facilitate the entry of girls into the
school environment and ensure that girls remain in school.

Lesson 2: Increasing teachers’ motivation and accountability can be critical to improving
student learning outcomes. Interventions such as the provision of State-level investment grants,
learning materials, and training of teachers are unlikely to be effective if teachers are absent, lack
motivation, and are unaccountable for student learning. Project data show that even after years of
project implementation, teacher absenteeism remained a major unaddressed challenge in
participating States. Numerous factors may enhance or reduce teachers’ motivation including
policies on selection, salary, and career growth, as well as school-level factors such as working
conditions, availability and quality of support for teachers, and accountability systems.
Understanding and addressing these factors is important to improving the quality of teaching in the
classroom and, ultimately, student learning outcomes.

Lesson 3: Raising schools’ and communities’ awareness about project interventions,
including on eligibility requirements and selection processes, can be critical to ensuring

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       P143842- NG Partnership for Edu. Project (P143842)



inclusivity and building trust. Under the project, communities and schools lacked awareness
about the grant and scholarship selection processes and requirements, leading to delays and
confusion in the early years of implementation. Investing in awareness-raising and community
engagement activities early on, even during preparation, can help prevent delays and build trust and
partnership with beneficiary communities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

At 35 pages in the body of the text and an additional 25 pages of annexes, the ICR was long, but consequently
the document was generous in the quality of its analysis and in providing evidence to back up that
analysis. The careful discussion of the project's theory of change and the assumptions underlying it was well
done. The assessment of the validity of the results framework's intermediate and outcome indicators was direct
and thorough, as was the discussion of plausible attribution of observed results to the project's interventions. In
the discussion surrounding the findings, the abundant information candidly presented, along with the high
quality of analysis, enable a reviewer to follow easily the logic and the case being made for both achievements
and challenges. The ICR also highlighted valuable experiences in its "Lessons" section, some of which are
presented in abridged form in this ICRR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
