     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022505

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P086768                                   ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Poland                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-74360                                30-Nov-2014                                        166,561,150.12

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Mar-2007                               30-Jun-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         184,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          173,278,349.64                                               0.00

 Actual                                      166,561,150.12                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 19), and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 9)
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to protect the population in the Odra River Basin (ORB)
   against loss of life and damage to property caused by severe flooding." The Project would protect more than
   2.5 million people against flooding in Raciborz, Kedzierzyn, Kozle, Krapkowice, Opole, Brzeg, Olawa, and
   Wroclaw, and settlements in the three voivodships of Slaslue, Opolskie, and Dolnoslaslue along the ORB. A
   voivodship is the highest administrative division in Poland, equivalent to province in other countries.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



   This review will assess the project performance against this singular objective. The PDO would be achieved
   by: (i) reducing the extreme flood peaks by constructing a dry polder on the Odra River upstream of Raciborz
   town (a dry polder is a storage mechanism using machines to dry flood plain areas to better control the river
   system and reduce flood peak downstream of the reservoir), and (ii) increasing the flood carrying capacity of
   the Odra River channels through and around Wroclaw.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Construction of Raciborz Flood Retention Reservoir: (US$ 218.3 at appraisal, US$486.88 million
   actual). This component would finance the construction of a dry polder on the Odra River to store flood
   water, including right and left bank dikes or embankments along the Odra valley and a spillway
   structure. These structures would reduce the frequency and severity of future floods.

   2. Modernization of Wroclaw Floodway System: (US$253.9 million at appraisal, US$383.7 million
   actual). This component would finance improvements to Odra dikes, strengthen and raise embankments,
   and construct retaining walls. In addition, the component would increase hydraulic capacity of the Odra
   River and widen and deepen channels for hydraulic related structures; increase design capacity of the
   existing Odra - Widawa diversion, and increase the capacity of the Widawa River channel by widening the
   flood plain, and reconstructing dikes and structures along the river.

   3. Improving Flood Management, Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), and Supervision of the
   Environmental Assessment (EA), Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and Resettlement Action
   Plan (RAP): (US$ 26.6 million at appraisal from World Bank, and US$14.74 million actual, all from the
   World Bank). This component would finance (i) the implementation of the RAP and resettlement
   of persons displaced by the construction of the dry polder and the modernization of the Wroclaw floodway
   system; (ii) the establishment of an Odra River Flood Management Center (OFMC) for the upper and middle
   Odra river basin to conduct flood forecasting, planning, emergency preparedness and crisis
   management; and (iii) the preparation of flood management and protection strategy. This component would
   also (i) improve and implement flood simulation models and prepare plans for operation and maintenance
   (O&M) of major flood storage reservoirs and other hydraulic infrastructure in the ORB; (ii) Improve flood
   forecasting systems, operational effectiveness of the system of hydro-met forecasting and flood protection
   and management plans; (iii) identify, rank, and conduct studies for priority projects, and (iv) monitor and
   evaluate project impact.

   4. Project Management, Technical Assistance, and Training: (US$5.2 million from the World Bank, and
   US$6.25 million actual, all from the World Bank) This component would finance implementation support for
   the project PCU, including the preparation of a follow-on project, technical assistance, and institutional
   strengthening.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was US$489 million comprised of a World Bank loan
  (US$184 million) and non-World Bank contributions (US$ 305 million) including from the borrower. The
  Bank loan disbursed US$166.56 million and the balance of the loan was cancelled.

  Financing: At appraisal, the estimated total cost (US$489 million) was to be financed by the International
  Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)(US$184 million), the European Commission (EC,
  US$130 million) and the Council of Europe Development Bank (CEB)(US$145 million) and the borrower
  (US$30.0 million see below). At project closing, the total actual project cost (US$1,025.29 million) had the
  following actual disbursements (US$1,018.57 million): the World Bank (US$166.56 million), EC
  (US$382.65 million) ECB (US$229.96 million) and the borrower (US$239.4 million). The balance of
  US$6.72 million of the Bank loan was cancelled.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal the borrower committed to contribute US$30 million. At closing, the
  actual borrower contribution was US$239.4 million to cover cost overruns (ICR, paragraph 51 and Table 3).

  Dates: The project was approved on March 21, 2007 and made effective on July 9, 2007. The Mid Term
  Review (MTR) was conducted on September 26, 2011. The original closing date was November 30, 2014.
  The project was extended twice to close on June 30, 2020 after level 2 restructurings. There were four level
  2 restructurings:

        On January 31, 2014 to make changes in disbursement arrangements and procurement provisions.
         These included:(a) increase the special account allocation, (b) reallocate loan proceeds among
         disbursement categories, (c) increase the share of expenditures to be financed, and (d) modify the
         procurement processes and thresholds. These changes would maintain timely payments to
         contractors. make better use of the different funding sources, and allow more flexibility for the
         remaining recruitments and small works.
        On July 10, 2014, to extend the loan closing date for the first time from November 30, 2014
         to December 31, 2017 -- a three-year extension. EU accession, changes in the government, and the
         project’s large and complex procurement packages and safeguard requirements resulted
         in procurement delays of the major civil works contracts. A three-year extension would allow for a
         one-year performance test period of the dry polder. At the time of this extension, 10 of 12 major
         contracts committed 90 percent of the total project cost.
        On October 20, 2017 to modify the results framework, extend the loan closing date a second
         time from December 31, 2017 to June 30, 2020--an extension of two and a half years, and adjust
         target completion dates. A dispute in the dry polder construction contract led to its cancellation and
         termination of the management contract in October 2016. A new contract was expected in
         December 2017. This 2017 contract required another two years to complete. The baseline and
         target values of indicators from the original Results Framework (PAD, Annex 1) were not monitored
         in Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and were reinstated (Restructuring Paper RES
         No. 29007).
        On February 16, 2018 to reallocate and use up all funding sources.

  Split Rating: The PDO and outcome indicators remained the same until closing, hence a split rating is not
  required.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: The PDO is highly relevant. The country's Odra River and its tributaries flood frequently.
Records show four major floods in the 19th century and another 12 in the 20th century. The July 1997
floods caused by extremely heavy rains was four times that of the long-term average (PAD, paragraph 7).
The 1997 devastation covered 650 km2 of three voivodships of Slaski, Olpolskie, and Doinoslaskie;
damaged 37,000 building; 866 bridges; over 2,000 km of roads; and destroyed 129 km of dikes. The floods
caused damages estimated at US$2.3 billion (PLN8.5 billion) with 54 lives lost, 700,000 homes flooded,
and 110,000 residents evacuated (PAD, paragraph 7). The 1997 floods also magnified uncoordinated
operations of the hydraulic structures resulting from damages to the monitoring, early warning,
and communications systems. In line with its 2004 European Union accession, the country is complying
with the requirements of the second cycle of the Floods Directive and in support of the new 6-year EU
program called "Stop Floods" to support the development of flood risk management plans beginning in
2022 (ICR, paragraph 29).

Alignment with Country Priorities: The PDO is aligned with the country's priorities. Poland, Germany, the
Czech Republic, and the European Union are members of the Odra River Commission. After the 1997
floods, each member country prepared a flood protection program. Poland prepared Oder 2006 Program to
address flood protection, inland navigation, water quality protection, hydro-power production, land use
planning, forestry and nature protection in the Odra River Basin. The Polish Council of Ministers
adopted "The Strategy for Responsible Development (SRD) for the period up to 2020 (including the
perspective up to 2030)" on 14th February 2017, which underscores the country's commitment to socially
sensitive and territorially sustainable development and effective state and institutions contributing to growth.
The PDO would contribute to support the achievement of these objectives by forming part of a new uniform
water management structure to enhance protection from flood and drought (SRD, p.19). In addition, the
country is pursuing the Odra-Vistula Flood Management Project, to build on the outcomes of this project.

Alignment with Bank Strategy: The PDO is highly relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Poland (FY19-FY24) with an objective of building resilience to climate related
events under ‘Resilience to Environmental and Global Threats’. According to the CPF, the World Bank
Group is taking a comprehensive and holistic approach to flood management critical for long-term,
sustainable, social, economic, and environment development. This approach would combine infrastructure
investments, policy measures, and institutional arrangements to support performance. The institutional
strengthening needed to achieve the PDO is relevant to the CPF objective of advancing evidence-based
design of policy and institutions.

Prior Bank Experience in the Country and the Sector: In response to the 1997 floods, the World Bank
financed the Emergency Flood Recovery Project (EFRP, 1998) co-financed by the European Investment
Bank (EIB) and other donors to support Poland's flood recovery, rehabilitate damaged municipal and rural
infrastructure, and improve flood warning and forecasting systems. In this project, the Bank led in flood
recovery, modernization of flood forecasting and early warning systems and prepared the feasibility studies
for this Odra River Basin Flood Protection Project (PAD, paragraph 12). The World Bank is also
implementing flood risk management initiatives in Romania and Bulgaria and projects to improve the
efficiency and quality of water supply and wastewater service delivery in 11 countries of the Danube Water
Program (ICR, Box 1).


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             "to protect the population in the Odra River Basin (ORB) against loss of life and damage to property caused
                             by severe flooding."

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The scale of inputs was adequate and properly sequenced for achieving the
                             attributable outputs. Constructing a dry polder in Raciborz would result in 185 Mm3 of flood water storage
                             capacity. A dry polder is a storage mechanism using machines to dry flood plain areas to better control the
                             river system. Improvements of the Odra dikes and embankments, the Odra Channels and the Widawa
                             Transfer would modernize the Wroclaw floodway system. Equipment and consulting services would improve
                             emergency preparedness, complete flood protection and management plans, monitor and evaluate (M&E)
                             impact, and create an Odra River Flood Management Center. Additional works would ensure compliance with
                             safeguards. People affected by the construction will be resettled. The outputs would result in reducing
                             extreme flood peaks and increase flood carrying capacity of the Wroclaw floodway system. The specific
                             infrastructure interventions followed a logical sequence that led to protecting against flooding the more than
                             2.5 million people in Raciborz, Kedzierzyn, Kozle, Krapkowice, Opole, Brzeg, Olawa, and Wroclaw, and
                             settlements in the three voivodships of Slaslue, Opolskie, and Dolnoslaslue around the ORB.

                             Outputs and outcomes were attributable to the project. The outcome indicators were expressed as preventing
                             lives lost, or reduced damage to property or reduced flooded areas (in hectares). The outcome indicator did
                             not include the value of improved economic activities as a result of flood protection stemming from the
                             project's interventions. The TOC, however, reflected these as desired long-term impacts. There were no
                             indicators to monitor these. The validity of the TOC in causally leading to PDO achievement depended on the
                             following critical assumptions: (i) resettlement to be carried out during project implementation, (ii) available
                             co-financing from the European Union Cohesion Fund and the Council of Europe Development Bank, (iii)
                             successful recruitment of M&E consultants to evaluate project impact, implement the Environmental
                             Management Plan (EMP), and the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). One risk that was not mentioned was the
                             timely establishment of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU). It was first planned as an agency under the
                             National Water Management Authority in October 2007 but became operational only in 2008. By 2010, the
                             PCU was replaced by an autonomous Odra River Basin Flood Protection Project Coordination Unit with its
                             own budget. That PCU became operational in January 2011. The use of the EU Cohesion and ECB funds led
                             to longer than expected period to finalize design and obtain environmental and construction permits because
                             of the need to harmonize policies across EU accession, Polish legal framework, and Bank safeguards (see
                             Section 10 Other issues below). At the 2017 restructuring, the baselines still used the 1997 flood's outcome



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



indicators but modified them as negative targets, i.e., no lives lost, no damage to property, no areas flooded
similar to the magnitude experienced under the 1997 floods. These changes did not alter the TOC.

OUTPUTS:

      Protection against floods was provided to 2.5 million people from towns such as Racibórz, Kędzierzyn-
         Koźle, Krapkowice, Opole, Brzeg, Oława and Wrocław, and settlements in the three voivodeships of:
         Śląskie (Silesian Voivodeship), Opolskie (Opole Voivodeship) and Dolnośląskie (Lower Silesian
         Voivodeship) around the ORB.
        The Racibórz Dry Polder was constructed as designed with 185 Mm3 in built storage capacity. The
         completed design regulates discharges during a flood comparable to the 1997 event. Permanently
         acquired 1,145 hectares for the dry polder construction; The dry polder reservoir occupied an area of
         26 km2. and a 9.0 m water storage level. Associated outputs include (i) the permanent acquisition of
         1,145 hectares for the dry polder construction; (ii) the construction of 22 km of embankments (dams)
         around the dry polder with earthen embankments having a maximum height of 11.1 m; and (iii) the
         construction of three pumping stations - Buków, Pogrzebień and Lubomia - located outside the
         reservoir. Relocation was also carried out, involving 250 residents from the old villages of Nieboczowy
         and Ligota Tworkowska to a new village called Nieboczowy with all public facilities.
        To modernize the Wrocław Floodway System, the following were completed: (i) modernization or
         rebuilding of 97.2 km of flood embankments; (ii) rehabilitation of 41.4 km of flood embankments with
         the construction / reconstruction of culverts, embankment stairs, and various types of anti-filtration
         screens; (iii) restoration of 37 km of canals in Wrocław; (iv) rebuilding or expanding of 2 weirs; (v)
         modernizing of 3 locks; (vi) rebuilding of 9 bridges including increasing their load capacity and building
         of a flyover road; (vii) building or rebuilding of 5 fish passes (A fish pass or fish ladder, or fish way, is a
         structure on or around artificial and natural barriers to facilitate diadromous fishes' natural migration as
         well as movements of potamodromous species); and (viii) planting of several thousand trees and
         restoration of 1.5 ha of alluvial forests.
        The PCU also identified new projects as planned. In 2013 the Concept Notes were prepared for the
         Bank’s appraisal of three new flood protection projects: (i) the upper Vistula basin; (ii) the Nysa
         Kłodzka valley; and (iii) the Middle and Lower Odra. On September 10, 2015 the Bank and Poland
         signed a loan to co-finance the Odra-Vistula Flood Management Project (€460 million). The PCU
         monitored the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), the construction of the new
         village of Nieboczowy, and land acquisition by the Lower Silesian Board for Amelioration and
         Hydraulic Structures (DZMiUW).
        Established the Odra River Flood Management Center (OFMC) for the upper and middle Odra river
         basin as planned. The ICR did not report on any Flood Information Centers (OKI) mentioned in the
         FA.
        Under the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), 250 families were resettled, representing about 700
         residents from the villages of Nieboczowy and Ligota Tworkowska. Homes, churches, cemeteries, and
         all public facilities were relocated and restored in a new village.

OUTCOMES:

      Using a state-of-the art modelling, the project simulated the achievement of full protection against
         floods of the 1997 magnitude. Using the1997 flood as baseline, about 485,000 hectares were
         affected, assets damaged valued at 14.0 billion PLN (including flood fighting costs) and 57 people
         dead. The negative targets for project outcomes were that no land area would be flooded and that

                                                                                                         Page 6 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



                                     there will be no loss of lives or damage to assets. There have been no 1997 floods since the project
                                     closed but this modelling showed that the completed infrastructure would allow the discharge floods
                                     without causing inundations, damage to property or loss of human lives. In addition, flash floods in
                                     October 2020 demonstrated that the completed dry polder worked as designed (ICR, footnote 16).
                                    The capacity of the beneficiary improved and would also support flood risk management in other
                                     regions of Poland. Improved capacity was evident in the development of river basin management
                                     plans under the EU Water Framework Directive and the flood risk management plans to adhere to the
                                     EU Floods Directive. These plans serve to protect the population against loss of life and damage to
                                     property caused by severe flooding. The increased capacity is also of high added value to the
                                     development and current implementation of the OVFMP (P147460).
                                    Flood risks were reduced. Social, environmental, and economic activities bordering the Odra and its
                                     canals increased. The study ‘The Leveraging Potential of Public Investments in Flood Protection: The
                                     Case of Wrocław, Poland’ estimated that the direct effects of these public investments on land value
                                     are in the order of at least hundreds of millions of dollars. Other long-term impacts of the
                                     investment include (a) improved resilience to floods in the ORB, (b) increased economic returns with
                                     reduced future losses and fiscal burden to the country and reduced incidence of poverty, and (c)
                                     improved investment climate and enhanced competitiveness and thus countrywide economic growth
                                     (ICR, paragraph 10).
                                    The project interventions improved the flood protection system and the system of hydro-met
                                     forecasting (SMOK). Over 2009 – 2018, the Institute of Meteorology and Water Management (IMGW)
                                     carried out activities related to (i) the implementation of quality control systems for hydro-
                                     meteorological measurements, (ii) the expansion of the functionalities of the Client Service System
                                     (CSS), (iii) the implementation of the Central Historical Database, and (iv) the development of quality
                                     control algorithms for hydro-meteorological measurements and hydrological forecasts. The full
                                     functionality of these systems was achieved in 2014. All modules of the system were used
                                     productively by IMGW.
                                    Success was achieved in the resettlement program, implemented from 2003 to 2018 and also in
                                     the activities to ensure compliance with social and environmental safeguards. The latter are now
                                     reported to be in use for other projects in the country and other unspecified countries (ICR, paragraph
                                     38). The resettlement created a new city with fully functioning public facilities. Resettled residents
                                     were reportedly content with the new city The World Bank acknowledged as best practice (ICR Box
                                     2) the resettlement process in this project, which was accompanied by a thorough consultative
                                     communication strategy.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial because all outcome indicators
                            were achieved based on the modelling used.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 17
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



  The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the PDO is rated Substantial based on achievement of
  its outcome indicators.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: Benefit-cost analysis was conducted at appraisal. Benefits were derived using "with" and
"without" project scenarios. Benefits included estimated reduction of flood damages, and production of gravel
during the life of the project. The analysis at appraisal assumed the following:

      a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital (PAD, paragraph 54);
      primary benefits from reduced annual average flood damages (calculated as the difference between
       expected flood damages "with" and "without the project" under various scenarios of flood severity (ICR,
       Annex 4, paragraph 3 and footnote 27) at a rate in direct proportion to the country's estimated 1.3
       percent annual rate of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth;
      PLN 20 million per year in secondary benefits from the extraction of gravel in the dry polder area.
      Investment costs under a "with" project scenario using 2002 prices were estimated at PLN 1,352 million
       overall, PLN 579 million for the dry polder component only, and PLN 670 for the modernization of
       Wroclaw flood system only. Additional O&M costs were estimated at PLN 1.37 million per year for the dry
       polder only and PLN 0.5 million for the Wroclaw flood modernization only. Investment costs "without the
       project" would be zero.

At appraisal, the project Net Present Value (NPV) was estimated at Euros 232.15 million (US$304.98 million
equivalent). The overall project benefit-cost ratio was 1.99 and an economic internal rate of return (EIRR)
was16.7 percent. For the dry polder component only; the benefit-cost ratio was at 1.86, and EIRR was 16.7
percent. For the Wroclaw floodway component only, the benefit-cost ratio was 2.1 and the EIRR was 16.6
percent.

At closing, the benefit-cost analysis used the same key assumptions at appraisal:

        a 10 percent opportunity cost of capital (ICR, paragraph 47);
        primary benefits from reduced damages use actual annual GDP growth rates;
        value of gravel extraction similar to that used at appraisal.
        investment costs were converted to current prices using GDP deflator (ICR, Annex 4, footnote 29). O&M
         costs at appraisal were used at closing. The overall investment costs was estimated at PLN 2,932
         million; PLN 1,096.5 million for the dry polder component only, and PLN 863.7 million for the Wroclaw
         modernization component only. An additional cost of PLN 53.6 million accounted for final design,
         supervision, project management, and training.

At closing, the overall project NPV was estimated at Euro139.54 million (US$ 156.25 million equialent). The
overall benefit-cost ratio was estimated at 1.62 with an EIRR of 15.1 percent. For the dry polder component

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



only, the benefit- cost ratio was1.31 and an EIRR of 13.0 percent. For the Wroclaw floodway system component
only, the benefit cost ratio was 1.96 and an EIRR of 17.0 percent.

At closing, and after an overall five and a half year implementation delay, cost overruns reached 76 percent at
real prices (or 48 percent at 2002 nominal prices). The cost overruns included a 28 percent price escalation from
inflation between 2002 when original costs were estimated at appraisal and 2011 when project designs were
finalized (ICR, paragraph 50). According to the ICR (Annex 4, paragraph 7): "The sensitivity analysis of the
EIRR to changes in investment costs was performed at appraisal, finding that the project could withstand 100
percent increases in investment cost without lowering the EIRR to less than 10 percent."

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Two level 2 restructurings extended the project completion by
almost six years. The weak institutional framework and governmental reorganizations delayed start-up by about
three years. According to the ICR, EU accession in 2004 (ICR, paragraph 23). introduced changes in policy and
legal environment that delayed obtaining the environmental and construction permits and in finalizing
engineering designs. Contracts for both project components, the dry polder and Wroclaw floodway
system, started only in or after 2012 with new completion dates (2017). A breach in the construction contract for
the dry polder and time overruns caused by complex resettlement processes (see Section 10 Other Issues
below) required another extension. This operation strengthened the observation that flood risk management
programs were time consuming and required more realistic long term engagements. Other flood risk
management projects, for example, the Netherlands' Room for the River' program took 23 years to
implement. The 76 percent project cost overrun over a five and a half year implementation delay still led to
economic efficiencies that were above the 10 percent cost of capital. Efficiency is rated Substantial because the
overall rates of return and those of its components remained above the country's cost of capital and positive
benefit-cost ratios above 1.0. The EIRRs at closing were in line with those financed by the Bank elsewhere (ICR,
paragraph 49), which were covered in the Bank's 2012 study "Understanding the Economics of Flood Risk
Reduction: A Preliminary Analysis."


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    40.00
 Appraisal                                                16.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    51.70
 ICR Estimate                                             13.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)




The relevance of objective is rated High because the objective supports the country's priorities in flood risk
management and contributes to the World Bank's strategic objectives in the country. The efficacy of the project
to achieve the objective and overall efficacy are both rated Substantial because the outcome targets were
achieved based on modeling to assess flood risks. Efficiency is rated Substantial because of comparatively
substantial returns to investments even as the project experienced cost overruns. As a result, overall outcome is
rated Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (paragraphs 101-104) identified the following risks to development outcomes:

      Continued exposure to natural hazards and climate change: Poland, which remains prone to
       flood hazards has prioritized a Flood Management and Water Security agenda in response to the
       devastating flood of 1997. It continues to improve its flood risk management of the Odra River Basin
       and other basins and is preparing the follow-on project on flood management for the Odra-Vistula.
       This new project is intended to add to the development outcome of this project. Furthermore, the
       Floods Directive under the EU requires an update every six years of the flood risk management plans
       for the river basins that Poland is currently preparing. The Government also expressed interest in
       long-term water security in the face of increasing climate variability that causes droughts and floods,
       and would consolidate and build on the institutional achievements of the project. This risk of
       continuing exposure to hazards, as well as those mentioned below, would be mitigated under the
       follow-on project.
      Commitment to sustain nonstructural measures supported by the project. Continuous quality
       control in the performance of the structures would ensure the integrity of the completed
       infrastructure. The improved capacity of the Odra River Flood Management Center lead to
       monitoring the effectiveness of the infrastructure by carrying out flood risk safety
       assessments, respond to floods in an integrated manner by using the flood forecasting system, and
       effective consultations informed by the experience from the broad stakeholder participation.
       Beneficiaries overcame implementation challenges, which benefits the follow-on project. Institutions
       evolved by continuously sharing knowledge and experience during implementation. Increased
       awareness also led to information redundancy, fortifying the concept of multiple safety levels
       including (i) reducing probability of flood risks, (ii) flood awareness in spatial planning and land use,
       and (iii) increased preparedness in case of an extreme event.
      Sufficient financial and technical resources to operate and maintain the new infrastructure.
       The government allocated resources to hire and train personnel to operate and maintain the works
       completed under the project. The non-infrastructural interventions institutionalized risk management
       with defined functions and responsibilities. For all civil works, O&M requirements were documented.
       The International Panel of Experts has reviewed the O&M for the dry polder, and provided



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



      recommendations for optimum operations. In October 2020, discharges in the Odra increased due to
      floods, and the dry polder was tested and functioned as intended.
     Gravel extraction to reduce floods. The mining of gravel was foreseen at appraisal. With the gravel
      extraction, the total volume of the reservoir would increase to 270– 300 million m3 in 30 years to be
      filled mostly with water. The operational volume to retain peak floods would likely increase to a
      maximum of 200 million m3. This increase would provide additional capacity to further reduce
      flooding downstream of the Raciborz dry polder.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed as a follow-on to the 2007 ERFP. All feasibility studies were prepared under
  that previous operation. Lessons learned from the ERFP experience were incorporated into project
  design. In addition, the following lessons were considered in design (PAD, paragraph 29): (i) thorough
  hydrological and hydraulic analyses - project interventions were designed incorporating results of basin
  wide flood protection management; (ii) complete detailed design of key works prior to negotiations -
   designs were undertaken as part of the preceding project; (iii) use of large civil works contracts with
  adequate resources for construction supervision - design divided the contracts into 9 large packages
  representing 90 percent of project loan (according to the Implementation Status and Results Report), with
  contract supervision; (iv) resettlement and land acquisition issues dealt up front - the Resettlement Action
  Plan was prepared prior to appraisal with consultations beginning under the preceding project; (v) design
  was kept simple - the project had two major infrastructure components; and (vi) Bank's leadership role to
  leverage a substantial package - the Bank's loan was 19 percent of total project cost.. Consultations with
  stakeholders were integral to project design. Accession to the European Union (EU) on May 1, 2004 and
  coordination with the Czech Republic and Germany under the International Commission for the
  Protection of the Odra (ICPO) informed project design. Agreement with the ICPO led to the "Oder 2006
  Program for Poland," which included flood risk management considerations that were included in the
  project components. Harmonizing Polish environmental laws with EU directives resulted in including
  Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) in detailed design and contract-specific bidding documents.
  The collaboration with other donor partners in the preceding EFRP mobilized significant amounts of co-
  financing from the CEB and the EU Cohesion Fund. The Bank team conducted training to strengthen
  capacity in fiduciary obligations as well as in economic aspects of compliance with environmental and
  social safeguards. Design adopted an overly optimistic timeframe as borne out by the need to extend the
  project twice in increments of three and two and a half years. Another shortcoming at entry was the
  assessment of compliance risks associated with the harmonization of policies across various sources of
  funds. The initial three-year delay negatively affected implementation capacity (see below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



 The World Bank team conducted 25 regular supervision missions and technical missions with experts and
 specialists over the 13-year implementation period. There was no mention of turnover in Task Team
 leadership and if this affected supervision during the initial implementation delay. Several factors
 contributed to three year start up period. These included the change in government, which affected the
 establishment of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU). Fiduciary and safeguards specialists carried out
 technical missions and supported the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to ensure compliance with Bank
 policies while harmonizing with the requirements of EU accession, including those associated with
 procurement challenges (see Section 10 Other Issues below). The Bank team also provided technical
 support to ensure M&E systems were adequately strengthened (see Section 9, M&E (c) Utilization
 below). Restructuring was also used to reinstate values of baselines and targets for outcome indicators
 from the original results framework to maintain consistency in M&E reporting. The team supported
 continued collaboration with the government in flood risk management, evident in the completed EFRP,
 this project and the follow-on project. (ICR, paragraph 30).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) was designed using state-of-the-art modeling and detailed analytical
 work. Hydraulic modeling was conducted during preparation and repeated periodically during
 implementation (see below). Different works identified conceptual design requirements. The interoperability
 of the different components (rivers, canals, sluices, weirs, and so on) used the discharges of the
 1997 event to test the performance of the designed water system.

 Design parameters for the infrastructure works and the nonstructural interventions would account for
 the safe discharge of the peak as occurred in 1997. The systematic and integrative approach
 acknowledged that infrastructure works and non-structural interventions would lead to proper operation and
 maintenance (O&M) of the system. M&E design included indicators to monitor and evaluate (i) the
 improvement of the flood early warning system, and (ii) the increased institutional capacity in O&M and the
 development of flood risk management plans, as well as the implementation of the Resettlement Action
 Plan (RAP) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The M&E design was comparable to the ones
 used for the "Room for the River" program in the Netherlands and the protection of the city of New Orleans
 in the United States. Indicators included the level of completed works designed for the required flood return
 period, and institutional and technical capacity to ensure proper operation of the built infrastructure.

 The target values from the baselines and the intermediate and final outcome indicators were reinstated
 from the original results framework in the PAD and further clarified in October 2017. The targets for the
 indicators were defined as ‘Full protection against floods of the 1997 magnitude between Raciborz and
 Wrocław city’ for Component A and ‘Full protection of Wrocław against floods of the 1997 magnitude’ for

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



 Component B. These were linked to the full completion of the woks included in Components A and B.
 Component C’s indicator was defined as ‘Improved flood forecasting and better linkage of forecaster and
 communication with flood management’ with the target to achieve ‘Established institutional and
 communication setup for operation of various structures in the system’. To ensure that the implementation
 of Components A and B conformed to World Bank standards, Component D was to assess the
 implementation of the RAP design of infrastructure and construction completion on time. For flood risk
 reduction projects that are based on a systemic integrated approach grounded on thorough modeling and
 analytical work, the combination of targets set for the completion of structural and nonstructural
 interventions is a proper way to measure the level of PDO achievement. M&E was adequately designed to
 assess progress during implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) of the Ministry of the Environment implemented the M&E system as
  designed. The World Bank team initially supported the PCU in implementing the M&E system while the
  PCU strengthened its capacity to report and evaluate progress. Hydraulic modeling was repeated
  periodically during implementation The PCU submitted quarterly and annual reports on time with
  information on financial and physical progress, financial statements, and procurement. The annual
  reports included the coming year's work plan. (ICR, paragraph 77).



c. M&E Utilization
  The project review missions of the World Bank and co-financiers, used data generated by the M&E
  system. A midterm review in 2011 provided a good review of progress and next steps. The 2011 MTR
  indicated potential risk of delays but most of the corrective measures appeared to be manageable at that
  time. Even then, no restructurings were planned. The first restructuring addressed disbursement
  categories and procurement strategies.

  M&E is rated Substantial. The M&E was customized to meet requirements under a flood risk
  management project as designed. M&E was implemented to ensure sufficient understanding of project
  status and corrective measures to address implementation challenges along the way. The M&E data
  and reports were used to inform project operations. The same system would be used in the follow-on
  project indicating its adoption in the institution supporting flood protection.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was assigned an environmental category "A" and triggered the
   seven safeguard policies (ICR, paragraph 80 noted seven but the PAD and the Operations Portal
   mentioned six safeguard policies): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP

                                                                                                Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



  4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Forests (OP/BP
  4.36), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The project
  complied with the environmental safeguards policies according to the Operations Portal and the ICR
  (paragraphs 81-87).

  All works contracts complied with OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) with contract-
  specific Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) procedures. Mitigating measures accompanied identified
  environmental impacts and were duly compensated, as needed. The Environmental Management Plan
  (EMP) detailed all mitigation, compensation, and monitoring measures. Comments and suggestions from
  local communities were incorporated into the EIAs and EMP. The documents were published and were
  available to the public. All works contracts used special procedures to ensure compliance with the principles
  of OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats). In the case of OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), people affected by contracts where
  trees or shrubs were removed were duly compensated (ICR, paragraph 83). All works carried out necessary
  archaeological and conservator’s supervision in compliance with OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources).
  Wayside shrines and conciliation crosses were relocated from the dry polder area and reinstalled in the new
  village of Nieboczowy at places of religious worship, preserving historically valuable original elements (ICR,
  paragraph 84). Implementing OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) posed considerable challenges
  because of significant differences in land acquisition for construction purposes using Polish and EU
  regulatory frameworks and OP/BP 4.12. Where differences between Polish legislation and the provisions of
  OP 4.12 were found, principles more favorable to project affected persons (PAP) were adopted. In the case
  of OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) an international panel of experts was established to monitor and evaluate
  the civil works as well as the operation and monitoring plans prepared for the new installations. The
  International Dam Safety Panel of Experts (IPE) advised on the design and construction of the dam and
  embankments for the dry polder (ICR, paragraph 97). On OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International
  Waterways), the project was discussed with the Czech Republic and Germany. Letters to notify the riparian
  states and the Odra Commission, advising them of the project scope, design details, and possible
  environmental impact, were sent on June 10, 2005. Germany (July 15, 2005) and the Czech Republic (July
  11, 2005) confirmed that the foreseen works in the project were in the international flood protection program
  of the Odra Commission.

  Social Safeguards: The project established a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) as planned. A
  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and disclosed. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
  monitored grievances in coordination with Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and reported these to the
  Bank in a timely manner. Affected people were aware of the GRM and have been using the system. As of
  November 2020, over a dozen cases remained pending and awaiting resolution (ICR, paragraph 88). These
  were associated with completing compensations affected by the lengthy administrative and court
  procedures under the Polish legal system. In some cases, some of the acquired properties, including those
  with unresolved inheritance cases had uncertain legal standings. Funds necessary for the compensation
  were set aside and would be released after public administration bodies reach their final decisions/rulings.
  Water reform in Poland changed the entity managing state treasury-owned plots and were awaiting legal
  resolutions. These issues had no impact on project affected people (ICR, paragraph 88). The resettlement
  process proved to be time consuming and was held as one of the reasons for the lengthy implementation
  (ICR, paragraph 71) but nevertheless acknowledged as best practice (ICR, Box 2).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



   Financial Management: The project faced implementation challenges such as workload shifts due to
   reorganizations and cumbersome funds transfer procedures, which delayed payments. The PCU, PGW
   WP, involved ministries and the World Bank collaborated to adopt timely corrective
   measures using existing legal internal control procedures. The government publicly disclosed project audit
   reports that were received and accepted by the World Bank on the project (PCU) website. (ICR, paragraph
   91). According to the Operations Portal, the SAI submitted the final audit in June 2020 with unqualified
   (clean) opinions.

   Procurement: The ICR indicated that project procurement was satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 92). The
   implementing agency had adequate experience and capacity to manage the procurement processes and
   ensure that the project complied with the World Bank’s procurement guidelines. The PIUs managed large-
   value contracts in an effective manner using modern contract management tools and alternative dispute
   resolution mechanisms for timely and efficient claims settlement. The lengthy implementation period was
   partly attributed to procurement delays. Due to the harmonization needs of safeguards and land acquisition
   policies, for example, some contract-specific EIAs were redone. A construction contract had to be
   terminated for breach and was re-bid. In another case, a leader of a joint venture implementing another
   contract declared bankruptcy although the project was eventually completed according to the contract
   (ICR, paragraph 70).The World Bank team conducted several procurement trainings and workshops to
   strengthen the PIUs’ knowledge on the World Bank’s procurement policies and procedures, and contract
   management. The Supreme Audit Office of the government (SAI) conducted annual procurement post
   reviews with no major issues (ICR, paragraph 92).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offered six lessons (ICR, paragraphs 105 - 110 and paragraph 43). Three of those, slightly
edited, are presented below:


                                                                                                Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)



      Using limited IBRD resources to leverage (and lead) a much larger financing
       consortium is an effective way to increase impact and build country systems and
       capacities in advanced clients. The collaboration with the co-financiers (CEB, and
       European Commission) required extensive effort to harmonize operational requirements.
       Expectations, objectives and processes required constant consultation. The experience
       enhanced the World Bank's position to serve as honest broker and lead in establishing best
       practices. The complex project served as a platform to facilitate convergence of national
       systems (notably on environment, river basin management, procurement and financial
       transparency, safeguards, economic analysis, and so on) with those of the EU and the World
       Bank. Operationally, the availability of three different financing sources gave the
       project liquidity, lower capital cost, and maintained good relations with contractors who were
       paid on time.
      Project experience may facilitate knowledge exchange partnerships with
       organizations outside the project and in other countries. Exchanges of experience in
       flood risk management were shared with countries in the Balkans. Poland shared its strong
       experience in works execution and benefited from better forecasting know-how and hardware
       specifications for projects managed by the International Sava River Commission in Zagreb.
       Joint workshops were held. The Odra project was a keynote presentation at several
       professional fora in the United States and in Europe, including the 2015 Amsterdam
       International Water Week.
      Flood risk management projects should plan for likely technical complexity and
       consultations with multiple stakeholders with competing interests. The spatial impacts
       of these projects involve many stakeholders with competing interests. These projects require
       thorough participation programs involving different authorities (national, regional, and local),
       NGOs, the private sector, and residents in the areas affected by the interventions. These
       complex processes result in drawn out flood risk management implementation periods. A
       lesson in success was anchored in the consultative communication program of the
       resettlement process.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The breadth and depth of World Bank experience in flood risk management globally, the heightened hazards
  from climate change, and a follow up to the 2012 preliminary analysis of the economics of reducing flood risks
  are some reasons why the Bank may benefit from an assessment of its global investments in the sector. The
  World Bank is currently implementing flood risk management initiatives in Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria
  while on water quality the World Bank supports 11 countries involved in the Danube Water Program to improve
  the efficiency and quality of water supply and wastewater service delivery in the region (ICR, Box 1).



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ODRA RIVER BASIN FLOOD PROT (P086768)




The ICR was clear and provided relevant information and useful analysis. The detailed discussion around
project efficiencies was particularly useful and supported by Annex 4. The detailed justification behind the four
level 2 restructurings were also helpful. The report was candid. For example, the factors that affected the
lengthy implementation period and resulting cost overruns were clearly laid out. The quality of the analysis
justified the ratings. The report was based on evidence and results-oriented with numerous cross referencing to
ensure consistency and strengthen the basis for the ratings. For example, the cogent outcomes beyond those
monitored (see ICR, paragraphs 40, following and 61) were persuasive arguments for the substantial outcome
rating. Lessons were derived from the project operations.

There were some shortcomings, however. Although the ICR generally followed OPCS guidelines, the main
report exceeded the 15-page suggested length. There were also inconsistencies in figures provided. For
example, not all disbursements against each component (ICR, paragraphs 15-18) matched those in Annex 3.
As a result, the sum of the disbursement (US$892.04 million) did not match the sum in Annex 3 (US$ 886.78
million). In addition, total disbursements in Table 3 (Euros 886.78 million) was the same as the sum in Annex 3
but in US$ (US$886.78 million) and did not match the total disbursements in the data sheet (US$1,018.57
million). This was very confusing. The ICR data sheet correctly reported the US$ equivalent of Euro
contributions, e.g., the EU Cohesion Fund contributed Euros 101.29 million or US$130 million equivalent;
and the ECB contributed Euros 112.98 million or US$145 million equivalent.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
