     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022575

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P096481                                 MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 North Macedonia                         Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-76990,IBRD-81580                   30-Nov-2014                                         81,609,591.05

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2009                             30-Sep-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                         25,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     65,140,128.54                                               0.00




 Prepared by             Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl          Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P150342_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P150342                                 Municipal Services IPA Rural Window ( P150342 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                               16469462.51

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Dec-2014

                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)




                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                   17,720,607.81

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                   17,387,414.24

 Actual                                                   0.00                                   16,469,462.51




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (p. 3) and the Financing Agreement of June 29, 2009 (p. 4), the
   project development objective was “to improve transparency, financial sustainability and delivery of targeted
   municipal services in the participating municipalities.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2012

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included the following components:

   Component A: Municipal Investments (appraisal estimate €15.07 million, actual €46.82 million. The
   component received AF in the amount of €31.47 million). This component was to finance loans to
   municipalities eligible to borrow. Investments to be financed under this component were to be mainly for
   revenue-generating public services and other investment projects of high priority to municipalities and with
   cost saving potential. Sub-projects were to demonstrate either revenue earning or cost savings to qualify.
   Municipalities and Communal Service Enterprises (CSEs) were to be assisted with project preparation
   activities, including review of feasibility studies, preparation of detailed design and bidding documents, as
   well as supervision of construction activities. According to the PAD (p. 21), CSEs are legally independent
   from their municipal owners and operate based on an informal arrangement with municipalities. The CSE
   uses infrastructure owned by the municipality or the state to provide services and proposes tariffs, which are


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



  then approved by the municipality. The municipality in the current structure is owner, policy-maker, and
  regular. Also, the municipality is a large user of CSE services through its own institutions.

  Component B: Capacity Building and Institutional Reform (appraisal estimate €1.41 million, actual
  €3.42 million. The component received AF in the amount of €2.43 million). This component was to
  finance consultancy services and technical assistance including the following:

       i. Sub-project preparation support: feasibility studies and required financial, environmental, and social
          assessments; preparation of final designs and bidding documents; and bidding procedures for
          investments funded under Component A.
      ii. Local capacity building: finance technical assistance, training, and consulting services for
          municipalities and CSEs to improve service provision performance and meet project objectives.
     iii. National-level institutional strengthening: support national agencies through a study of policy issues
          and strategy development related to the financial sustainability of municipal services, including
          possibilities to establish a revolving fund.

  Component C: Performance-Based Investment Grants (appraisal estimate €2.27 million, actual €3.34
  million. The component received AF in the amount of €2.90 million). This component was to finance
  grants to municipalities as incentives and rewards for implementing reform initiatives to improve service
  delivery performance. Performance grants were to be awarded according to simple and objective criteria
  based on enforcing current Former Yugoslav Republic (FYR) Macedonia legal and regulatory requirement.

  Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal estimate €96,200, actual
  €126,200. The component received AF in the amount of €300,000). This component was to finance the
  project management unit (PMU) operation and assist with project implementation and monitoring. The
  component was to finance PMU incremental operating costs incurred through its responsibility for overall
  project management.

  Component E: European Commission (EC)-Instrument for Pre-Accession RETF-funded investment
  window (appraisal estimate €zero, actual €19,814,500). This component was added during the
  December 2014 restructuring and was to provide grants to finance infrastructure sub-projects in eligible
  municipalities through the implementation mechanism of the project.

  The scope of these components was increased when the project received AF.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost €18.9 million, actual cost was €74,34 million. The project
  received AF of €37.20 million and €15.5 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by a Bank loan in the amount of €18.9 million, of which €17.68 million
  was disbursed. Also, the project received AF in the amount of €37.20 million, of which €36,000 million was
  disbursed and AF (from the European Commission (EC)-Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA) Trust Fund
  administered by the Bank) in the amount of €15.50 million of which was fully disbursed.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower did not plan any contribution at appraisal. The actual Borrower
   Contribution was €.5.2 million (ICR page 13, Table 2).

   Dates: The project was restructured six times:

         On December 1, 2011 the project was restructured to: i) modestly revise the performance-based
            investment grant allocation mechanism under component C as well as the related intermediate
            results indicator; and ii) reallocate funds between project components and disbursement categories.
           On June 7, 2012 the project received AF in the amount of €37.2 million to scale-up of project
            activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project and help mitigating the adverse impacts
            of the unfolding economic crisis. The project was to continue i) financing investments in basic local
            infrastructure and municipal services; ii) providing technical assistance (TA) to municipalities and
            Communal Service Enterprises (CSEs); iii) supporting institutional reforms in municipalities through
            performance grants; and iv) supporting operation of the Project Management Unit (PMU)
            responsible for project implementation. The original loan closing date was extended by three years,
            from November 30, 2014 to November 30, 2017, to implement additional activities financed by the
            AF.
           On December 24, 2014 the project received AF in the amount of €15.5 million from the European
            Commission (EC)-Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA) Trust Fund administered by the Bank. The AF
            was to introduce a new component EC- IPA Rural Investment Window to provide grants to finance
            rural infrastructure sub-projects in eligible municipalities through this project’s the Municipal Services
            Investment Project (MSIP) implementation mechanism. The trust fund mainly targeted rural
            municipalities, but urban municipalities with rural settlements were also eligible. The projects closing
            date was extended sixteen months, from November 30, 2017 to March 31, 2019, to align with the
            closing date of the EC-IPA Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF).
           On December 14, 2018 the project was restructured to: i) modify the Results Framework to include
            more intermediate outcome indicators and increase of the target values related to results of the
            Performance Based Investment Grant component; ii) extend the loan closing date from March 31,
            2019 to March 31, 2020 to allow for the implementation of activities financed by the AF; and iii)
            modify the implementation schedule.
           On March 27, 2020 the project was restructured to change the closing date from March 31, 2020 to
            September 30, 2020. The extension of the closing date was requested to allow delivery of
            purchased equipment to four participating municipalities that was delayed due to COVID 19 related
            disruption to international trade and logistics.
           On June 29, 2020 the project was restructured to cancel €2.42 million of the original and AF loan
            funds.

   Split rating. The PDO remained unchanged during the project. The two AFs resulted in the scaling up of
   the project and outcome target values were increased. Consequently, a split rating will not be conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



               Country and Sector Context. According to the PAD (p. 1) in 2008, at the time of project appraisal, the
               Republic of North Macedonia’s economic performance was strong. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew by
               5.2 percent compared to the previous year. However, this growth was not sufficient to significantly reduce
               poverty and unemployment. In order to increase economic growth some structural issues such as improving
               the efficiency and effectiveness of public service delivery and providing higher incentives for the private
               sector to increase investments had to be addressed. The Republic of North Macedonia faced the dual
               challenge of increasing investments in municipal services while addressing shortcomings in municipal
               performance and local capacity. The government’s 2008 Public Investment Program aimed to invest €90
               million in water, wastewater, and solid waste management services. Also, the government’s Program for
               Implementation of the Decentralization process 2008-2010 identified priorities to strengthen municipalities.
               However, the decentralization process gave greater responsibilities to municipalities for which they did not
               have sufficient capacity. Municipalities and their Communal Service Enterprises (CSEs) were responsible
               for providing most local public services including water and sanitation, urban transit, street cleaning
               etc. According to the ICR (p. 10) a 2006 sector study conducted by the Bank (“FYR Macedonia Issues in
               Urban and Municipal Development: A Policy Note”) found that communal services were relatively well
               developed but local government faced high losses, low collection rates, and low tariffs to fund necessary
               operation and maintenance costs, rehabilitation and new investments.

               Alignment with the Country Strategy. The objective of the project supported the government’s work
               program for 2020-2024, which focuses on further fiscal decentralization and increased responsibility and
               transparency of municipalities’ operations through; i) enhancing the delivery and quality of communal
               services to citizens by investing in municipal infrastructure and equipment; ii) building municipal capacity in
               delivering communal services and implementing investments; iii) improving fiscal sustainability of
               municipalities; and iv) supporting citizen engagement (ICR p. 16).

               Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was aligned with two pillars of the
               Bank’s most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY19-23): i) fostering economic growth, job
               creation, and increasing living standards for all; and ii) improving governance and transparency of public
               service delivery to support the market economy. The fourth objective of the CPF pertains to the
               improvement of fiscal sustainability by strengthening fiscal and public financial management and is relevant
               to the project objectives of contributing to improved transparency, financial sustainability, and delivery of
               targeted municipal services in the participating municipalities.

               The project was highly relevant to the government’s program and the Bank’s CPF for North Macedonia.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To improve transparency of targeted municipal services in the participating municipalities.

Rationale
The project made the following assumptions for all objectives: i) municipalities/CSEs are interested to
apply for sub-loans and have sufficient borrowing capacity; ii) performance grant is sufficiently high to
motivate municipalities/CSEs to make an effort to meet grant qualification criteria; iii) municipalities are
capable to supervise implementation of infrastructure projects, and absorb and retain knowledge; iv) national
government is willing to consider and institutionalize new mechanisms for municipal investment borrowing; v)
municipalities/CSEs have financial capacity to maintain the investments in proper conditions: vi)
municipalities/CSEs continue applying transparency standards after the project financing ended.

Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as providing
technical assistance to municipalities and CSE for the preparation of sub-projects and implementation,
strengthening capacity in service provision and meeting performance-based grants’ qualification
criteria were to result in outputs such as municipal and CSE staff being trained in sub-project preparation and
implementation. These outputs were to result in intermediary outcomes such as capacity of participating
municipalities and CSE for the preparation and implementation of sub-projects being strengthened, capacity
of local authorities in employing citizen engagement mechanisms to inform municipal decisions being
increased and citizens having better access to reliable and regularly updated information about the
municipalities’ decision and feedback mechanisms. These intermediary outcomes were to result in the
objective of improving transparency of targeted municipal services in the participating municipalities.

Outputs

      All participating municipalities regularly publish benchmarks and sub-project progress information on
         their municipal CSE’s websites, and on PMU’s project portal, achieving the target of all provinces
         doing so.
        59 municipalities qualified for sub-loans, surpassing the original target of 10 municipalities and the
         revised target of 58 municipalities.
        89 sub-loans were signed, surpassing the original target of 35 sub-loans and the revised target of 78
         sub-loans.
        78 municipalities received a grant from the EC-IPA rural window, surpassing the target of 60
         municipalities.
        Each of the 9 participating municipalities established and followed at least one stakeholder feedback
         mechanisms, as a prerequisite for the project financing. Based on an inventory performed by the PMU
         in 2019 and 2020:
               o 83 percent of municipalities were actively using municipal websites/Facebook to engage with
                 citizens and collect their feedback.
               o 61 percent of municipalities relied more on field meetings and 56 percent municipalities were
                 more active in using open days with the municipal executives. According to the Bank team
                 (May 20, 2021), this approach aimed to provide citizens with an opportunity to openly and
                 directly (and without a prior appointment) discuss with the municipal authorities (e.g. mayor
                 and executives) any concerns/problems/issues or ask any questions about any of the specific
                 projects or activities.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



              o 56 percent of municipalities distributed leaflets after completion of a specific project/investment
                  to inform citizens about what has been accomplished.
              o   44 percent of municipalities actively employed reporting a problem online.
              o   39 percent of municipalities used complaint boxes.
              o   Six percent of municipalities used an open telephone line tool.
              o   Four percent of municipalities used municipal notice boards.

Outcomes

        56 participating municipalities implemented institutional development reforms contributing to PDO, as
         evidenced by the number of municipalities meeting four of the seven performance criteria (which
         qualify for performance grants), surpassing the original target of 10 municipalities and the revised
         target of 50 municipalities.

Information disclosure by municipalities/CSEs was improved in four dimensions: i) municipal-owned water
and sanitation CSE participate in the International Benchmarking Network for Water and Sanitation Utilities
(IBNet) - supported data benchmarking; ii) annual planned and actual budgets are being published and
disclosed, and internal and/or external audit results at the municipal and CSE webpages are being published;
iii) municipal and CSE websites are being regularly updated with a minimum information regarding
organizational structure, personal contact details of staff responsible for key municipal services, complaint
channels, information on planned investments, tariff structure of all municipal services etc.; iv) service level
agreements between municipalities and CSEs are being signed. The first two dimensions were requirements
for all participating municipalities to access the project’s sub-loans and the third and the fourth dimensions
were part of a set of performance criteria for investment grants under component C. Furthermore, the project
supported the collection and reporting of data through the IBNet benchmarking program. This data is now
included in the Energy Regulatory Commission’s (ERC) questionnaire, which has been submitted to the ERC
by every CSE since 2019.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve financial sustainability in the participating municipalities.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as providing
technical assistance for national level institutional strengthening and sub-loans to municipalities for
investments in revenue-generating public services and other investment projects of high priority to
municipalities and cost-saving potential were to result in outputs including analyses for and inputs to the
national policy dialogue being prepared as well as local infrastructure being improved, new technologies
being introduced etc. These outputs were to result in intermediary outcomes such as dialogue on potential
framework for future municipal investment borrowing through an independent intermediary or any other



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



mechanisms being initiated. This intermediate outcome was to result in improved financial sustainability of
target municipal services in the participating municipalities.

Outputs

The project’s performance grants (under component C) provided incentives for participating municipalities to
enhance their financial stability. These grants were conditioned on fulfilling at least four specific performance
criteria out of a set of seven. Five criteria focused on financial sustainability which were: No. 1. increase in
municipalities’ local revenues; No. 4. CSE’s approval of a tariff adjustment program; No. 5. establishing a
separate cost center accounting; No. 6. implementation of a non-revenue water reduction program; and No.
7. preparation of a CSE asset inventory.

      Out of the 56 municipalities, which were qualified to obtain performance-based grants and which
         implemented performance grant-financed sub-projects, 84 percent met criterion No. 1, 45 percent of
         municipalities fulfilled criterion No. 4, 63 percent met criterion No. 5; 48 percent met criterion No. 6;
         and 71 percent achieved criterion No. 7.
        Technical assistance was provided to build municipal capacity to manage targeted communal services
         aiming to improve their sustainability. TA outputs included: i) debt management and sub-sovereign
         debt in North Macedonia; ii) redefining the manner and determining of criteria for designated and block
         grants for municipalities; iii) technological options and operation and maintenance arrangements
         related to wastewater treatment in rural areas.
        TA contracts were completed satisfactorily (the ICR does not specify the number of contracts
         completed). These TA included: i) TA to analyze technological options and O&M arrangements related
         to wastewater treatment in the rural areas; ii) TA to analyze block grants to municipalities; iii) TA for
         preparation of technical designs for streets and local roads for the North Macedonia municipalities,
         with 78 municipalities benefitting from getting their technical designs financed; iv) portion of TA funds
         is being used to finance energy efficiency specialist to help to develop pipeline of investments for the
         Bank financed energy efficiency project.
        Dialogue on institutional reforms as evidenced by submission of two studies such as a Strategy for
         Financial Intermediation for Municipal Investment was continued and sustained, achieving the target
         of continuing and sustaining such dialogue. The ICR notes that the approach on the next steps will be
         discussed with the government after the elections.
        108 cost-saving or revenue generating sub-loans sub-projects were successfully completed,
         surpassing the original target of 80 sub-projects and the revised target of 90 sub-projects.

Outcomes

86 percent of participating municipalities achieved increased revenue earnings and/or cost savings in
completed sub-projects, surpassing the original target of 25 percent and achieving the revised target of 86
percent. Since the borrowing capacity of most of the participating municipalities was limited, the values of
sub-loans and related investments were impacted accordingly. For example, an investment into
the kindergarten “Snezana” in Cair municipality reduced electricity consumption for heating purposes from
about 572,000 kWh in 2011 by more than seven times to an average of about 79,000 kWh between 2014 and
2018. During the same time the number of students increased by 68 percent. The installation of 108
photovoltaic systems in 36 municipalities resulted in an decrease in energy costs for public entities (schools,
kindergartens, administration buildings, and wastewater treatment plants) since the systems were able to
produce electricity for all 108 facilities between April 2019 and April 2020 (92 percent of the installed

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



capacity). During that period energy costs also decreased for eight large energy consumers such
as wastewater plants or water treatment plans with monthly electricity bills decreasing by 36 percent. 100
public buildings such as schools, kindergartens and cultural centers experienced an electricity cost decrease
of 31 percent. Solid waste collection sub-projects (purchase of vehicles and waste containers and bins)
contributed to increased municipal revenues (more individuals/entities billed for solid waste collection) and
decreased operational costs (lower fuel and maintenance costs).

However, the sub-projects focusing on rehabilitation and upgrading of infrastructure and on cost savings did
not always generate additional demand or revenues, and, thus, they did not necessarily yield high financial
rates of return.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve delivery of targeted municipal services in the participating municipalities.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as providing
performance-based investment grants to municipalities as an incentive and reward for
implementation of reform initiatives aimed at performance improvement in service delivery was to
result in outputs such as citizen feedback mechanisms at municipal level being introduced, results of
benchmarks and sub-project progress being published at municipal and PIU websites and IBNET data being
collected and submitted. These outputs were to result in intermediate outcomes such as capacity of local
authorities in employing citizen engagement mechanisms to inform municipal decisions being increased and
citizen’s access to reliable and regularly updated information about the municipalities’ decisions and feedback
mechanisms being improved. These intermediate outcomes were to result in the PDO of improved delivery of
targeted municipal services in participating municipalities.

Outputs

      59 participating CSEs and/or municipalities implemented institutional development reforms
       contributing to the objective, surpassing the original target of 15 participating CSEs and the revised
       target of 58 participating CSEs. Generated savings presented above under objective 2 are related to
       this objective too.
      24,256 piped household water connections were rehabilitation by the project, exceeding the target of
       12,900.

Outcomes

The project financed investments improved delivery of targeted municipal services:

      556,782 people in urban areas were provided with access to regular solid waste collection under the
       project, surpassing the target of 524,516 people.

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)




                                  86 percent of participating municipalities achieved targeted improvements in delivery of selected
                                     services in completed sub-projects, surpassing the original target of 40 percent and in line with the
                                     revised target of 86 percent.
                                    529,623 people, including 241,282 women, benefited from improved local road infrastructure (219,847
                                     meters of improved local road infrastructure). This outcome did not have a target.
                                    50,373 people benefited from improved public buildings (27,807 square meters). This outcome did not
                                     have a target.
                                    58,174 people benefited from improved public space (24,317 square meters). This outcome did not
                                     have a target.
                                    162,750 people benefitted from more livable and safer neighborhood environment enabled by 8,998
                                     streetlights replaced or installed. This outcome did not have a target.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective was High and the achievement of the second and third objective was
                            Substantial. The project was able to improve transparency as demonstrated by participating municipalities
                            implementing institutional development reforms and improving Information disclosure by
                            municipalities/CSEs. Also, the project was able to improve financial sustainability as demonstrated by
                            participating municipalities increasing revenue earnings and/or cost savings in completed sub-projects.
                            Furthermore, the delivery of municipal services was improved as demonstrated through piped household
                            water connects benefitting from rehabilitation works and people in urban areas being provided with access to
                            regular solid waste collection. Overall efficacy was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency

   The PAD (p. 13) did not include a traditional economic analysis and only stated the financial principles based on
   which sub-projects were to be selected. These were to include:

                              i. The sub-project is revenue earning or cost saving;


                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



    ii. For the revenue-earning entities (CSEs), available financial statements are appraised to highlight
        strengths and weaknesses, calculate critical ratios (collection ratio, operating ratio, current ratio) and to
        propose solutions;
   iii. The investment is justified based on financial and economic net present value, or least-cost approach.
   iv. The sub-project has been publicly disclosed to citizen beneficiaries and approval obtained from elected
        local councils to determine priority and relevance, prior to the funding decision.

The ICR (p. 23) included a traditional economic analysis based on a sample of selected sub-projects. The
sample reflected the four largest sub-project categories (investments in improved urban infrastructure such as:
(i) improved public spaces and municipal roads; (ii) solid waste management; (iii) water supply and sewerage;
and (iv) education). Those sub-projects were responsible for 90.4 percent of the project’s total sub-project
budget and 87 percent of the total number of sub-projects.

The analysis applied a discount rate of 4.5 percent, which seems rather low and estimated an Economic Net
Present Value (ENPV) of €47.56 million and an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 11.24 percent.
While the selected discount rate seemed rather low, the analysis suggests that the project was a worthwhile
investment.

Operational efficiency

The project’s implementation period was extended four times. The first two extensions were related to the AFs,
which expanded the scope of the project and increased its targets. The third extension allowed an additional
number of eligible municipalities to benefit from the performance grants. The fourth extension provided
additional time for the delivery of all procured goods and completion of four remaining sub-projects which were
delayed due to the Covid-19 pandemic. According to the ICR (p. 27), the project experienced some
implementation delays due to insufficient capacity for managing large infrastructure project.

The project administrative costs were €126,200 or less than 2 percent of the total costs. This was due to well-
performing PMU developed under the project.

Taking everything together, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        90.00
 ICR Estimate                                                11.24
                                                                                         Not Applicable


                                                                                                        Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with government priorities and the Bank’s most recent
CPS (FY19-23). Efficacy and efficiency were both Substantial. Taking everything together, the project’s
outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcome can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment/follow on projects: The government remains committed to the objective of the
project and continues to collaborate with the Bank in this area through a new potential Municipal Finance
Development Project (financing amount as of May 21, 2021 about US$50.0 million), which aims to support
the government to enhance municipal financing practices and sustainability in delivering the targeted
municipal services in the participating municipalities. Also, the government and the Bank are currently
working together on the Second Municipal Services Improvement Project (€25 million, P154464), which
continues to support local governments in transparent and financially sound inclusive delivery of targeted
municipal services. Continuing this partnership will have a positive impact on ensuring the sustainability of
project outcomes. This risk is assessed as low.

Financing: Maintenance of infrastructure and equipment will require dedicated financial government
resources. The Bank team (May 20, 2021) stated that financial resources for the proper maintenance of
infrastructure and equipment are being provided by municipalities. The required amount of financial resource
has been provisionally calculated for each of the subprojects at the sub-project preparation stage. According
to the ICR (p. 34), the Second Municipal Services Improvement Project is working with the government on
potentially establishing a more sustainable and institutionalized financing mechanism for municipal
infrastructure development. This risk is assessed as low.

Capacity building: While the project was able to build capacity, the sustained capacity of municipalities and
CSEs in preparing and implementing investments will depend on their ability to retain the trained staff who is
experienced in the preparation of sub-project applications and supervision of investment contracts. However,
according to the ICR (p. 34), staff turnover is relatively high and maintaining experienced staff and
properly training new staff will be critical for ensuring sufficient capacity at the municipal level. This risk is
assessed as Substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design was innovative and was the first demand-driven and municipality-based approach in
  North Macedonia. According to the PAD (p. 6), the design took the Bank’s experience in supporting the
  preparation and implementation of municipal services in transition economies, especially when shifting
  responsibilities to municipalities into account. Also, lessons learned from the Bank’ experience in newly
  decentralized countries on how to transfer funds and responsibilities within a framework that promotes
  accountability while promoting national oversight and policy developments were applied. The PAD further
  stated that the Bank team collaborated with other agencies supporting the municipal service sector in the
  country including the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and KfW.

  According to the ICR (p. 26), at appraisal the Bank conducted an analysis which identified specifically: i)
  existing municipal infrastructural needs; ii) gaps in the administrative capacity at municipalities; and iii)
  borrowing capacity of municipalities. The project design included innovative approach such as demand-
  driven approach, sub-loans conditioned by the set of the eligibility criteria, and the performance grants
  with additional set of prerequisites.

  The Bank team identified relevant risk factors such as staffing the PMU sufficiently with the required
  expertise. All risks were rated moderate. However, the Bank did not identify the risk of municipalities not
  having sufficient institutional and human capacity to manage relatively large infrastructure
  projects resulted in implementation delays.

  The project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details). The initial PDO target
  values were set at a modest level, which reflected the risks related to the new demand-driven approach
  and not fully known municipal demand. However, these target values were significantly ramped up
  through the project restructurings when the strong municipal demand was confirmed.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 33), the Bank team conducted regular supervision missions (a total of 30
 missions) with experts that had the necessary technical expertise. Also, the Bank team was responsive and
 proactive when implementation bottlenecks arose. For example, the Bank shifted resources from
 components B and C to component A to allow for a stronger sub-loan absorption, incorporated AF to meet
 strong municipal demand, and extended the project’s closing date to address Covid-19 related
 implementation delays. The Bank mobilized non-disbursing EC-IPA funds to finance rural investments.

 When the project received AF, the Bank team restructured the Results Framework to reflect the expansion
 of the project’s scope appropriately. Attention to safeguards compliance was adequate.

 According to the ICR (p. 28), the Bank and the PMU collaborated closely with the EU delegation, which had
 a positive impact on the implementation of the EC IPA rural window.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective was clearly specified and the project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs
 were to lead to the intended outcomes was soundly reflected in the Results Framework. The selected
 indicators encompassed all outcomes of the objective and were adequate to capture the contribution of
 project activities and outputs towards achieving the objective. Also, all indicators had a baseline, when
 possible, were sufficiently specific, measurable, and relevant. Due to the demand-oriented nature of the
 project, no sectoral targets were embedded in the PDO indicators.

 According to the PAD (p. 10), the PMU was to be responsible for monitoring project progress and
 outcomes. Project monitoring were to include: a) performance indicators of participating utilities according
 to the international benchmarking network methodology (IBNET). Participation in IBNET-based
 benchmarking were to be an eligibility condition for municipalities and CSEs to access Component A
 financing; b) the results of stakeholder workshops and surveys; and c) progress in preparing and
 implementing subproject investment programs.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s Results Framework was modified throughout project implementation when the project was
  restructured and when it received AF to reflect the increase in scope. According to the ICR (p. 30),
  the PMU collected project data from municipalities on a regular basis to assess implementation progress.
  Due to the diversity of the sub-projects and municipalities, data collection was sometimes challenging.
  For example, data collection for larger sub-projects related to water supply, energy efficiency of public
  buildings, street lighting etc. was relatively easy and granular data and financial results were generally
  available. However, for other sub-projects such as infrastructure rehabilitation, assessing financial gains
  was more challenging since, for example, road maintenance costs were expected to decrease after the
  rehabilitation and could not be assigned to one specific part of the road.

  The CE indicator and gender dimensions were introduced in the results framework during project
  implementation in response to the evolution of the World Bank’s corporate approach. Monitoring of
  gender specific values was undertaken by the PMU and was applied, e.g., through the gender
  disaggregation of the specific intermediate indicators on a number of people benefiting from improved
  local roads.

  According to the ICR (p. 30), the PMU hired a M&E consultant to collect data and analyze data with
  municipalities in relation to PDO indicator three, improved financial performance.


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (p. 30) stated that M&E data was used to inform decision making such as moving resources
  between components, increasing the capacity of the PMU, and obtaining AFs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguards OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The project prepared an Environmental
   Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) in 2008. The ICR (p. 31) stated that during the initial
   phase local contractors lacked capacity for an adequate implementation of environmental and social
   mitigation measures such as noise and dust pollution. In order to address these issues, the PMU conducted
   regular inspections to verify the project’s safeguard compliance and ensure that contractors would provide
   regular training to their workers before the start of- and during civil works. The project also put grievance
   and complaints mechanisms in place such as some municipalities using complaint boxes and phone lines or
   phone applications.

   According to the ICR (p. 31), OP/BP 4.12 was triggered only twice resulting in compensation. The ICR
   stated that all sub-project complied with the safeguards and the project’s environment rating was
   Satisfactory throughout project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   According to the ICR (p. 31), the project complied with the Bank’s financial covenants. The project put in
   place adequate financial management arrangements and submitted satisfactory reports in a timely
   manner. Also, the auditor did not identify any major weaknesses and deficiencies. Furthermore, the project
   did not encounter any issues regarding the disbursement of loan/grant proceeds and designated accounts
   were replenished in a timely manner. Finally, at project closure no ineligible expenditures or undocumented
   designated account balances existed.

   The ICR (p. 31) stated that the project’s Financial Management was continuously rated Satisfactory
   throughout project implementation.

   Procurement


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



   According to the ICR (p. 32), the project’s procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory during the first
   six months of implementation since the Procurement Specialist at the PMU was not hired yet. The project
   followed the agreed procurement policies and procedures and did not face any major procurement issues
   or delays. The municipalities participated in the different stages of the procurement process and the PMU
   was responsible for ensuring quality and management of the sub-project procurement process. The
   Procurement Specialist conducted regular workshops for relevant municipality staff and provided technical
   assistance to strengthen the municipalities’ procurement capacity resulting in higher quality of bidding and
   evaluation documents, increased efficiency and timeliness of procurement processes as well as
   satisfactory contract management.

   In addition, the Bank’s Procurement Specialist conducted post reviews of randomly selected contracts
   procured by the municipalities. These reviews found that all municipalities published the procurement
   notices for tenders in two newspapers. Also, the qualification and evaluation criteria were clear and stated
   in the bidding documents and the contract award details were accessible on the municipality’s website and
   sometimes, innovatively, on the municipalities’ Facebook page.

   The ICR (p. 32) stated that after the first six months of project implementation until the project closed, the
   project’s procurement performance was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 34-36) included several lessons:

      Identifying municipal demand at appraisal stage is critical for informing project
         design. In this project, due to the limited borrowing capacity of most of the participating

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT (P096481)



         municipalities, the average investment size was relatively small. Therefore, being realistic
         about potential results and managing expectations accordingly is important.
        Allowing participating municipals to apply for sub-loans on a rolling basis provides
         adequate flexibility. This project used a flexible approach and participating municipalities
         were able to apply for sub-loans whenever they had sufficient borrowing capacity instead of a
         specified call for proposals approach, which resulted in a more balanced implementation
         pace and sustained disbursement as well as minimized the volume of uncommitted funds at
         project closure.
        Collaboration among multiple beneficiaries with similar interests can allow for
         exploiting economies of scale. In this project, the IPA rural window where the PMU, the
         Bank and the European Commission were able to swiftly use the saved amount for the
         purchase of the photovoltaic installations and back-hoe loaders for poorer municipalities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR was
internally consistent and provided an appropriate economic analysis. Furthermore, it was sufficiently outcome
driven. Especially, the ICR provided several useful lessons learned, which can be applied for future projects in
this area. The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
