     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022466

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P112074                                    BR Sergipe Water

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81130                                30-Jun-2017                                           63,440,714.93

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jan-2012                               30-Apr-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,275,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            63,440,714.93                                                0.00

 Actual                                        63,440,714.93                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Fernando Manibog            Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is to promote the efficient and sustainable use of water in the Sergipe Water
   Basin by strengthening the Borrower's sector management, enhancing soil management practices, and
   improving water quality (Loan Agreement dated September13, 2012, Schedule 1). The Borrower was the
   State of Sergipe.

   The objective of the project as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) is the same as above.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



   For the ICRR, the PDO is parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To promote the sustainable use of water.

   Objective 2: To promote the efficient use of water.

   The achievement of each objective is assessed under the sub-headings of (i) strengthening the Borrower'
   sector management, (ii) enhancing soil management practices, and (iii) improving water quality.

   A split evaluation is carried out in assessing the efficacy of the project. Although the original development
   objective remained unchanged during the project implementation period, there were some significant changes
   during project restructuring in the formulation of one PDO indicator and some intermediate result indicators,
   and in associated output targets, which reduced the ambition of the project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Reference: PAD paras.14 to 19.

   Component 1: Integrated Water Resource Management and Institutional Development : (cost at appraisal
   US$ 17.1 million; actual cost at completion US$ 8.0 million).

   This component was to support improvement of the Borrower's (State of Sergipe) water resources and
   environment management capacity through carrying out activities designed to promote an increased
   integration between policies and practices, coordination among related agencies addressing water
   resources planning, regulation, management and services provision including:

   1. Integrated Water Resources Management

          preparatory work for design of an institutional model of an agency in charge of water resources
           management;
          development of water resources and environmental management procedures and instruments;
          improvement of soil management practices in the Sergipe River Basin (SRB);
          development and implementation of regional management models for provision of solid waste and
           water and sanitation services for rural and small towns


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



      carrying out of communications and environmental education programs.

2. Project Management

      Strengthening of the Borrower's capacity and overall project management, monitoring, evaluation,
       and dissemination.

Component 2: Water for Irrigation: (cost at appraisal US$ 14.20 million; actual cost at completion US$
11.4 million).

This component was to (i) support improvement of the technical, institutional and environmental
sustainability of the two irrigation perimeters of the Pocao Da Ribeira and Jacarecica I dams, and provision
of technical assistance to support future improvements of the Jacarecica II dam perimeter; and (ii) to
promote improved environmental soil and water use practices within the targeted micro-basins of the
Jacarecica sub-basin including:

      rehabilitation and modernization of pubic irrigation perimeters;
      promotion of environmental management through implementation of selected activities designed to
       promote soil and water conservation and more efficient irrigation methods for farmers;
      rehabilitation of existing tubular wells in the Sergipe River Basin and construction of small-scale rural
       and small-town water supply and sanitation solutions in selected localities of the Sergipe River
       Basin;
      minor rehabilitation of the following dams: Pocao Da Ribeira, Jacarecica I and Jacarecica Ii, based
       on recommendations of the Independent Dam Safety Panel;
      capacity building and institutional strengthening of SEAGRI (Sergipe State Secretariat for
       Agriculture), COHIDRO (Sergipe State Water Resources and Irrigation Development Company), and
       EMDAGRO (Sergipe State Agriculture Development Company).

Component 3: Water for Cities: (cost at appraisal US$ 83.6 million; actual cost at completion US$
90.8 million).

This component was to complement the Borrower's ongoing efforts to finance interventions aimed at
improving the quality of life for residents of the targeted municipalities in the Sergipe River Basin as well as
the quality of water and sustainability of the environment in these areas through expansion of water supply
and sanitation services and urban drainage infrastructure, and improvement in the efficiency of services
offered by DESO (Sergipe State Water Supply and Sanitation Company) including:

1. Sub-component: Services expansion and improvements in the MRA (Metropolitan Region of Aracaju):

      expansion of the existing wastewater systems and treatment plant in the municipality of Aracaju;
      construction of wastewater system and treatment plant for the municipality of Barra des Coqueiros.

2. Sub-component: Services expansion and improvements in the Sergipe River Basin.

    1. carrying out of activities for the expansion and optimization of water supply conveyance systems,
       and sanitation and drainage services in selected municipalities of the Sergipe River Basin outside of
       the MRA (water supply subprojects);


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



      2. provision of technical assistance to DESO to (i) enhance corporate governance and strategic
           planning; (ii) raise the quality of water supply and sanitation services provision; and (iii) improve
           operational efficiency, including through carrying out studies for:

          corporate management planning;
          management plan for wastewater services;
          institutional arrangements and instruments for services provision;
          water loss control and energy efficiency programs;
          integrated operation of water supply services in the metropolitan area to optimize costs and water
           reliability.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$ 117.1 million. the actual cost at completion was US$
  110.3 million (ICR Annex 3).

  Project Financing: The project was financed through a World Bank loan in the amount of US$ 70.3 million.
  Disbursements were US$ 63.4 million (90%). The balance of US$ 6.8 million was cancelled.

  Borrower financing: The planned contribution from the State of Sergipe was US$ 46.9 million. This
  contribution was made in full.

  Dates: The project was approved on January 26, 2012 and became effective on December 11, 2012. The
  original closing date was June 30, 2017. It was extended twice - first, by 22 months to April 30, 2019, and
  later by 12 months to April 30, 2020. The two extensions totaled 34 months compared to the original
  planned implementation period of 54.5 months.

  A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was carried out in May 2015.

  Restructurings: The project had two restructurings. The first restructuring was more significant in terms of
  changes in scope, components, and indicators. The second restructuring focused on
  institutional arrangements and closing date extension.

  First restructuring: (June 2017 - disbursed amount US$ 25.24 million). (ICR Data Sheet).

  This was a Level 2 restructuring. The PDO remained the same without any change. However, there were
  changes in the formulation of some PDO and Intermediate Results indicators and in output and indicator
  targets.

  Changes in PDO indicators:

        Outcome Indicator 2 (efficiency improvement of 20% in use of water as measured by
           liters/second/hectare in 1,150 hectares that comprise the Pocao da Ribeira and Jacarecica I
           irrigation perimeters" was considered unreliable and difficult to measure since it was formulated in
           terms of the percentage increase in efficiency and there was a lack of consistent measuring
           processes and monitoring data, including baseline values. Also, the original irrigated area was
           inaccurately presented in the PAD (ICR para. 17). It was replaced by "improved efficiency

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



       techniques implemented in agricultural areas targeted by the project" (Restructuring Paper, Section
       III - Proposed Changes). Measuring the impacted area instead of the percentage increase in
       efficiency was considered a more appropriate indicator of results achieved. The target area was set
       at 800 hectares (ha).
      Outcome Indicator 3 ("pollution load discharged by municipalities targeted by the project's
       wastewater investments is reduced by BOD 5,620 tons per year in 2015") was changed to "pollution
       load discharged by the municipalities targeted by the project's wastewater investments is reduced by
       BOD 4,000 tons per year (tpy) by 2019". (BOD refers to biological oxygen demand).
      Two core indicators were introduced (i) number of people with access to improved sanitation
       practices and (ii) women provided with access to improved sanitation services.

Changes in components:

Component 1: Activities dropped: (i) improvement of soil management practices in the Sergipe River Basin;
(ii) development and implementation of new regional management models for provision of solid waste and
water and sanitation services in rural and small towns. Activities added: (i) development of regulatory
capacity on water and sanitation services; (ii) protection and rehabilitation of water supply reservoirs in
surrounding areas of the Sergipe River Basin. (ICR para. 17).

Component 2: Activities dropped: (i) rehabilitation of existing tubular wells in the Sergipe River Basin; (ii)
construction of small-scale rural and small-town water supply and sanitation solutions in selected localities.
Activities added: Rehabilitation activities for Poxim Dam (as recommended by the Independent Dam safety
Panel). (ICR para.18).

Component 3: Activities dropped: Studies for (i) preparing management plan for wastewater services and
(ii) institutional arrangements and instruments for service provision. Activities added: (i) component
description was revised to include sanitation subprojects in addition to water supply subprojects; (ii)
provision of technical assistance to DESO was expanded to include implementation of activities instead of
studies. (ICR para. 19).

Changes in intermediate results indicators (IRIs): IRIs were modified as follows:

Component 1: (integrated Water Resource Management and Institutional Development)

      The indicator "Agency for water resources management created/designated" was replaced by
       "proposal to create or designate the state agency responsible for water resource management is
       submitted to the Government". The target date was extended from June 30, 2017 to April 30, 2019.
      The indicator " state environmental conservation areas in the SRB created/expanded and managed"
       was replaced by " demarcation and conservation and recovery of protected areas in water supply
       reservoirs in the Sergipe River Basin". The target was reduced from 2,355 ha to 266 ha and the
       target date was extended from June 30, 2017 to April 30, 2019.

Component 2: (Water for Irrigation)

      A new indicator "water users benefiting from improved irrigation systems" was added.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



         The indicator "adoption of improved water and soil conservation practices by rural producers
          benefiting from irrigation kits" was modified to measure the actual number of producers benefiting by
          this activity under the project.

   Component 3: Water for Cities

         For the indicator "number of domiciliary connections to wastewater connection services increased by
          2018 in the municipalities of the SRB", the target was reduced from 143,000 to 127,000.
         The target for the indicator "DESO's EBITDA margin improved by 2018" was reduced from 17% to
          12%.
         A new (core) indicator was added "number of people benefiting from improved water supply
          services".

   Change in closing date: The original closing of June 30, 2017 was extended by 22 months to April 30, 2019
   to allow for implementation of the third phase of the wastewater works for the city of Itabaiana and energy
   efficiency works for the irrigation perimeters under the project. (ICR para. 23).

   Second restructuring (April 2019 - disbursed amount US$ 44.08 million). (ICR Data Sheet).

   This was a Level 2 restructuring. The original PDO remained the same without any change. However, there
   were changes in indicators and in one target as follows:

   PDO indicators: There were changes in implementational arrangements due to changes within the
   Government and in its priorities. ADEMA (Sergipe State Administration for the Environment) was dropped
   and AGRESE (Regulatory Agency for Public Services in the State of Sergipe) added.

   Intermediate result indicators: The target for "DESO's EBITDA margin", after being reduced from 17% to
   12% during the first restructuring, was further reduced from 12% to 8%.

   Closing date extension: The closing date was extended by a further 12 months from April 30, 2019 to April
   30, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: Water resources and associated infrastructure services are crucial elements
for Brazil's sustainable and equitable development. At project appraisal in 2012, Brazil faced crucial water
resource challenges related to scarcity, pollution in urban conurbations that did not have adequate
wastewater collection and treatment services, and recurrent droughts and floods. The State of Sergipe was

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



emblematic of the water challenges facing Brazil. With a population of about 2 million, Sergipe was (and
remains) the smallest state in the impoverished northeast of Brazil. Its per capita income was only 60% of
the national average with enormous disparities in access to basic infrastructure and social services such as
drinking water and proper sanitation. In 2010, about 19% of the population lacked access to water supply
services and only about 14% had access to sewerage services. The Sergipe River Basin (SRB), which
provided water to almost 50% of the state's population, was representative of the water scarcity and water
quality issues facing the state. Inadequate water supply and sanitation services, and inappropriate disposal
of solid waste, had polluted the SRB and negatively affected the local environment. Furthermore,
development of irrigated agricultural potential in the SRB was limited by water scarcity, water pollution, and
conflicts for water allocation due to rapid growth of urban demand. Within Brazil, the northeast region
(including Sergipe State) may be the most affected by climate change. The State lacked an adequate
institutional framework and tools to effectively plan, manage and regulate water resources and service
provision in an integrated manner (PAD paras. 1 to 7 and ICR paras. 1 to 7).

Alignment with national priorities: The project objectives are consistent with national priorities at the central
and state government levels. Brazil has passed a national Saneamento Law and a National Water Security
Plan with the objective of extending water supply and sanitation services to reach a universal access level.
In Sergipe's 2019-2022 Strategic Plan, the core themes include improvement of water supply and sanitation
infrastructure, water resources security, and irrigation.

Country Partnership Framework (CPF): The project objectives are consistent with the CPF FY2018 to FY
2023 that is currently in effect. The CPF (para. 98) confirms that the World Bank Group (WBG) will
emphasize an integrated approach for providing economic, environmental and social sustainability,
including resolution of social conflicts, through better governance. Objective 3.2 of the CPF (para. 102) is to
provide more inclusive and sustainable urban services. Focus Area 3 under the CPF regarding Inclusive
and Sustainable Development emphasizes support for (i) achievement of Brazil's NDC with a particular
focus on land use; (ii) provision of more inclusive and sustainable urban services; and (iii) promotion of
socio-economic development of small rural producers and vulnerable groups. The CPF (para. 113) further
confirms that the WBG will support authorities at the national and sub-national levels to increase the
number of people with improved living conditions (water supply, sanitation, etc.).

Prior Bank experience: The project built on the experience gained from implementation of two earlier Bank-
financed projects (i) Federal Water Resources Management Project (PROAGUA) and (ii) Phase II of the
Water Sector Modernization Program. Both projects were with the Federal Government but included
components that supported states including Sergipe; both projects included institutional strengthening
components. (PAD para. 9).




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BR Sergipe Water (P112074)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To promote the sustainable use of water.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (TOC) was that, to promote the sustainable use of water in a coordinated manner, it
               was necessary to (i) strengthen institutional and implementation capacity in the main Sergipe State
               government agencies concerned; and (ii) improve irrigation, soil management, and environmental
               conservation policies and practices. The project would provide inputs in the form of (i) technical assistance
               through training, capacity building, provision of required software and hardware, and carrying out of studies;
               and (ii) financing of infrastructure improvements, including equipment, materials, and supplies. This would
               enable key required outputs to materialize as follows: (i) establishment of integrated procedures and tools for
               environmental licensing and defining of water rights; and (ii) improvements in irrigation, soil management and
               environmental conservation practices. The outcomes would be strengthening the institutional framework and
               the capacity of the Sergipe State government agencies to carry out integrated water resources management
               (IWRM), thereby contributing to the sustainable use of water and incentivization of the main stakeholders to
               improve irrigation, soil management and environmental conservation practices. The higher-level outcomes
               would be (i) improved quality of life and socio-economic benefits for farmers and other beneficiaries in the
               areas supported by the project and (ii) environmental benefits from improved water resources management.

               Outputs/IRIs: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework)

               Strengthening the Sergipe State government's capacity for water resources management.

                     Integrated procedures for environmental licensing and water rights were established. However, the IRI
                      regarding creation/designation of a state agency to be responsible for water
                      resources management was not achieved as this was assessed to be beyond the influence of the
                      project (Restructuring Paper, para. 6 and ICR para. 74). The agency was not created. The target was
                      revised at restructuring to submission of a proposal, including a roadmap, to create or designate the
                      state agency, to the state government.
                     State environmental and conservation areas in the SRB are created/expanded and managed (target -
                      2,354 ha; actual achievement 266 ha; achievement level 11%). The target was not achieved. At
                      restructuring, the achievement was assessed to be beyond the purview of the state government
                      (Restructuring Paper, Section on Proposed Changes). The indicator was changed to "demarcation,
                      preservation, conservation and recovery of protected areas in the water supply reservoirs in the
                      SRB" and the revised target was set at 266 ha.
                     Development of new regional models for provision and management of solid waste services in rural
                      and small towns. The target was not achieved. The indicator was dropped at restructuring because of
                      new priorities that had emerged, and was replaced by " water sources and water supply reservoirs
                      protected and rehabilitated"

               Enhancing soil management and conservation practices

               Outputs/IRIs: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework)



                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sergipe Water (P112074)




      Adoption of improved water and soil conservation practices in areas supported by the project: The
       original target was 60% of the farmers in the irrigation perimeters of the Pocao da Ribeira and
       Jacarecica I irrigation perimeters (target 300; actual 35; achievement level 11%). The target was not
       achieved. At the restructuring in June 2017, the indicator was replaced by "adoption of improved water
       and soil conservation practices by rural producers benefiting from irrigation kits supplied".

Outcomes: There were significant shortcomings regarding achievement of the originally targeted outcomes.
The PDO indicator was "integrated procedures and tools for environmental licensing and water rights are
implemented". This included establishment of a water resources management agency which was not
achieved. The original target was therefore only partially achieved. The IRI regarding establishment and
expansion of State designated conservation areas was not achieved as it was assessed at project
restructuring to be beyond the purview of the State government. The IRI regarding adoption of improved
water and soil conservation practices was not achieved.




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective to promote the sustainable use of water was not revised..

Revised Rationale
As indicated above in Section 2, the original PDO was not revised during project implementation, but there
were significant changes in the formulation of some PDO indicators and IRIs, and in output/IRI targets during
the project restructurings. The theory of change (TOC) remained essentially the same as under Objective 1
regarding inputs but reflected changes in outputs and IRIs indicated in Section 2.

Outputs/IRIs: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

Strengthening the Sergipe State government's capacity for water resources management.

      Proposal, including a roadmap, to create or designate the state agency responsible for water
       resources management was submitted to the government. The target was achieved.
      Demarcation, preservation, conservation and recovery of protected areas in the water reservoirs areas
       in the SRB (target 266 ha; actual 266 ha, achievement level 100%).
      Elaboration of water user registry in the SRB. 2,971 water users were successfully registered. The
       target was achieved.
      Water bodies of the SRB were classified according to applicable regulations governing surface water
       and underground water. The target was achieved.
      Integration of Water Granting processes and Environmental Licensing processes. The target was
       achieved.


                                                                                                Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sergipe Water (P112074)




      Institutional strengthening and integration among the state's institutions concerned with water
         resources management included coordination of environmental licensing and water rights. The
         changes were ratified by relevant State Government decrees. The target was achieved.

Enhancing soil management and conservation practices.

      Water users benefiting from improved irrigation systems (target 600; actual 593; achievement level
         99%).
        Adoption of water and soil conservation practices by rural producers benefiting from irrigation kits
         supplied under the project (target 30; actual 42; achievement level 140%).
        Training of rural agricultural producers and rural technical assistance agents as replicators of
         technologies and practices of soil and water conservation (target 1,000; actual 1,090; achievement
         level 109%).
        Rehabilitation works (as recommended by the Independent Dam Safety Panel) were carried out for
         the Pocao da Ribeira, Jacarecica I, Jacarecica II, and Poxim dams.
        2,793 persons including farmers, irrigators, technicians and students were trained in the sue of
         pesticides.
        Bathymetry was carried out for the Pocao da Ribeira, Jacarecica I and Jacarecica II reservoirs to
         characterize sedimentation.
        Hydraulic model was developed to optimize operations, hydraulic capacity and water uptake from the
         reservoirs.
        Training and capacity building were provided to the main Sergipe State government agencies
         concerned - SEAGRI, COHIDRO and EMDAGRO, including new IT (information technology) software,
         hardware, vehicles and improved facilities.

Outcomes: Targets were achieved or substantially achieved for most outputs/IRIs. The revised PDO indicator
was "improved efficiency irrigation techniques implemented in agricultural areas targeted by the project". The
ICR reports that improved systems were implemented in 868 ha (overachieving the target of 800 ha) and
adopted by 893 farmers in the Pocao da Ribeira and Jacarecica I irrigation perimeters. One area that was
pending at project completion was the preparation and submission of Dam Safety Plans for the four dams
supported under the project. This is expected to be completed in 2021. The target was substantially
achieved.




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote the efficient use of water

Rationale


                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



The theory of change was that improvements in (i) irrigation practices and (ii) water supply and sanitation
infrastructure were necessary and causally linked to enhancing efficiency in the use of water. The project
would provide inputs through financing of technical assistance, training, and infrastructure rehabilitation and
modernization in (a) irrigation systems and (b) water supply and sanitation facilities. The outputs directly
attributable to the utilization of the inputs would include: (a) in irrigation, improved, infrastructure, equipment,
and water use practices; and (b) construction/expansion of (i) wastewater systems including treatment plants;
(ii) drainage systems; (iii) water supply conveyance systems; and (c) strengthened institutional and
implementational capacity in the key State government agencies including COHIDRO, EMDAGRO, and
DESO. This would result in outcomes including: (i) increased efficiency in use of water in irrigation systems;
(ii) reduction in pollution loads contributing thereby to improvement of water quality and sustainability of the
environment; (iii) increased reliability in water supply; and (iv) strengthening the capacity of DESO to provide
better water supply and sanitation services. The increased efficiency and reliability, as well as the reduction
in pollution, are expected to lead to higher-level outcomes including (i) improved quality of life and socio-
economic benefits for the population in the project-supported areas and (ii) environmental benefits from
improved water quality and water resources management.

Outputs/IRIs (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework)

Improving efficiency of water in irrigation.

      Establishment and implementation of water tariffs for farmers operating in the Pocao da Ribeira and
       Jacarecica I irrigation perimeters. The tariff framework was established and is expected to be
       implemented in 2021. The target was substantially achieved.
      Reduction in energy costs in irrigation perimeters supported by the project (target 40%; actual 29%;
       achievement level 71%). The target was substantially achieved.
      Water user associations were established in the Pocao da Ribeira and Jacarecica I irrigation
       perimeters. Training was provided in operations and maintenance, establishment of water tariffs, and
       promotion of water-efficient irrigation techniques.

Improving water quality and promoting efficient use of water in municipalities.

      Number of domiciliary connections to wastewater collection services increased in the municipalities
         supported by the project (baseline 55,000; target 143,000; actual 157,309; achievement level 110%).
      Number of people benefiting from improved water supply (target 290,000; actual 290,000;
         achievement level 100%).The target was achieved.
      Improvement in DESO's EBITDA margin (baseline 10%; target 16%; actual 8%; achievement level
         50%). The target was not achieved.
        New wastewater treatment plants were constructed and in operation in the municipalities of Aracaju,
         Itabaiana, and Nossa Senhora das Dorres.
        Drainage system was implemented and operational in Itabaiana.
        Water supply interventions were carried out in Aracaju including replacement of obsolete meters and
         30,000 household connections.
        Emergency recovery was successfully carried out for a major collapsed water supply pipe serving the
         city of Aracaju.
        Operational efficiency of DESO was improved through new equipment, facilities and vehicles.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sergipe Water (P112074)




      New environmental protocols for wastewater management were developed by DESO.

Outcomes: Two of the three PDO/IR indicators related to efficiency of water were not achieved. The PDO
indicator fo efficiency improvement in irrigation was "20% of efficiency improvements in the use of water as
measured by liters/second/hectare in the Pocao da Ribeira and Jacarecica I irrigation perimeters". At the
project restructuring in 2017, it was assessed that this indicator was difficult to measure and dropped
thereafter. One IRI that was not achieved was the improvement in DESO's EBITDA margin. This was
assessed to require actions beyond the scope of the project. The PDO indicator "pollution load discharged by
municipalities targeted by the project's wastewater investments is reduced" (expressed as reduction of tons
per year of BOD) was underachieved as compared to the original target and overachieved as compared to
the revised target (baseline 600; original target 5,600; revised target 4,000; actual 5,543).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective to promote the efficient use of water was not revised.

Revised Rationale
As indicated above in Section 2, the PDO was not changed during implementation, but there were significant
changes in some PDO and IR indicators reflecting the use of cost savings to scale up wastewater
related investments and to better align project activities with changed State government priorities during
implementation. The revised TOC was essentially the same as under the original Objective 2 regarding inputs
but reflected changes in PDO/IR indicators and outputs as indicated in Section 2.

Outputs/IRIs: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework)

Improving efficiency of water in irrigation.

      Establishment and implementation of water tariffs for farmers operating in the Pocao da Ribeira and
       Jacarecica I irrigation perimeters. The tariff framework was established and is expected to be
       implemented in 2021. The target was substantially achieved.
      Reduction in energy costs in irrigation perimeters supported by the project (target 40%; actual 29%;
       achievement level 71%). The target was substantially achieved.
      Water user associations were established in the Pocao da Ribeira and Jacarecica I irrigation
       perimeters. Training was provided in operations and maintenance, establishment of water tariffs, and
       promotion of water-efficient irrigation techniques.

Improving water quality and promoting efficient use of water in municipalities.

      Number of domiciliary connections to wastewater collection services increased in the municipalities
       supported by the project (baseline 55,000; target 143,000; actual 157,309; achievement level 110%).



                                                                                                Page 12 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR Sergipe Water (P112074)




                                   Number of people benefiting from improved water supply (target 290,000; actual 290,000;
                                      achievement level 100%). The target was achieved.
                                     Improvement in DESO's EBITDA margin (baseline 10%; target 12%; actual 8%; achievement level
                                      66%). The target was significantly underachieved.
                                     New wastewater treatment plants were constructed and in operation in the municipalities of Aracaju,
                                      Itabaiana, and Nossa Senhora das Dorres.
                                     Drainage system was implemented and operational in Itabaiana.
                                     Water supply interventions were carried out in Aracaju including replacement of obsolete meters and
                                      30,000 household connections.
                                     Emergency recovery was successfully carried out for a major collapsed water supply pipe serving the
                                      city of Aracaju.
                                     Operational efficiency of DESO was improved through new equipment, facilities and vehicles.
                                     New environmental protocols for wastewater management were developed by DESO.

                            Outcomes: Targets were achieved or substantially achieved for most outputs/IRIs. One IRI that was
                            underachieved was the improvement of DESO's EBITDA margin. This was assessed to require actions
                            beyond the scope of the project. The revised PDO indicator "pollution load discharged by municipalities
                            targeted by the project's wastewater investments is reduced" (expressed as reduction in tons per year of
                            biological oxygen demand - BOD) was overachieved. (Baseline 600; revised target 4,0000; actual 5,543;
                            achievement level 139%). The core indicator "number of people with access to improved sanitation service"
                            was overachieved in total (baseline 102,000; target 230,000; actual 459,075; achievement level 200%). and
                            female (baseline 54,300; target 122,000; actual 237,137; achievement level 195%).



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Although the PDO remained unchanged during project implementation, a split evaluation is carried out since
                            changes made at project restructuring resulted in a reduction in the project's ambition and significant changes
                            in the formulation of some PDO/IR indicators and output/IRI targets.

                            Pre-restructuring efficacy is rated Modest based on ratings of Modest for Objective 1 (to promote sustainable
                            use of water) and Modest for Objective 2 (to promote efficient use of water). As discussed in Section 4, for
                            Objective 1, there were significant shortcomings in the achievement of targets/IRIs related to the PDO
                            regarding establishment of institutional procedures and tools, notably the failure to create or designate a State
                            government agency for water resources management and the limited success in establishment and
                            expansion of designated areas for environmental conservation. For Objective 2, there were significant
                            shortcomings regarding achievement of the IRIs related to improvement of efficiency of water use in irrigation
                            and in improvement in DESO's EBITDA margin.


                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 22
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              BR Sergipe Water (P112074)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
         Modest                                                    Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale


         Post-restructuring efficacy is rated Substantial as the project substantially achieved the targeted outcomes in
         regarding the project's objectives (i) to promote the sustainable use of water and (ii) to promote the efficient
         use of water.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Administrative and Implementation Efficiency

Project cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$117.1 million. The actual cost at completion was
US$110.3 million. (ICR Data Sheet). Part of the savings in cost was fortuitous - substantial changes in the
exchange rate between the Brazilian Real and the US dollar resulted in savings of about US$18 million which
were utilized for additional investments under the project (Restructuring Paper, para. 11).

Project duration: The original closing date was June 30, 2017. It was extended twice, first by 22 months to April
30, 2019 and later, by 12 months to April 30, 2020 to compensate for delays in the early part of implementation
and to allow sufficient time for completion of ongoing contracts. The actual implementation period was 88.5
months compared to the planned period of 54.5 months.

Economic Efficiency

Appraisal analysis: (PAD Annex 6). The indicators used for economic efficiency were the Economic Internal
Rate of Return (EIRR) and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) estimated at a discount rate of 10% over a
duration of 25 years. Estimates were made separately for the irrigation component and the water supply and
sanitation component. For the irrigation component, the main benefits anticipated were (i) savings in water used
and the incremental quantity available to be used for other purposes; and (ii) reduction in costs including use of
chemicals and other materials. For the water supply and sanitation component, the benefits anticipated were (i)
incremental quantity of water sold and (ii) incremental wastewater charges collected. The estimated economic
viability indicators were:

              For the irrigation component, an EIRR of 32% and an ENPV of US$16.2 million

                                                                                                            Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



      For the water supply and sanitation component, an EIRR of 23% and ENPV of US$11.3 million.

Post-Completion analysis: (ICR Annex 4): Efficiency analysis was carried out separately for (i) the irrigation
component (13% of project cost) and (ii) the water supply and sanitation component (77% of project cost).

Irrigation component: Estimates were prepared separately for the two irrigation schemes (i) Pocao da Ribeira
system including 648 farms and (ii) Jacarecica I system including 248 farms. The cost benefit calculations were
based on incremental (with and without project) analysis using 10 farm simulation models with different
combinations of eight key crops. The assumptions in regard to intensity of land use were 70% without the
project and 85% with the project. The estimated EIRRs are: 15% for the Pocao da Ribeira system and 14% for
the Jacarecica I system.:

Water supply and sanitation component: The analysis was carried out on an incremental (without and with
project) basis. Benefits included (i) incremental quantity of water sold; (ii) estimated average benefits for
households from improved wastewater collection services - R$2,040 per household per year based on a study
carried out in 2018. The estimated EIRR was 38% with an ENPV of R$334 million.

Assessment: The post-completion EIRR estimates were higher than the appraisal estimates for the water supply
and sanitation component and lower for the irrigation component. However, in both cases, the post-completion
EIRR are significantly higher than the discount rate of 6% to 8% currently prescribed under Bank guidelines for
economic analysis of investment projects, and the ENPVs are positive. The project's efficiency is rated
Substantial.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Table: Overall Outcome Ratings



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



                                                               After
Indicator                               Before Restructuring
                                                               Restructuring
Relevance of objectives                 High                   High
Efficacy                                Modest                 Substantial
Objective 1 (with original indicators
                                        Modest                 Not rated
and targets)
Objective 1 (with revised indicators
                                        Not rated              Substantial
and targets)
Objective 2 (with original indicators
                                        Modest                 Not rated
and targets)
Objective 2 (with revised indicators
                                        Not rated              Substantial
and targets)
Efficiency                     Substantial                     Substantial
                               Moderately
Outcome rating                                                 Satisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory
Outcome rating value           3                               5
Amount disbursed (US$ million) 25.24                           38.20
Disbursement (%)               40%                             60%
Weight value                   1.2                             3.0
                               1.2+3.0 = 4.2
Total weights
                               (rounded to 4.0)
                               Moderately
Overall outcome rating
                               Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risks (Moderate): The state agencies concerned are familiar with the technologies employed under
the irrigation and water supply and sanitation components. The Dam Safety Plans (DSPs) for the four dams
supported under the project were not completed at the time of project closing. They are expected to be
completed in 2021. There is a risk that these may be delayed.

Administrative risks (Moderate): Substantial changes were introduced under the project regarding definition
of state agency responsibilities and inter-agency collaboration frameworks. Successful implementation of
integrated resources management will require the establishment of a state agency in charge of water
resources management. This has been delayed and was not accomplished at the time of project closing.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



There is a risk that the establishment of the agency may be further delayed which will impact the
implementation of integrated water resource management policies.

Policy risks (Moderate): Successful implementation of integrated water resources management will require
continued focus and support on the part of the state government. There is a risk that the necessary
resources may not be allocated to enable the agencies to carry out their functions effectively.

Financial risks (Moderate): Sustainability of the gains made under the project interventions will require
continued support from DESO, COHIDRO, EMDAGRO, and other implementing agencies which, in turn,
would depend upon availability of financial and other resources to operate and maintain the infrastructure
and other facilities, and to provide support to participating farmers and other land users through technical
assistance and supplies of materials. There is a risk that the necessary resources may not be available in a
timely and sufficient manner.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design benefited, to some extent, from experience under earlier Bank-financed projects under
  which Sergipe State was a beneficiary (among other states) of funds made available to the Federal
  Government. The strategic relevance was, (and continues to be), high in terms of alignment with national
  priorities and those in the CPF. However, the project design was ambitious in terms of the project scope,
  taking into account the capacities of the main state government agencies involved and their lack of
  experience with Bank policies and procedures. Some PDO and Intermediate results indicators were not
  designed appropriately in terms of their formulation and/or basis of measurement. Baseline values were
  incorrect in some cases and had to be modified during implementation. Project implementation capacities
  in terms of procurement and financial management were not satisfactorily established at the start of
  project implementation which contributed to substantial delays in the early stages of implementation.
  Environmental and social safeguard implementation arrangements were satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team carried out a total of 16 supervision missions over the implementation period. The project
 had two TTLs during implementation. The TTL was based in Brazil which contributed to more effective
 client interface and continuuity. The supervision teams were adequately staffed with environmental, social
 safeguards, and fiduciary specialists.

 The project team was proactive in reaching out to the multiple implementing agencies under the project.
 However, the team could have been more proactive in pursuing project restructuring, given the substantial
 delays in the early part of implementation and the weaknesses in the project's M&E system in terms of lack

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



 of baseline data, inappropriate formulations for some PDO and intermediate results indicators, and
 measurement difficulties for some indicators. The first restructuring was carried out only in 2017 (the
 original closing date was June 30, 2017) when these deficiencies were addressed.

 Performance reporting by the team was timely and candid. Supervision of fiduciary and safeguards aspects
 was timely and adequate.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 There were some significant shortcomings in M&E design:

       Some of the original PDO indicators were not adequate to measure the two-part PDO formulation
          (sustainable and efficient use of water) and had to be modified during project restructuring.
         Some intermediate result indicators had to be re-formulated to better measure results and align
          them with project scope.
         Baseline values were missing and/or incorrect in some cases.
         The measurement methodologies prescribed for some indicators were impractical.
         Some indicators were missing in regard to achievement of interventions under Component 2 (water
          for irrigation).
         Indicators were not included to assess dam safety actions.




b. M&E Implementation
  The deficiencies regarding the design of the M&E system were largely corrected during the project
  restructuring in 2017. The Project Management Unit (PMU) collected activity reports from the
  implementing agencies including bi-annual progress reports. The collected data was incorporated into the



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



  M&E system and was available to gauge progress in implementation in terms of achievement of outputs,
  intermediate results, and outcomes.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used to report on project progress, including both positive and negative features.
  Results were communicated to the state government agencies involved and used for reporting of
  progress in the Implementation Status Reports (ISRs).

  Overall rating of M&E: Although there were significant weaknesses in the M&E design, they were largely
  corrected during implementation. On balance, the rating for the project's M&E system is Substantial with
  moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards: The project was rated Category A (Full Assessment) at appraisal and continued
   to remain so classified. It triggered the following: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats
   (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11); and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).

   The ICR reports (para. 64) that there were no significant environmental impacts throughout project
   implementation. At project closing, the ratings were Satisfactory for all triggers except Safety of Dams
   (OP/BP 4.37) due to non-completion of the required Dam Safety Plans prior to project closing. (These are
   expected be completed in 2021). At project closing, the overall rating for Environmental Compliance was
   Moderately Satisfactory.

   Social safeguards: The ICR reports (para. 67) that Resettlement Planning Frameworks (RPFs) were
   prepared and disclosed for the project sites. There was no involuntary resettlement of persons. Some land
   acquisition was required, but all the areas were acquired, and compensated for, in compliance with OP
   4.12. Overall, there were no non-compliance issues in regard to social safeguards.

   The ICR reports (para. 67) that a Social Action Plan was implemented with success, but it was not possible
   to prevent advances in irregular occupation in the dam areas, and that there is a risk that this may
   compromise future water quality and pose a risk to occupants in areas close to the dam reservoirs. The ICR
   reports (para. 68) that a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was set up. It received more than 40,000
   calls monthly and responses were provided in the agreed timeframe (24 hours or 5 days as applicable).




                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): Ratings were Satisfactory in the first two years of implementation;
   downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in November 2014 due to an outdated Operations Manual and
   discrepancies in unaudited Interim Financial Reports (IFRs); upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory in April
   2016; downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in August 2016 due to inconsistencies in IFRs; upgraded
   subsequently to Satisfactory in August 2017; and downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory in October 2019
   due to withholding of designated accounts by the State treasury. The rating at closing was Moderately
   Satisfactory.

   The ICR reports (para. 56) that auditors expressed clean opinions for most years except 2015. All IFRs
   were acceptable and mostly on time. There were no cases of ineligible expenditures.

   Procurement: The ICR reports (paras. 58 to 61) that procurement ratings varied from Moderately
   Unsatisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory during the implementation period. The project's implementation
   arrangements, as designed, did not address the procurement challenges caused by multiple implementing
   agencies and lack of compatibility between Bank procurement systems and requirements under state and
   federal government regulations. The situation was more difficult up to 2015 but improved subsequently.
   The rating for Procurement was Moderately Satisfactory in the last two years of project implementation.

   The ICR does not indicate what were the fiduciary (procurement and financial management) ratings in the
   last ISR before project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no significant unintended impacts reported.



d. Other
   Gender: There were no gender-specific activities included in the project design. However, the project's PDO
   indicator did include a core indicator on number of beneficiaries which included a target for women
   beneficiaries.The target was reported to be achieved.

   Poverty Reduction: The project included the introduction of a framework for water tariffs for irrigation
   purposes which included the introduction of socially targeted tariffs based on income levels of households.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory


                                                                                                 Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 79 to 89) lists a number of lessons that have relevance for projects implemented in
similar environments:

1. Client capacity needs to be realistically assessed early on in project design: The experience under
this project has shown that, when designing the project, it is essential to make a realistic
assessment of the client's implementing capacity, particularly when it is a first-time client not
adequately familiar with Bank fiduciary procedures and requirements. Basic training in procurement,
financial management, and safeguards procedures needs to be provided early on in the
implementation process.

2. Interventions in irrigation related improvements need to be undertaken at an early stage of project
implementation: Capacity building activities aimed at improved soil management and conservation
practices need to be implemented after the new irrigation systems are in place to maximize the
demonstration effects and increase ownership. Improved practices are more likely to be accepted
and used after the physical investments are in place.

3. Training of rural producers in improved techniques and practices requires close and continuing
contact: The experience under the project has shown that close and continuing contact and social
action with the targeted beneficiaries is essential to motivate participants and keep them engaged.

4. Projects should be designed to have sufficient flexibility to adapt to changing priorities: An
important priority that emerged during project implementation was the emergency response that was
required to address the collapse of a major water supply pipe supplying water to the city of Aracaju.
Project funds had to be re-allocated to address this need.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR exceeds the prescribed length for ICRs under the OPCS guidelines, but this is considered justified in
view of the scope and complexity of this project. The ICR is clearly written, candid, and follows other applicable
OPCS guidelines. It presents a clear theory of change. The analysis and reporting are outcome focused and
evidence based. The ICR draws on information from the project's M&E system supplemented by data from
other official sources. The narrative and analysis in the main text are supplemented by detailed information in

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sergipe Water (P112074)



supporting annexes. The ICR provides relevant lessons learned from the project experience. Overall,
the ICR provides a good basis for assessing the project's outcome.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 22 of 22
