     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022464

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148052                                    TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                       Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9610,TF-17138                         30-Sep-2018                                         16,938,954.07

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-May-2014                                15-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            15,790,000.00                                    5,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             18,580,605.17                                    2,790,605.17

 Actual                                         16,938,954.07                                    2,790,605.17




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement dated 6/20/2014, p. 4, the objective of the project was to increase the
   utilization and improve the quality of maternal and child health services in targeted areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Improving accessibility and quality of maternal and child health (MCH) Services through
   performance-based financing (PBF) and community health (Appraisal US$17.8 million; Actual
   US$11.5 million).

   Sub-component 1.1: Provision of PBF grants and expansion of PBF through health facilities delivering
   service packages comprising preventive and curative services with a focus on MCH.

   Sub-component 1.2: Governance of PBF purchasing arrangements, including supervision of health facilities,
   verification and counter-verification of PBF results after payments, and delivery of technical assistance to
   rural health facilities.

   Sub-component 1.3: Development of community-based approaches for MCH services. Review of
   community-based approaches and training of community health workers for door-to-door visits and service
   delivery.



   2: Strengthening institutional capacity to implement and sustain PBF and community-level health
   care services (Appraisal US$2.99 million; Actual US$4.3 million).

   Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening institutional capacities for improved program and sector management,
   including organizing fora and workshops to advance the policy reform agenda, improving the quality and
   availability of essential medicines, and allocation of human resources.

   Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening capacities for monitoring and evaluation (M&E), supervision, and project
   implementation. This included financing of project management and supervision, M&E, reviews conducted
   by the External Evaluation Agency, use of web applications on project performance, and covering costs of
   the impact evaluation.



   Revised Components

   A project restructuring on 6/28/2018 maintained the original components and added two more in response
   to government needs in addressing weak capacity in immunizations and emergency obstetric and neonatal
   care programs that impeded overall improvements in MCH outcomes. The two additional components
   consisted of the following:



   3. Strengthening the delivery of the Expanded Program of Immunization (EPI) and emergency
   obstetric and neonatal care (EmONC) (Allocation US$5 million; Actual US$5 million). The component
   was to finance cold chain equipment, solar refrigerators and motorbikes for the EPI program, national and
   sub-national immunization campaigns, and training of health personnel on EmONC, where training was

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



   delivered by the World Health Organization. The distribution of related supplies was undertaken by
   UNICEF.



   4. Contingency emergency response. This fourth component aimed at facilitating the government
   response to any public health emergency or disease outbreak if the need arose. No upfront allocations were
   made, but the component would allow support for mitigation, response, and recovery in affected districts,
   with disbursements to be made against a list of goods, works, and services.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost and financing. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$20.8 million consisting of an IDA grant of
   SDR 10.2 million (US$15.8 million equivalent) and another grant of US$5 million from the Multi-Donor Trust
   Fund for Health Results Innovation (HRITF). No direct counterpart financing was planned or provided. The
   total actual cost was US$19.7 million.

   Dates. The project appraisal document was finalized on 5/6/2014. Financing was planned for a four-year
   implementation period ending on 9/30/2018. The project was approved on 5/29/2014 and became effective
   on 9/18/2014. A Mid-term Review was carried out on 2/23/2018. A first restructuring on 6/28/2018 revised
   components, allocations, and the results framework, and extended the closing date to 7/31/2020. A second
   restructuring moved up the closing date to 6/15/2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives were responsive to important health sector challenges combining aspects of accessibility,
affordability, and quality of services. Utilization of existing health services, notably at the primary level of
health care, was very low. For example, there were only 0.18 contacts per year and per child. The maternal
mortality ratio, estimated at 1,100 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2010, was the highest among Central
African countries, and the infant mortality rate was estimated at 98 per 1,000 live births (PAD, pp. 1-2). High
fertility and gender inequalities were salient, and the Human Development Index ranked Chad at 183 out of
187 countries in 2011. Half of the population lived on less than US$1.25 per day.

Prior to the project during the period between October 2011 and March 2013, the government carried out a
pilot PBF scheme in eight health districts across four regions covering a total population of 1.45 million
people. The pilot included a basic package of health services delivered at health centers, a complementary
package of services delivered at district hospitals, and the introduction of a quality checklist for services.
Pilot results showed an increase in service utilization with doubling of attended deliveries and immunization
rates (PAD, pp. 4-5).



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



               During project preparation, the Bank did not have a Country Partnership Framework in place. An Interim
               Strategy Note was developed for the period 2010-2012, followed by a 2013 Joint Staff Advisory Note that
               was aligned with Chad’s National Development Plan for the period 2013-2015, in which human capital
               development was among its eight pillars. A subsequent national plan for 2018-2020 was developed. Both
               national plans focused on improving equitable access to quality health services and prioritizing MCH. The
               objectives were aligned with the National Health Policy 2016-2030 that set a vision for building an
               integrated, well-performing, resilient, people-centered system. The National Health Policy underlined the
               need to ensure access to health services for the most vulnerable groups in order to promote equitable
               access to quality health services.

               At project closing, development objectives remained consistent with the Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) 2016-2010. The CPF had three engagement themes: (1) Strengthening management of public
               resources; (2) Improving returns to agriculture and building value chains; and (3) Building human capital
               and reducing vulnerability, under which one of the CPF objectives was to improve rural access to
               reproductive health services. The project was listed by the CPF as an ongoing operation contributing to the
               CPF objective on improving access to reproductive health services.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the utilization of maternal and child health services in targeted areas

                             Rationale
                             Explanation of targeted areas. The project focused on 12 health districts in five regions (Batha, Guera,
                             Logone Oriental, Mandoul and Tandjile). The five regions were selected on the basis of: (i) high poverty rate;
                             (ii) status of health indicators; (iii) presence of other development partners; and (iv) logistical and technical
                             capacity to implement PBF. Four of the regions participated in a previous PBF pilot, as previously noted in
                             Section 3. The beneficiary population included approximately 2.2 million inhabitants (2014) in the five
                             selected regions. Main beneficiaries were women of reproductive age (including young women, pregnant
                             women, and mothers) and children.



                             Theory of change

                             It was reasonably expected that PBF payments to health facilities, as well as provision of bonuses promoting
                             motivation, training of personnel, training of community health workers, strengthened management and


                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



supervision, verification of results, and the use of quality checklists for services would result in increased
utilization and quality of MCH services.

There were some gaps in the theory of change. Addressing demand-side aspects is an important contributor
to utilization, as the latter is a function of both supply and demand aspects. In this context, ‘information,
education and communications’ activities were lacking, even though barriers to demand, such as socio-
cultural barriers, were known (ICR, p. 48). Also, the full extent of the desired change was not clear, as the
planned achievement targets were reflected in absolute numbers without information on the proportion of
users that the project was striving to reach.



Outputs and intermediate results

The number of health personnel receiving training reached 516 persons in 2019, short of the target of 1,000
persons. Most of the training was undertaken in the latter part of the project period, as only 1.4 percent of the
target was reached by May 2018 at project restructuring (ICR, p. 54). The indicator on health personnel
receiving training was not clearly described in terms of targeted cadres or training content. Given that other
intermediate indicators also referred to staff training, the ICR (p. 40) stated that there might have been an
overlap between related indicators. As a non-PBF-related output that aimed at increasing utilization,
Community Health Workers were trained for delivering an integrated preventive and curative package at the
household level. The number of trained workers reached 1,492 workers in 2019, exceeding the target of 500
workers.

The following results were specific to project areas:

The number of women of reproductive age using modern contraceptive methods increased from 7,916 in
2014 to 108,947 women in 2019, exceeding the target of 14,000 women.

The number of children under five years of age receiving preventive nutrition services increased from a
baseline of 23,483 children in 2014 to 95,486 children in 2019, exceeding the target of 50,000 children.

The number of people who received essential health, nutrition, and population services under the project was
258,917 in 2019, exceeding the target of 98,600 people.

The number of women and children who received basic nutrition services under the project reached 95,486 in
2019, exceeding the target of 38,600 women and children.



Outcomes

Reported results, specific to project areas, showed the following:

      An increase in the number of pregnant women who received antenatal care during a visit by a health
       provider from 48,300 women in 2014 to 171,460 in 2019, exceeding the target of 80,000 pregnant
       women.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)




      An increase in the number of births through deliveries attended by qualified health personnel from a
       baseline of 20,836 attended births in 2014 to 70,872 attended births in 2019, exceeding the target of
       35,000 attended births.
      An increase in the number of children immunized (DPT3) from a baseline of 15,389 children in 2014 to
       92,604 children in 2019, exceeding the target of 25,000 immunized children.

In terms of volume of services, the results indicated that the project contributed to increased utilization of
MCH services in project areas. However, there were gaps in the evidence and some concerns regarding
plausible contribution by the project. First, and as noted above in the theory of change, the project lacked
information on the proportion of people utilizing MCH services. The ICR (p. 21) stated that, while utilization
targets were surpassed, coverage of essential health services in project areas remained low by regional and
international standards, but the ICR did not provide further details. Second, there was a lack of
information that would enable comparison of areas or groups covered by the project with areas or groups not
covered by PBF. In this context, the ICR (p. 48) noted that it was very difficult to ascertain that improvements
in service utilization plausibly could be attributed to PBF payments. Third, another reservation regarding
plausible contribution arises from the fact that several project targets were met by the original closing date of
September 2018 (ICR, p. 25), and yet, PBF activities started only in March of the same year (ICR, p. 32).

An additional shortcoming was that the project did not comply with the triggered safeguard policy on
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 (see Section 10a).

On balance, taking into consideration exceeded achievement targets and the shortcomings discussed above,
the achievement of Objective 1 is considered borderline substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of maternal and child health services in targeted areas

Rationale
Theory of change: same as above under Objective 1.



Outputs and intermediate results

The following results were specific to project areas:

The number of health centers and district hospitals that had Basic Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care
reached 65 centers in 2019, short of the target of 150 centers.




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



Staff in health centers and district hospitals who received training in Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal Care
reached 130 staff in 2019, short of the target of 203 staff.

The percentage of tracer drugs available in targeted health facilities on the day of the visit increased from a
baseline of 50 percent in 2014 to 100 percent in 2019, exceeding the target of 75 percent.

The percentage of health facilities reporting monthly activities was universal at 100 percent in 2019 compared
to a baseline of 65 percent in 2014, exceeding the target of 95 percent.

The number of health centers and districts that received cold chain equipment reached 155 centers,
exceeding the target of 134 facilities.



Outcomes

The average score of the quality checklist reached 65.4 percent in 2019, exceeding the target of 30 percent.

Explanation of quality checklists and their utilization:

Checklists were used to assess overall quality of services and to identify specific areas for improvement on a
periodic basis. Checklists provided an index encompassing the calculation of an array of quality aspects:

    1. At the health center level, the checklist covered 12 areas: maternal care, antenatal care, family
       wellbeing, immunization and preventive child health services, general activities, surveillance and data
       management, hygiene and environmental health, outpatient services, tuberculosis and leprosy, minor
       surgery, drug management, and financial management. General activities covered the availability of
       information at the facility such as opening times and fee schedules, availability of a phone or radio,
       and development of an action plan for the semester. For service-related areas, indicators covered
       themes such as privacy, availability of critical supplies, and compliance with clinical guidelines and
       standards.
    2. At the hospital level, the checklist covered 16 areas, mostly linked to hospital wards: maternity, urgent
       and emergency care, pediatrics, gynecology, operating block, blood transfusions, general medicine,
       surgery, outpatient care, hygiene, maintenance, pharmacy, sterilization, laboratory, imagery, and
       hospital administration (ICR, p. 21).

However, since PBF payments were stopped in April 2019, no data on the quality of care were collected after
April 2019 through project closing in June 2020. The ICR (p. 45) noted that there were good reasons to
believe that service quality would drop, including because staff hired under PBF might not be retained, and
the absence of staff bonus payments would have reduced staff motivation to comply with all requirements to
deliver quality health services.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The aggregation of achievements under the two objectives to increase utilization and to improve the quality of
                            MCH services in targeted areas indicate that the objectives were almost fully achieved, with some
                            shortcomings, consistent with a substantial rating for overall efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Adequately applied interventions in MCH are generally considered cost-effective in the global literature. Findings
   from studies in low and middle-income countries on the cost effectiveness of MCH interventions vary on average
   between US$82-142 per DALY averted (Disease Control Priorities, Second Edition, 2006).

   At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was carried out. The analysis considered direct costs of the PBF
   component, excluded the community health component due to the lack of data, used a social discount rate of 5
   percent, and assumed a budget execution rate of 80 percent. The analysis estimated a Net Present Value
   (NPV) of US$3.23 million. The ICR (p. 18) carried out an ex-post economic analysis following the same
   methodology adopted at appraisal, and it updated the estimate of NPV related to PBF at US$20.2 million. A
   sensitivity analysis was also conducted for a second scenario with a discount rate of 3 percent, yielding an NPV
   of US$21.64 million and a benefit-cost ratio of 6.1; and for a third scenario with a discount rate of 10 percent,
   corresponding to an NPV of US$17 million and a benefit-cost ratio of 6.5, indicating that benefits outweighed the
   costs.

   However, there were shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation ranging from significant to major.
   Significant operational delays hindered the start of key PBF activities such that implementation on the
   ground began only in the fifth year of the project (2018), along with the protracted signing of a contract with an
   Independent Verification Agency. The ICR (p. 36) noted that the delays in recruiting and maintaining the
   verification agency posed major challenges to PBF implementation. Hence, PBF services were implemented
   only for a short period of time in 2018 through April 2019, at which date PBF payments were stopped due to
   insufficient financial resources (Restructuring Paper of 6/18/2020, Report No. RES41497, p. 3). Subsequently,
   only a few activities happened on the ground during the last year of the project until its closing date on
   6/15/2020. According to the ICR (p. 66), extended implementation delays during the initial four years were
   characterized by very weak government ownership. Opening of bank accounts for health facilities required an
   official act certifying that a health facility had been created by the government (ICR, p. 26). Disbursements
   between 2014 and 2018 were minimal, as reflected in the ICR's Figure 4 (ICR, p. 31).

   The project underestimated the cost of PBF, and verification costs alone represented 54 percent of the PBF
   budget, with another 30 percent for administrative costs (ICR (p. 35). These issues resulted in a financing
   envelope that was insufficient to implement PBF for the full duration of the project. Health facilities were unable
   to retain related staff. A fiduciary team was not in place during the first three years of project implementation


                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



(ICR, p. 43). Financial management performance remained unsatisfactory or moderately unsatisfactory for the
better part of the project (ICR, p. 43). Internal control was weak with significant deficiencies in internal auditing.

Counter-verification did not occur because of insufficient funds (ICR, p. 36). The planned impact evaluation was
not carried out. The project did not have enough resources to renew the verification contract, and the
government hired individuals to verify results for a duration of four months after which PBF payments were
stopped. The planned review of community-based approaches was not undertaken. Project funds were
understandably used to mitigate outbreaks of cholera and hepatitis, but this further reduced scarce resources
intended to support original project activities (ICR, p. 25).

At the institutional level, the PBF Steering Committee was not functional for four years between 2014 and 2018,
and the PBF Technical Unit (that served as the Project Implementation Unit, according to the PAD, p. 14, and
Task Team clarifications of 1/27/21) was not manned (ICR, p. 32). Oversight was slight and there was no
effective platform to deal with arising challenges or to adopt timely corrections. According to the ICR (p. 32), the
PBF Steering Committee was in breach of the principles stipulated by the Financing Agreement because it was
chaired by the General Director of Health Activities instead of the General Secretary at the Ministry of Public
Health, and this arrangement impacted implementation because the project did not have sufficient visibility at
the senior management level. The PBF Steering Committee was reformed shortly before the 2018 project
restructuring. It was chaired by the General Secretary at the Ministry of Public Health, after which it became
functional.

Staffing issues were salient, notably at the Project Implementation Unit. The delay in hiring a PBF specialist led
to a decision to eliminate this position. Other key positions were vacant, and turnover was high. The project had
three different Project Coordinators between 2014 and 2017. There were concerns regarding the performance of
key staff during the project's initial years. The ICR stated that the Project Implementation Unit identified
constraints on the ground, but that there was no evidence that issues were effectively addressed or that support
was provided for developing action plans to facilitate implementation (ICR, p. 37). Access to facilities in the
southern provinces was difficult due to flooding during the rainy season, preventing effective field supervision for
both the Project Implementation Unit and the Bank team, and making visits costly and challenging. Flooding
limited the number of people utilizing health services. The general security situation in Chad also imposed
restrictions and complicated logistics.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                          Not Applicable


                                                                                                          Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high, as objectives remained closely aligned with the Bank Group Country
Partnership Framework FY16-20, the country’s National Development Plan 2018-2020, and the National Health
Policy 2016-2030. Efficacy is rated substantial as the objectives were almost fully achieved, with some
shortcomings. Efficiency is rated modest because the project was not efficiently implemented, with significant
and major shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. Therefore, the overall outcome is rated moderately
satisfactory, indicative of essentially moderate shortcomings in the project achievement of its objectives, in its
efficiency, or in its relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk that development outcomes may not be maintained relates to financial constraints. It is likely
that project achievements would be affected over time by the discontinuation of activities, non-retention of
staff mobilized under PBF, reduction of funding to the regions, and loss of credibility due to the cessation of
PBF. No data on the quality of care was collected after PBF payments were stopped. Another risk is that
PBF could be perceived as a pilot or a donor-driven intervention, thus reducing opportunities for its
institutionalization.

At the same time, some of the project interventions may have a sustained positive impact. The increased
autonomy of health facilities may empower them to proactively make decisions to deliver adequate services.
Staff competencies and M&E processes have been strengthened. Facilities have been equipped with solar
fridges and motorbikes, and relevant staff were trained to tackle overall maintenance.

The government requested the preparation of a new project for extending PBF, and the proposed follow-on
operation would be implemented in areas covering 6.7 million people (Health System Performance
Strengthening Project, P172504, planned for Q3 of FY21 per Task Team clarifications of 1/27/2021). Also,
the government has included PBF as one of the main health financing mechanisms in its National Universal
Health Coverage Strategy. The ICR indicated that both government and Bank teams were working on a
Development Policy Operation that would include actions related to the institutionalization of PBF, including
by using government funding.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



  The design of the PBF model built on lessons from a previous PBF pilot, including lessons related to
  institutional arrangements and autonomy of health facilities, and the use of PBF subsidies and incentives
  (ICR, pp. 28-29). The project did not have specific interventions to address socio-cultural barriers to
  demand (ICR, p. 48), nor activities to support coordination with community-based platforms such as the
  supervision of Community Health Workers by facility staff (ICR, p. 30).

  Project preparation took only six months, as it was accelerated with a valid aspiration to reduce the time
  gap between the pilot and the project. However, the accelerated pace contributed to gaps in readiness for
  implementation. The ICR noted that more preparatory steps could have been taken to advance the
  recruitment of the Independent Verification Agency, such as drawing up and validating terms of
  reference, and assessing local and international markets for verification service providers. The
  subsequent delay in recruiting the verification agency emerged as a major bottleneck to PBF
  implementation.

  A recently updated National Medical Waste Management Plan was to be used in the context of
  environmental safeguards. Financial management was the responsibility of the General Directorate for
  Resources and Planning (PAD, p. 20). The financial management assessment at appraisal concluded
  that the directorate had reasonable experience in donor-financed activities, but that it did not fully meet
  the necessary requirements in know-how and capacities. According to the ICR (p. 44), the PAD did not
  have sufficient information on how the project would strengthen fiduciary capacities, as the risk of low
  capacities posed a major challenge to timely and effective implementation in compliance with World Bank
  policies and guidelines. PBF costs were underestimated, although the project planned for full costing to
  be undertaken in the early stages of implementation. In addition to important shortcomings in readiness
  as noted above, there were shortcomings in M&E design that are discussed in Section 9a.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted implementation support visits to Chad on a biannual basis. No dedicated staff
 was based in the country. The Bank team’s early implementation support visits focused on establishing
 adequate implementation arrangements and developing the concept of an impact evaluation (ICR, p. 44).
 Such activities are normally expected to be fulfilled during project preparation. Subsequently, the focus
 shifted to unblocking bottlenecks that caused implementation delays.

 The ICR (p. 38) noted that there was no evidence to suggest that the Bank reacted proactively to address
 implementation challenges that were within its control during the first years of implementation. Changes in
 the composition of the task team (the project had five TTLs, including co-TTLs) resulted only in marginal
 progress. According to the ICR (p. 36), weak progress during the project’s first years would have merited
 more frequent implementation support visits to the country. Implementation support visits would have
 provided an opportunity to facilitate the strengthening of managerial capacities and to actively support
 government counterparts in the development of action plans to accelerate implementation. There was no
 evidence that such support was provided (ICR, p. 37). The ICR also noted that there was no evidence that
 relevant support resources were mobilized, particularly in the areas of procurement and financial
 management, to accompany the Project Implementation Unit counterparts and to facilitate the completion

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



 of essential tasks such as in the development and management of contracts. The ICR also stated that the
 delay in the recruitment of the verification agency could have been prevented by more active fiduciary
 support.

 Nevertheless, the proactiveness of the Bank’s implementation support improved during the life of the
 project (ICR, p. 44), and the Bank team facilitated a Mid-Term Review in February 2018, followed by two
 project restructurings, the first of which contributed to accelerating the pace of implementation. According
 to the ICR, assessments by the fiduciary team pointed to some of the most salient weaknesses in project
 implementation, and the fiduciary team brought up their concerns during the Bank’s portfolio review, thus
 providing an opportunity to increase the visibility of shortcomings to reach government officials at the
 central level.

 There were shortcomings in the quality of reporting. While ISRs and Aides-memoire were candid about the
 challenges being faced (ICR, p. 37), there was inconsistency between the findings and ratings, and
 monitoring documents did not provide clear follow-up on actions and potential solutions or sufficient
 information on the persistence of implementation challenges.

 Supervision of safeguards was inadequate. The ICR (p. 45) reported that there was no evidence in the
 ISRs that issues around the development of safeguards were adequately documented, that the first and
 only reference to safeguards appeared in the 6th ISR, and that the project did not develop guiding
 documents for the management of risks. Issues related to non-compliance with safeguards are discussed
 in Section 10a. According to the ICR (p. 42), the project also did not comply with the requirement to
 develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework, and its absence impeded the identification
 of risks. According to the ICR, this also meant that the project did not have any guidance on how to
 manage risks and how to conduct important processes such as public consultations and management of
 grievances. No ratings for safeguards were reported in the Bank’s Operations Portal.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated. The objective to improve the quality of services was well captured by an
 index indicator reflecting an array of quality aspects, while the utilization objective was captured in terms of
 volume of services delivered, but lacked coverage measures that were needed to demonstrate
 achievements in terms of proportions among targeted populations.

 According to the ICR (p. 40), there were shortcomings in intermediate results indicators. For some, there
 was insufficient information on how indicators were calculated. The indicator on health personnel receiving
 training was not clear, as there was no indication on personnel cadres to be trained or on training content.


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



 Some baselines were available, and others were to be determined through a baseline survey that was
 planned shortly after effectiveness.

 The Ministry of Public Health was responsible for M&E. It planned to use data from several sources: the
 existing Health Management Information System, PBF data collected by health facilities, verification data,
 and a planned impact evaluation whose objectives were to: (i) identify the effects of PBF on MCH services;
 (ii) identify key factors responsible for the project’s observed outcomes; and (iii) assess the cost-
 effectiveness of PBF as a strategy to improve coverage and quality (PAD, p. 15).



b. M&E Implementation
  Important milestones in M&E implementation did not take place (ICR, p. 41). The baseline survey was not
  carried out. The counter-verification of results did not take place. This was explained by the lack of
  sufficient funds to hire a counter-verification agency (ICR, p. 36). The impact evaluation was not
  undertaken. Issues related to verification were noted in Section 5. When PBF data became available in
  the latter part of the project, progress was reported through a web-portal dedicated to the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used for project monitoring and PBF payments. According to the ICR (p. 41), there was
  no evidence that central level officials accessed project data to inform their regular discussions, but M&E
  findings helped in designing the restructuring of the project, including for strengthening immunization
  capacity and emergency obstetric and neonatal care.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, under which the project
   was classified as Category B in view of increased risks of health care waste. The project planned to use the
   National Medical Waste Management Plan, that was reviewed, consulted upon, and revised during
   preparation. It was disclosed in April 2014 (Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet, p. 5, 4/18/2014).

   Implementation was limited to the period between 2018 and project closing in June 2020 (ICR, p. 42).
   Facilities were equipped with key supplies and equipment for infection control and prevention, including
   personal protective equipment and waste management equipment. Health facilities used PBF subsidies to
   procure some of these supplies. An environmental and social audit conducted at project closing provided
   information regarding compliance with environmental safeguards and the extent to which the plan was
   effectively implemented. According to the ICR (p. 42), the audit concluded that the plan was not available in
   about 80 percent of the facilities in the audit sample, that a large share of health facilities had incinerators
   that were not functioning, and that 80 percent of the facilities did not have qualified staff to operate them.

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



   The ICR also stated that the project did not comply with the requirement to develop an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (see section 8b).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management performance was deemed to be in the unsatisfactory range during most of the
   project period, and the Project Implementation Unit did not have a fiduciary team in place during the first
   three years of the project. Bank statements were not reconciled. There were significant weaknesses in the
   management of fixed assets and significant delays in the submission of audit reports. Performance
   improved moderately after the recruitment of the fiduciary team in 2017, but weaknesses persisted with
   weak internal control and internal auditing deficiencies. In procurement, one noteworthy issue was the
   delayed recruitment of a verification agency as previously discussed in Section 5. The ICR (p. 42) stated
   that, with active support from the task team procurement specialists, the project complied with World Bank
   procurement policies and procedures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project undertook environmentally friendly actions such as the use of solar panels for health facilities
   and the distribution of solar fridges that reduced the consumption of electricity (ICR, p. 27).



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                       IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                     This ICR Review rated efficiency
                                                                                     as modest because the project
                                                                                     was not efficiently implemented,
                                                                                     with significant and major
Outcome                            Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory     shortcomings, including very
                                                                                     high verification and
                                                                                     administrative costs, and
                                                                                     discontinuation of PBF health
                                                                                     services.
                                                                                     This ICR Review rated both
                                   Moderately            Moderately                  Quality-at-Entry and Quality of
Bank Performance
                                   Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              Supervision as moderately
                                                                                     unsatisfactory because of

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



                                                                                 significant shortcomings,
                                                                                 including lack of readiness,
                                                                                 insufficient implementation
                                                                                 support and proactiveness, and
                                                                                 inadequate follow-up and
                                                                                 reporting on the project’s non-
                                                                                 compliance with the
                                                                                 environmental safeguard policy.
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 46-49) identified a few lessons and provided relevant recommendations, including the
following lessons re-stated by IEG:

Increasing financial autonomy of health facilities contributes to improvements in the quality
of services. Under the project, and in addition to the use of service quality checklists, a large
number of health facilities used PBF funds to mobilize additional human resources, provide bonuses
that motivated staff to enhance performance, purchase drugs that were out of-stock in the
mainstream system, facilitate mobility for outreach services, and undertake infrastructure repairs.

Putting in place basic implementation arrangements to promote project readiness is equally
important to the development of substantive technical designs. Under the project, preparation
revolved around technical design, and relatively less on routine implementation arrangements and
processes. Funds could not adequately flow until basic implementation arrangements were in place.
A 4-year delay in recruiting an independent verification agency hindered PBF rollout and could have
been curtailed with certain preparatory steps, such as drawing up and validating terms of reference,
assessing of local and international markets for verification service providers, and engaging senior
government decision-makers on the importance of a timely process for approvals and contracting.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was results-oriented and very candid. It provided a complete critique of the project. Its analysis was
thorough, although, at times, the ICR's conclusions were not fully in line with its findings. The quality of
evidence was uneven, but shortcomings originated from the project itself and not from the ICR, that aptly
analyzed and highlighted related weaknesses. The Review was internally consistent with occasional lapses,

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TD Mother &Child Health Services Strengt (P148052)



such as in timelines or ambition levels. The ICR offered relevant recommendations and multiple lessons,
although the latter often reflected findings rather than lessons. The ICR followed guidelines, but the quality of its
substantive contents was moderated by a lengthy narrative that was not tightly written, with repetitions,
resulting in a main text of 49 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
