     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022456

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P104687                                    CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Colombia                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17041,TF-96465                          31-Jan-2018                                           27,527,186.06

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2010                                31-Jan-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            27,700,000.00                                    27,700,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             27,527,186.06                                    27,527,186.06

 Actual                                         27,527,186.06                                    27,527,186.06




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Richard Anson               John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective, as stated in both the PAD and the Grant Agreement, is “to promote the
   adoption of environment-friendly Silvo-pastoral Production Systems (SPS) for cattle ranching in Colombia's
   Project areas, to improve natural resource management, to enhance the provision of environmental services
   (biodiversity, land, carbon, and water), and to raise the productivity in participating farms”. For purposes of
   assessing the extent which the PDO was achieved in Section 4, this review will parse the PDO into 4 specific
   objectives, namely: Objective 1: to promote the adoption of environment-friendly Silvo-pastoral Production
   Systems (SPS) for cattle ranching in Colombia's Project areas; Objective 2: to improve natural resource

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



   management; Objective 3: to enhance the provision of environmental services (biodiversity, land, carbon, and
   water); and Objective 4: to raise the productivity in participating farms.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (i) Component 1: Improving productivity in participating cattle ranching/CR farms in Project areas,
   through SPS (Original Allocation: US$ 30.9 M, of which $1.7 M from GEF and $29.2 M counterpart
   contributions; Actual Allocation: US$ 37.8 M, of which US$3.3M from GEF, US$9.1M from UK/BEIS, and
   US$25.4M from counterpart contributions: note: all figures from ICR). In line with its component objectives,
   component 1 financed: (a) SPS training to national, regional, and local technical assistance (TA) providers;
   (b) selection of beneficiaries and baseline farm assessments; (c) TA to farmers for implementing SPS; (d)
   assistance to farmers in accessing financial resources to adopt SPS; (e) assessment/adaptation of SPS
   technologies applied in each project area;

   (ii) Component 2: Increasing connectivity and reducing land degradation through differentiated PES
   schemes (Original allocation: US$6.4M, of which US$3.8M from GEF and US$2.6M counterpart
   contributions; Actual Allocation: US$9.5M, of which US$1.9M from GEF, US$6.6M UK/BEIS and US$1M
   counterpart contributions). In line with its component objectives, Component 2 financed: (a) adjustment and
   implementation of a short-term payment for environmental services (PES) mechanism (Biodiversity
   Scheme), to reward producers who adopted SPS and conserved forest-enhancing biodiversity and
   landscape connectivity; and, (b) design/implementation of long-term, local PES mechanisms— financed by
   the users of environmental services (ES)—that would pay producers over the long term for adopting SPS
   that were financially unattractive to adopt, but important for providing ES;

   (iii) Component 3: Strengthening of subsector institutions, and dissemination and M&E efforts
   contributing to the broader adoption of environment-friendly SPS in Colombian cattle ranching
   (Original Allocation: US$1.4M, of which US$0.8M from GEF and US$0.6 counterpart contributions; Actual
   Allocation: US$4.8M, of which US$1.1M from GEF, US$2.9M UK/BEIS and US$0.8 counterpart
   contributions). In line with its component objectives, it financed: (a) monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of
   project activities, and applied research on SPS contributions to ES, including for climate change adaptation
   and mitigation; (b) broad dissemination of results, including the internalization of SPS in national plans and
   programs; and (c) strengthening and capacity-building of producer organizations;

   (iv) Component 4: Project management (Initial financing: US$3.0M, of which US$0.7M GEF and US$2.3
   counterpart contributions; Actual Allocation: US$3.7M, of which US$0.6M from GEF, US$1.8M UK/BEIS
   and US$1.3 counterpart contributions). This component financed improved intra- and inter-institutional
   capacity and coordination to develop, execute, and manage the project, and M&E of the project’s
   administrative activities.

   While the components and their main objectives and activities as summarized above remained the same,
   there were some revisions during implementation, which reflected increased funding and expanded

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



activities. The main changes by the end of the project were as follows (for details, see ICR, Section B): (a)
Component 1 costs increased 22 percent, reflecting project information dissemination, awareness-building
and TA costs for an expanded number of farmers; (b) Component 2 costs increased 50 percent, due to the
AF’s (Additional Financing’s) inclusion of demonstration farms, plant and seed multiplication as well as the
piloting of a new PES scheme; (c) Component 3 costs increased 225 percent, as a result of a stronger
focus on monitoring of results and support for broad SPS and results dissemination efforts; and (d)
Component 4 project management costs increased 21 percent, to cover an added two-year implementation
period.

Table 1 summarizes the key changes made to the Project during implementation, comprising 5 scenarios:
the original GEF grant; at AF (in 2014); Restructuring 1 (2017); Restructuring 2 (2018); Restructuring 3
(2019) (see ICR, paras. 17 and 18, and Table 2). These revisions are self-explanatory.

Table 1: CMSCR Project – Summary of Key Changes and Timeline

             Original GEF Additional Financing               Level 2             Level 2         Level 2
   Item      Grant (2010)    (2014) (US$20.7 M)           Restructuring      Restructuring Restructuring (
              (US$7.0 M)             (UK)                 (March 2017)      (January 2018)     May 2019)
  Focus     As specified in Carbon sequestration          PES schemes          RF adjusted   Reallocation of
            the PAD, 2010 and poverty reduction             adjusted                          funds among
                                                                             Reallocation of   expenditure
                                    New PES                Deforestation      funds among       categories
                                 scheme (PES-2)          hotspots increased    expenditure
                                     piloted                    to 4            categories

                              2 deforestation hotspots      RF adjusted       Closing date
                                       added                                extended to end-
                                                          Reallocation of    January, 2020
                                   RF adjusted             funds among
                                                            expenditure
                               Reallocation of funds         categories
                                among expenditure
                                    categories

                                   Closing date
                              extended to March 23,
                                      2017
            Original as per                                               No change to   No change to
   PDO                          No change to PDO         No change to PDO
                 PAD                                                          PDO            PDO
                              7 PDO indicators: 2                            6 PDO
                7 PDO
   PDO                          new, 3 revised, 2   6 PDO indicators: 1 indicators: 1 6 PDO indicators:
           indicators, per
Indicators                       downgraded to             revised       dropped; and 1   no change
                 PAD
                               intermediate level                            revised
                                                    Changes to 4 PDO
               Original                                 indicator end-   Increases to 2
  Project                  Increases to all six PDO                                      No changes in
            targets, per                             targets: increased PDO indicator
 Targets                     indicator end-targets                                      PDO end-targets
                 PAD                                for 1, decreased for   end-targets
                                                              3

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   (i) Project Costs: The total project costs at approval (2010) was US$41.9 million. There was additional
   financing/AF from the UK (US$20.7 million), which also was accompanied by a reduction of counterpart
   funding, resulting in a revised project cost of US$43.06. The actual cost at project closing was US$56.08
   million, which also reflected an increase in counterpart funding for component 1. For details on project costs
   and sources of financing, see ICR, Annex 3. The figures shown in Section 1 cover only WB/GEF/UK
   funding.

   (ii) Financing: Financing was provided by three sources (amounts at project closing): Global Environment
   Fund Grant/GEF (and executed by the World Bank), for US$7.0 million, from the outset; the United
   Kingdom’s Department for Business, Energy and Industry Strategy (UK/BEIS), for US$20.5 million; and the
   Colombian Cattle Ranching Association (FEDEGAN), the project implementing partners (TNC, CIPAV
   Fondo Accion), and local producers, totaling US$28.6 million.

   (iii) Borrower/Recipient Contribution: From FEDEGAN, the project implementing partners (TNC, CIPAV,
   Fondo Accion), and local producers, totaling US$28.6 million.

   (iv) Dates: The project was approved on March 16, 2010, became effective on July 2, 2010. On August 4,
   2014, Additional Financing/AF was mobilized and approved August 4, 2014, funded from GEF, as a Trust
   Fund, for US$20.7 million. The original closing date was January 31, 2018, with the actual closing date of
   January 31, 2020, for an extension of two years.

   (v) Restructurings: There were 3 restructurings/R: R1 in March 2017; R2 in January, 2018, and R3 in May
   2019. Table 1 above highlights the key changes for each restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were “to promote the adoption of environment-friendly Silvo-pastoral Production
Systems (SPS) for cattle ranching in Colombia's Project areas, to improve natural resource management, to
enhance the provision of environmental services (biodiversity, land, carbon, and water), and to raise the
productivity in participating farms”. The primary target beneficiaries were 2,000 small and medium cattle
ranches, based on a social assessment, rural legislation, selection criteria/screening procedures, and
located in five regions selected for their high biodiversity and proximity to strategic ecosystems and
protected areas (ICR, para. 11). The four sub-objectives were complementary, and their four supporting
components and activities (and subsequent adjustments during the three restructurings) demonstrated high
relevance to the priority needs of the target beneficiaries and areas, by also addressing key elements of the
Government’s national and sectoral policies/strategies. These objectives also supported and were strongly
aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, 2008 – 2011), and with the strategic objectives
of the GEF; the restructured project also was consistent with the Bank’s new CPS for Colombia.

The relevance of the Project’s objectives/components/activities throughout its implementation is evidenced
in several key Government, Bank and GEF documents, including (PAD: 2010; ICR, paras. 4 – 6):
a) Government of Colombia’s National Development Plan (NDP) (2006 – 2010) outlined six pillars,

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 23
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



               supported by various strategic programs, including high and sustainable growth and environmental
               stability; b) the Government’s follow-up NDPs emphasized strategic support for scaling up SPS adoption by
               farmers: (i) the NDP of 2014 – 2018 addresses the adverse impacts of cattle ranchers on natural
               ecosystems (e.g., deterioration of watersheds, forest land, soil quality, biodiversity) and expansion of the
               agricultural frontier; (ii) the NDP for 2018 – 2022 incorporated CMSCR results and lessons in strategies to
               promote sustainable, climate-resilient production, includes a strong role for SPS, including Presidential
               support; c) Bank’s CPS (2008 – 2011) responded directly to the NDP, by defining “areas of concentration
               and collaboration”, through contributing directly to key aspects of four of the six CPS strategic areas: Area I:
               Sustained Equitable Growth; Area II: Poverty Alleviation and Equity of Opportunity; Area III: Environment
               and Natural Resource Management; and Area IV: Peace. The Bank’s CPS for FY16 – 21 provides
               continued strong support for the PDOs of the CMSCR. See the respective CPS documents for further
               details. d) GEF’s strategic objectives (in 2010) included Biodiversity Strategic Program #5 (Fostering
               Markets for Biodiversity Goods and Services) and Land Degradation Strategic Program #1 (Supporting
               Sustainable Agriculture and Rangeland Management). The Project also provided data for three indicators
               applied by the GEF Biodiversity Program: (i) coverage in hectares of production systems that contribute to
               biodiversity conservation or the sustainable use of its components; (ii) integration of biodiversity aspects
               into sector policies and plans at a national level; and (iii) improved livelihoods.

               Within the context of these higher-level strategic objectives, the rationale for World Bank/GEF support to
               scale up SPS in Colombia was compelling. The CMSCR Project stemmed directly from the GoC’s
               commitment to improve the Cattle Ranching (CR) subsector, and to build on and scale-up the successes of
               the Bank-financed Regional Integrated Silvo-pastoral Approaches to Ecosystem Management Pilot Project
               (RSPS). The CMSCR Project aimed to leverage the successes of the small RSPS, across more diverse
               regions of Colombia, and adapted by larger numbers and types of cattle ranchers. The project would rely
               on the combined knowledge and expertise of the World Bank, local players and GoC in forming alliances
               with partners/stakeholders, especially FEDEGAN, to validate and scale-up a mix of incentives to induce
               farmers to convert their production systems - including land-use strategies - to SPS, thus linking and
               integrating productive investments with environmental benefits.

               The innovative nature of the project, the project’s AF and three restructurings further enhanced the strategic
               relevance and results of project interventions. Also, the level of total resources for the project was
               commensurate for achieving the objectives. Accordingly, the project’s overall relevance of objectives was
               rated “High”.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective


                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



To promote the adoption of environment-friendly Silvo-pastoral Production Systems (SPS) for cattle ranching
in Colombia's Project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): While the project's design included a results framework (RF), the PAD did not
develop a ToC because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR reconstructed a ToC
that was consistent with the PAD, the AF and the 3 restructurings (para. 7, and illustrated in Figure 1), which
explained how the four inter-related objectives of adoption of SPS, enhanced Natural Resources
Management (NRM) and environmental services, and increased productivity of milk production would be
achieved. This ToC, which is illustrated in the ICR (refer to the figure at the top of p. 13), integrated these 4
objectives, to show cause-effect linkages to achieve the objectives.

The ToC for achieving objective 1 of expanded adoption of SPS included the following logic and linkages
between the four components: (a) removal of on-farm barriers to the adoption of sustainable CR practices; (b)
support/implementation of appropriate incentive schemes, including relevant technical assistance, to reward
cattle farmer actions toward sustainable land use; and (c) actions to stimulate increased milk productivity.

Critical assumptions in the ToC (ICR, figure on p.13) with respect to objective 1 were sound, and generally
held for the life of the project (as well as for the other objectives below), and included : cattle farmers are able
to overcome financial constraints to access existing SPS instruments; payment for environmental services
(PES) supported by the project improves the financial attractiveness of SPS, leading farmers to voluntarily
adopt them; productivity increases in milk production induced by project actions were sufficient to promote
adoption of SPS practices. An implied assumption which was not explicit in the ICR, was the appropriateness
of the SPS technologies/practices, suited to the various agro-ecological zones The responses from the
Bank’s project team provided explicit clarification on the specific ways the project strengthened innovative
SPS-based research activities and strong linkages with the extension delivery systems to support cattle
ranchers (see IEG Guide Questions and Team responses: 5/10/21).

Key Indicators and Supporting Evidence: Based on the results chain delineated in the ToC, the key indicators
and supporting results/evidence which are linked to objective 1, are summarized below (see ICR, Annex 1):

(a) Outputs: With respect to component 1 (improving productivity): (1) Number of municipalities where CR
beneficiaries are located: No target / Result: 87; (2) Number of project professionals/technicians trained in
SPS technologies: No target / Result: 377; (3) Number of external professionals/technicians trained in SPS
technologies: No target / Result: 314; (4) Number of beneficiaries from the training and dissemination plan:
No target / Result: 12,204; (5) Number of training and dissemination events: No target / Result: 457 events;
(6) Number of participants in events: No target / Result: 12,204; (7) Number of small cattle ranchers not part
of the project sensitized through “technology brigades” for the use of sustainable cattle ranching technologies
and tools: Target: 3000 / Result: 2,807; 93.5% of the target; (8) Number of trainings in access to credit for
professionals of banks and other actors: No target / Actual: 6; (9) Number of events on access to credit for
cattle rancher beneficiaries of the project: No target /Actual: 38; (10) Number of cattle ranchers participating in
events related to access to credit: No target / Actual: 588; (11) Number of beneficiaries sensitized on land
use: No target / Actual: 408.

With respect to component 2 (increasing connectivity and reducing land degradation via PES schemes): (12)
Number of demonstration farms installed/strengthened (until project closing): No target / Actual: 43; (13)
Number of focal plants species identified and monitored in project areas: No target / Actual: 1,269; (14)
Number of focal plants species produced/delivered (Mimosa tranae; Albizia saman; Erythrina spp; Escallonia

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



paniculate; Crescentia cujete): No target / Actual: 0.8 million; (15) Number of hectares of natural forest
enriched: No target / Actual: 3,466;

With respect to component 3: (strengthening subsector institutions and M&E systems): (16) Number of
courses for technicians via the National Services for Learning – SENA: No target / Actual: 3; (17) Number of
knowledge transfer events with SENA to strengthen ranching capabilities: No target/ Actual:3; (18) Number of
instructors participated with SENA to strengthen ranching capabilities: No target/Actual: 100; (19)
Development of a project website (as target): Actual: completed; 100% of target; (20) Number of testimonials
of the project for the audiovisual library (images/videos): No target / Actual: 50; (21) Number of publications.
No target / Actual: 30.

(b) Intermediate Results (outputs and outcomes): With respect to Component 1 (Improving productivity
through SPS): (1) Area converted to intensive SPS in participating farms. Target: 4,500 / Actual: 4,640
(103%); (2) Number of cattle ranching farmers sensitized and trained in SPS and sustainable cattle ranching
production systems. Target: 18,500 / Actual: 24,416 (132%); (3) Number of professionals/technicians trained
in SPS technologies. Target: 550/Actual: 691 (126%).

With respect to Component 2 (Increasing connectivity through differentiated PES schemes): (4) Number of
focal plant species used/conserved in cattle ranching farms. Target 50 / Actual: 50 (100%).

With respect to Component 3 (Strengthening subsector institutions and M&E systems): (5) Number of
strategic alliances established with key public/private, national/regional entities for the promotion of SPS in
Colombia. Target: 10 / Actual: 11; 110% of target; (6) M&E system established and providing timely/relevant
information on project’s direct/indirect impacts in aid of decision-making processes. Target: Yes / Actual: Yes;
100%; (7) Communication strategy implemented for different target audiences (policymakers and farmers).
Target: Yes / Actual: Yes; 100% of target; (8) Information system in place for reporting farms adopting SPS,
including those not directly participating in the project. Target: Yes / Actual: Yes; 100% of target.

(c) Outcome Indicators: 1) Area under environment-friendly cattle ranching production systems implemented
in project areas: Target: 84,000 /Actual: 100,522; 120% of target; (2) Land area where sustainable land
management practices have been adopted as a result of the project: Target: 35,000 / Actual: 38,390; 108% of
target.

In summary, while many of the output indicators were not assigned targets, [as can be seen from the above
performance indicators, and taking into account the AF and 3 restructurings], at the outcome and intermediate
levels, the project achieved all, and in many cases exceeded, the original and revised targets. Accordingly,
the rating for progress toward objective 1 is rated “High.”



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve natural resource management.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)




Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s integrated ToC (ICR, p.13) as discussed for objective 1 is also applicable for
objective 2. More specifically, the ToC shows the provision of: appropriate technical assistance and training;
adequate incentives (e.g., PES, co-financing of SPS), also resulting in reduced soil erosion; appropriate NRM
technologies suited for the diverse Areas. Also, the key assumptions for achieving objective 2 are generally
sound, while also noting the need to make more explicit the strengthening of the research system to ensure a
sustainable flow of appropriate technologies for improving NRM, over the diverse project areas.

Key Indicators and Supporting Evidence: Based on the results chain and the ToC, the key indicators and
supporting evidence of the results are summarized below: (see ICR, Annex 1, Table A1.B.1; there are some
indicators which are common for both objectives 2 and 3):

(a) Outputs: With respect to component 2 (increasing connectivity and reducing land degradation in
participating cattle ranching farms through differentiated PES schemes): 1) Number of contracts signed under
PES1 scheme. No target / Actual: 1,595; (2) Design of local PES mechanisms financed by users with long-
term payment. No target / Actual: Yes; (3) Number of contracts signed for exp-post payment under PES2
scheme. No target / Actual: 274; (4) Number of trees and forage produced and delivered to cattle ranchers.
No target / Actual: 3.1 million; (5) Number of hectares under SPS using plant material. No target / Actual:
33,750; (6) Number of trees planted using light machinery. No target / Actual: 408,000; (7) Areas with
implemented strategies of natural regeneration. No target / Actual: 18,603; (8) Land use M&E. No target /
Actual: 127,308 hectares; (9) Socio-economic M&E. No target / Actual: Yes; (10) M&E of Biodiversity in
farms. No target / Actual: Yes; (11) Number of bird species identified and monitored. No target / Actual: 522;
(12) Number of beetle species identified and monitored. No target / Actual: 230; (13) Increase of natural
variety of species identified by monitoring. No target / Actual: 30%; (14) Design and development of a web
application for biodiversity and carbon. No target / Actual: Yes; (15) Design and development of a web
platform for modeling, and publication of geographic services INFOTNC. No target / Actual: Yes; (16)
Design/implementation of a long-term PES scheme pilot (Cuenca Water Fund). No target /Actual: Yes; (17)
Creation of a green market dialogue. No target / Actual: Yes; (18) Design of 12 criteria for sustainable cattle
ranching. No target / Actual: Yes; (19) Number of participating farms where an analysis/evaluation of the
sustainable cattle ranching criteria was performed. No target / Actual: 10; (20) MOU with ASOBRANGUS to
elaborate a business case for the implementation of good practices on sustainable cattle ranching: No target;
Actual: 1 MOU;

(b) Intermediate Result Indicators: With respect to Component 2: (increasing connectivity and reducing land
degradation in participating cattle ranching farms through differentiated PES schemes): (1) Area under PES1
(biodiversity) scheme in project areas. Target 49,000 / Actual: 60,158; 123% of target; (2) Area under PES2
(carbon) scheme in project areas. Target 4,000 / Actual: 4,240; 106% of target; (3) Number of cattle ranching
farms benefitting from a PES1 (biodiversity) scheme. Target: 1,700 / Actual: 1,866; 110% of target; (4)
Number of cattle ranching farms benefitting from a PES2 (carbon) scheme in project areas. Target: 1,255 /
Actual: 1,341; 107% of target; (5) Number of market-based /consumer initiatives designed (including PES
mechanism) supporting broader adoption of SPS by end-project. Target: 2/Actual: 2; 100%; (6) Number of
focal plant species used/conserved in cattle ranching farms (25 of which are globally important species).
Target: 50 / Actual: 50; 100% of target.

(c) Outcome Indicators: (1) Improved presence of globally important biodiversity in project areas, measured
by an increase in the ESI resulting from the adoption of environment friendly SPS in participating farms, over
baseline. Target: 1.5 million / Actual: 1.4; 93% of target; and (2) Reduction of GHG emissions from avoided
deforestation and forest degradation and increase in carbon sequestration at the farm level through the

                                                                                                 Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



adoption of environment- friendly SPS in participating farms. Target: 1,600,000 / Actual: 1,565,026 ; 98% of
target.

As can be seen from the above performance indicators, and taking into account the AF and 3 restructurings,
the project achieved most (90%+) targets, and in some cases exceeded, the original and revised targets for
objective 2. Many of the output indicators were not assigned targets. Accordingly, the rating toward objective
2 is “Substantial”.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance the provision of environmental services (biodiversity, land, carbon, and water).

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s integrated ToC (ICR, Figure 1) as discussed for objectives 1 and especially
2, is also applicable for objective 3, based on a results chain which also shows the relevant activities, and
resulting outputs and outcomes, which together enhanced the provision of environmental services (in terms of
biodiversity, land, carbon and water) to participating/beneficiary cattle ranchers.

Also, the key assumptions for achieving objective 3 are generally sound, while also noting the need to ensure
the appropriate mix and type of environmental services to be provided to the different types of cattle ranchers
and agro-ecological livestock zones.

Key Indicators and Supporting Evidence: Based on the results chain and the ToC, the key indicators and
supporting results/evidence which are linked to objective 3 (and also contributing to objective 2, per above),
outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes, and according to each of the project’s components and
targets, include (see ICR, Annex 1, Table A1.B.1):

a. Outputs: With respect to component 2 (increasing connectivity and reducing land degradation in
participating cattle ranching farms through differentiated PES schemes): (1) Number of contracts signed
under PES1 scheme. No target / Actual: 1,595; (2) Design of local PES mechanisms financed by users with
long-term payment. No target / Actual: Yes; (3) Number of contracts signed for ex-post payment under PES2
scheme. No target / Actual: 274. Land use M&E. No target / Actual: 127,308 hectares; (4) Socio-economic
M&E. No target / Actual: Yes; (5) M&E of Biodiversity in farms. No target / Actual: Yes; (6) Design and
development of a web platform for modeling, and publication of geographic services INFOTNC. No target /
Actual: Yes; (7) Design and implementation of a long-term PES scheme pilot (the Agua Vivo Cuenca Water
Fund). No target / Actual: Yes; and (8) Creation of a green market dialogue. No target / Actual: Yes.

b. Intermediate Result Indicators: With respect to Component 2: (increasing connectivity and reducing land
degradation in participating cattle ranching farms through differentiated PES schemes): (1) Area under PES1
(biodiversity) scheme in project areas. Target 49,000 / Actual: 60,158 (123%); (2) Area under PES2 (carbon)
scheme in project areas. Target 4,000 / Actual: 4,240 (106%); (3) Number of cattle ranching farms benefitting
from a PES1 scheme. Target: 1,700 / Actual: 1,866 (110%); (4) Number of cattle ranching farms benefitting

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



from a PES2 scheme. Target: 1,255 / Actual: 1,341 (107%); (5) Number of market-based/consumer initiatives
designed (including PES mechanism) supporting broader adoption of SPS by end of the project. Target: 2 /
Actual: 2 (100%).

c. Outcome Result Indicators: (1) Improved presence of globally important biodiversity in project areas,
measured by an increase in the ESI resulting from the adoption of environment friendly SPS in participating
farms, over baseline: Target: 1.5 million ESI; Actual: 1.4 million; 93% of target; (2) Reduction of GHG
emissions from avoided deforestation and forest degradation and increase in carbon sequestration at the
farm level through the adoption of environment- friendly SPS in participating farms. Target: 1.6 million GHG
emissions; Actual: 1.6 million GHG emissions; 98% of target.

As can be seen from the above performance indicators, and taking into account the AF and 3 restructurings,
the project achieved most (90%+), and in some cases exceeded, the original and revised targets for objective
3. Many of the output indicators were not assigned targets. Accordingly, the rating for progress toward
objective 3 is “Substantial”.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To raise the milk productivity in participating farms.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s integrated ToC (ICR, Figure 1) shows a results chain which together will
contribute to increased milk productivity by the participating/beneficiary cattle ranchers. More specifically, the
ToC shows the provision of: appropriate SPS training and technical assistance; appropriate production
technologies/practices for different regions; market-based instruments to get access to finance adequate
incentives. Accordingly, these activities combined to generate increased milk productivity.

Also, the key assumptions for achieving objective 3 are generally sound, while also noting the need to make
more explicit the strengthening of the research system to ensure a sustainable flow of appropriate
technologies for ensuring sustainable milk productivity increases, involving diverse farmers and agro-
ecological zones.

Key Indicators and Supporting Evidence: Based on the results chain and the ToC, the key indicators and
supporting results/evidence which are linked to objective 4, are summarized below (see ICR, Annex 1, Tables
A1.B.1):

a. Outputs: With respect to component 1: (Improving productivity in participating cattle ranching farms in
project areas through SPS): (1) Number of producers trained in sustainable mgt. of their cattle ranching
company in production of milk and/or beef, including registry mgt.: No target / Actual: 4,100; (2) Percentage
increase in milk production in SPS farms. Target 10%; Actual: 32.6%; 326% of target; (3) Percentage
increase of animal load production in SPS farms. Target 10% per hectare / Actual: 24%; 244% of target; (4)


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



                            Increase of milk productivity in liters. No target / Actual: 1,708.5 per hectare; (5) Percentage increase in milk
                            quality. No target / Actual: 3%; (6) Percentage increase in forage supply: No target; Actual: 24.8%.

                            b. Intermediate Result Indicators: With respect to component 1: Improving productivity in participating cattle
                            ranching farms in project areas through SPS): (1) Increase in stocking rate (LU/ha) in intervened
                            areas/participating farms: Target: 10 / Actual: 15; 150% of target.

                            c. Outcome Indicators: (1) Increase in the production of milk per intervened hectare in participating farms:
                            Target: 10% / Actual: 17%; 170% of target; (2) Number of cattle ranching farms benefitting from project
                            instruments (technical assistance, PES or support for the establishment of on-farm nurseries): Target: 4,000 /
                            Actual: 4,100; 103% of target.

                            In summary, the above performance indicators show that the project achieved all of its targets, and in some
                            cases exceeded, the original and revised targets for objective 4. Also, many of the output indicators were not
                            assigned targets, while showing positive results. Accordingly, the rating for progress toward objective 4 is
                            “High”.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, since the project achieved most of its objectives, as follows:

                                1. Two of the four objectives are rated “High”, and the other two objectives are rated “Substantial”;
                                2. Most of performance indicators have a strong output orientation, with limited measurable outcomes;
                                3. There are many specific output objectives for which there were no assigned targets, thereby making it
                                   difficult to assess the extent of project performance; and
                                4. Some of the output, intermediate and outcome targets were nearly 100% achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Overall, the project performance and results, and accompanying analyses, demonstrated an efficiency rating of
   substantial, based on the various evidenced-based tools applied and presented in the ICR (paras. 54 - 61, and
   Annex 4, also informed by the project’s impact evaluation study and Government’s final technical report, 2020).


                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



Although the indicative economic and financial analyses (EFA) in the CMSCR PAD (2010) and AF Project Paper
concluded that the adoption of SPS and Intensive Silvo-pastoral Systems (iSPS) would be profitable and
sustainable, they provided no specific data on estimated/expected economic or financial returns which could be
compared to the results of the ex-post analyses presented in the ICR. The final EFA presented in the ICR
comprises four elements: economic, financial, climate variability resilience, and project leverage.

(a) Economic Analyses: The economic analyses presented in the ICR demonstrates that the project was an
efficient investment that “simultaneously created monetary and social value” (ICR, para. 55). Detailed estimates
of cash flows over ten years in nine of the most representative cattle ranching archetypes in Colombia, were
extrapolated to the entire area where the project drove changes in land use. These cash flows were estimated
with/without the project, using an incremental analysis methodology. A social price of carbon of US$40/t CO2
was used to calculate the value of carbon captured by the SPS. Results were calculated for three scenarios.

Based on those results, the CMSCR Project created sizable economic value, with an economic internal rate of
return (EIRR) ranging from 24.5 - 30.1 percent (with a discount rate of 9%), depending on the scenario, and net
present value (NPV) ranging from US$1,650/ha to US$1,935/ha. At the project level, total economic value
(Project NPV) was estimated to range from US$63 million (M) to US$74M, depending on the scenario. Also,
these results were calculated with and without the carbon price to estimate the global environmental value
created by the project. Total value from carbon capture driven by the project is an estimated US$66M (para. 55).

(b) Financial Analyses: These analyses evaluate the financial return offered by SPS investments to farmers and
finds that SPS technology has “strong potential to reach scale and deepen impact based on market forces”
(ICR, para. 56). Cash flows and key financial indicators were estimated for nine representative production
archetypes in nominal terms, discounted at 14.6 % (the cost of equity of investments in Colombia), and
extrapolated to the entire area where project SPS interventions were implemented. The financial internal rate of
return (FIRR) and NPV were estimated for all nine archetypes under two scenarios: (i) with the project, to reflect
the financial return to SPS investments; and (ii) with the project, and taking the environmental impact of SPS
into account, using the carbon price in Colombia’s emerging carbon market.

Estimates for the two scenarios were based on the incremental cash flows generated, compared to the cash
flows under conventional ranching. The results show that financial returns to investments in SPS (Scenarios 1
and 2) far outstrip cash flows to conventional ranching. At the same time, the analyses yield a sizable
environmental impact, which will contribute to the sustainability of the CR subsector in the long term (Annex 4).

(c) Other Efficiency Analyses: (i) Variability Analyses: This analysis indicates that the greater environmental
resilience of SPS compared to traditional systems creates economic value to strengthen the long-term
sustainability of cattle ranching. The analysis compares milk and cattle production losses incurred under
conventional CR with losses incurred on ranches adopting SPS, based on the risk and duration of climate
variability. The improvements in productivity resulting from SPS serve to shield producers from the worst
impacts of that variability. Producers adopting SPS would avoid losses in milk production valued at US$1.5M
and losses in cattle production valued at US$483K. These are the revenues that CRs are most likely to protect
as climate variability grows. However, the ICR recognizes that iSPS - are highly vulnerable to droughts and
floods during the first year of establishment. (ii) Project “Leveraging” Results: The EFA analyses presented in
the ICR also show that the CMSCR Project leveraged and created significant economic and environmental
value, including: (a) increased private capital in the form of investments by CRs; (b) increased economic and
environmental value. The resulting estimate of the multiple of invested capital (MIC) indicates that the project




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



leveraged/created US$3.6 for every US$1 provided by funding agencies (GEF, BEIS) and partners (see Annex
4 for further details).

Sensitivity analysis: A sensitivity analysis looked at the effects of changes of plus/minus 15 percent in milk
prices, cattle prices, production volumes, labor costs, and total costs, as well as the social price of carbon.
Returns generally remained positive across numerous scenarios, although a decline of more than 15 percent in
production volumes and total costs drove returns similar to the social discount rate (of 9%).

(iii) Implementation Efficiency Analyses: Implementation efficiency was substantial, based on these results: (a)
The PDO Indicators, and most Intermediate Outcome Indicators, were substantially met or surpassed, and
execution of Grant funds reached 99 percent. (b) Even though project momentum was curbed initially by
complex methodologies for verifying land use, inter-agency coordination issues, and credit constraints,
implementation under the AF accelerated, due to the demonstration farms and tree/seed production strategies,
and the flexible design/implementation of pilot PES1 and PES2 schemes. While project implementation
exceeded by two years the planned AF closing date, this enabled a complex and important project to
demonstrate a high level of achievement on its PDO Indicators (partially attributed to the use of exchange rate
gains/Colombian devaluation, to expand project activities).

Based on the above efficiency analyses, including a sensitivity analyses on various key parameters, overall
efficiency of the CMSCR Project is rated “Substantial”.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              24.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Given adjustments in some target values at PDO and Intermediate Outcome levels, the ICR Team assessed the
need for a split assessment of the overall outcome rating. Taking into account adjustments made by the AF
(2014) and the 2017 Restructuring, and final project outcomes, the consensus of the ICR team and reviewers
was that the case for a split assessment was not compelling, for the following reasons: (a) The CMSCR was an
experimental operation requiring adaptive management, based on frequent assessment of progress and
relevant adjustments, in line with project objectives; (b) Experience from Year 1 showed that SPS uptake was
affected by dynamic contextual circumstances requiring periodic adjustments, consistent with project objectives;

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



(c) Targets revised by the AF were generally higher than appraisal for most indicators; (d) The 2017
Restructuring reduced some targets in response to monitored field outcomes and key issues; (e)The
aggregated target value for hectares under environmental-friendly, improved land management practices was
increased at the PDO level; (f) The aggregated target value for hectares under environmental-friendly, improved
land management practices was increased at the PDO level; (g) All PDO level indicators either exceeded or
substantially achieved target values.

Overall Outcome rating is Satisfactory, based on the following assessment of relevant evidence: (a) High
ongoing relevance of the PDO: There were no shortcomings in current relevance of the PDO to the Bank's CPF
objectives (FY2016-21). As described in Section 3, the PDO at closing was well-aligned with GOC objectives;
high-level GoC commitments on SPS; and continuing relevant assistance by project and other development
partners; (b) Substantial rating for Efficacy: The project achieved its objectives. Achievement under PDO
Outcome targets was strong: four of the six PDO Outcome targets were exceeded, one achieved 98 percent
and the other 93 percent. Most Intermediate Outcome targets were achieved or exceeded. (c) Substantial
rating for Efficiency: The CMSCR pilot proved to be an efficient investment, which simultaneously created
monetary and social value, and generated impressive environmental impacts, thereby suggesting the potential
for long-term sustainability of the project investments.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is moderate risk to sustaining the project’s outcomes and contribution to the project’s expected
impacts. The ICR provides sound evidence and rationale for this conclusion, while also highlighting various
mitigation measures promoted by the project during implementation. The main risks and corresponding
mitigation measures include (ICR, para. 86): (a) There is the risk that the SPS adoption measures will not be
sustained by the target beneficiaries ex-post, particularly given the cessation of project monitoring and
TA. However, this potential environmental “rebound” effect is expected to be mitigated by stakeholders’
greater capacity, skills and awareness, as well as GoC commitment to SPS; (b) The business case for SPS
is not financially attractive and viable at farm level: This assertion is countered by the strong evidence
generated by the project, which demonstrated that SPS is indeed financially viable at the farm level, and
therefore, scalable, with the right type of support; and (c) The lack of alignment and harmonization by other
project partners to ensure continuity. The ICRR shows that Project partners are actively engaged in
initiatives to ensure the continuity of the project framework in their own regions and beyond, involving: (i)
New programs; (ii) Strategic alliances, including about 30 alliances between project institutions and outside
partners, which are yielding strategic results; (iii) relevant policy and planning activities, supported by
various development partners; (iv) Financing of similar type of investments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



  Overall, quality of entry was Moderately Satisfactory, based on the following evidence (ICR, para. 8):
  (i) The Bank had developed extensive knowledge experience through the predecessor pilot project and
  the non-lending technical studies, which both provided valuable inputs to the project’s design. (ii) The
  PDO was well-aligned with WB and GoC strategies and was designed to demonstrate proof of concept
  across critical, intersecting environmental and productive themes; (iii) RF indicators captured operational
  objectives and the multi-themed PDO. These were adjusted/enhanced during the AF and restructurings,
  and supported by a comprehensive and well-conceived, albeit an ambitious M&E plan (see Section 9(a)
  below); (iv) Beneficiary targeting and selection were appropriate, although a bit complex and
  cumbersome (e.g., extensive up-front documentation requirements, which contributed to processing
  delays); (v) Readiness to implement was satisfactory, while noting some shortcomings in the analytics of
  project design and also accommodating some adjustments during implementation as part of the project’s
  learning-by-doing approach; (vi) Various design assumptions were flawed and overly optimistic,
  especially regarding access to credit (for iSPS), technical capacities, scope for scaling-up geographically,
  underestimation of planting materials for establishing SPS; (vii) Targets for land conversion were overly
  optimistic, based on overly optimistic assumptions of the numbers of beneficiaries and the conversion
  rate of beneficiary-to-area adopting SPS, and the constraints to meeting up-front costs, especially for
  iSPS; (viii) Project risk identification was sound, with rational mitigation measures, but in retrospect, some
  unanticipated gaps emerged, especially with respect to the challenges in farmer adoption of the
  innovative SPS and iSPS technologies and access to credit.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Overall, the Bank’s quality of supervision was Satisfactory, based on the following evidence, involving
 specific initiatives taken by the Bank team with respect to factors inside its direct control, and also taking
 positive steps to influence factors within and outside the direct control of implementing entities (ICR,
 III).

 With respect to factors within the Bank’s direct control: (i) The Bank team acted decisively, especially in
 response to the results of the mid-term review, pivoting to resolve implementation issues. For example, the
 Bank team took appropriate and timely initiatives during the AF and three restructurings, with positive
 results regarding: challenges in implementing the Payments for Environmental Services scheme payments;
 and addressing critical operational, technical and financial issues arising during implementation (ICR,
 Section I and Annex 1(C)). (ii) The Bank played a catalytic role in preserving a stable implementation
 environment and arrangements for the project in the face of political pressure. Early in 2016, the Ministry of
 Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) requested that project implementation responsibilities be
 transferred from FEDEGAN to MADR, which could have impacted the private-driven, innovative nature of
 this intervention and further delayed implementation of the project. The Bank team acted decisively, to
 retain the fundamental role of FEDEGAN; (iii) The Bank’s project team reflected continuity and technical
 competence of the various Task Team Leaders/TTLs and team members, coupled with the confidence they
 engendered with counterparts; and (iv) The Bank team helped ensure compliance with the project’s
 fiduciary and safeguard requirements.



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



 With respect to factors within and outside the direct control of Government/implementing entities, the Bank
 provided sound and timely technical support to work out: (i) effective solutions to facilitate the selection of
 beneficiaries, provide TA over a wide geographical area, and induce land conversion. (ii) a sound approach
 and adjustments to the PES2 Carbon scheme, which was piloted with AF funds, and proved the
 importance of mainstreaming climate-finance schemes, which supported the up-front costs of the
 establishment of SPS, especially iSPS, and further supported by expanding beneficiary access to credit;
 (iii) improvements in PES implementation logistics, through adopting a streamlined method for validating
 land-use changes, arising from the results of a comprehensive mid-term review, with an active Bank role;
 (iv) successful approach to PES, which achieved proof of concept through adaptation actions, based on
 rigorously monitored field outcomes; and (v) appropriate strengthening actions to enhance climate
 resilience and the knowledge and application of water management practices. (e.g., through the project-
 supported activities in research and extension).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the M&E design was substantial, for the following reasons (ICR, para. 73): (i) The Theory of
 Change was complex, but the results chain was coherent. Complexity resulted from the intersection of
 three distinct streams of activity to achieve an ambitious PDO, and the project’s high technical content. The
 RF indicators adequately captured land transformation and its associated productivity and environmental
 benefits, but the level of detail on assessing land conversion’s benefits added complexity. (ii) The PAD
 provided specific guidance for measuring the impact of introducing SPS on the provision of Environmental
 Services (ES). The ES to be measured included biodiversity conservation, land restoration, carbon
 sequestration and water quality. Guidance was also included to formally evaluate the impact of SPS on
 farm productivity, and the contribution of specific land uses to sedimentation and run-off on selected farms.
 In practice, the ambitious M&E framework outlined was treated as advisory, not prescriptive. (iii) M&E
 features and arrangements were technically sophisticated and sound, and included the following features:
 (a) a geo-referencing methodology to measure changes in land use at baseline, end-line, and annually,
 supported by training of extension workers to manage/use these tools; (b) a two-pronged approach to
 measure milk productivity improvements arising from the SPS measures; (c) an improved environmental
 services index to monitor biodiversity, and actual biodiversity monitoring on the ground, to capture the
 effects of different project interventions and practices; and, (d) properly defined M&E roles/responsibilities
 and a clear set of M&E deliverables.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation proceeded smoothly, and was Substantial, as follows (see ICR, para. 74): (i) The
  system evolved responsively, incorporating new approaches and enhancing capacities to assess impacts
  of SPS, and providing lessons to improve implementation; (ii) Notwithstanding the challenges in the
  design of the results framework, M&E data were collected and analyzed in a methodologically sound
  manner, generally consistent with the PAD’s M&E design; and (iii) Changes were required to simplify the
  RF, increase its operational, rather than research, focus, and facilitate measurement: the AF and project
  restructurings introduced important improvements in the RF and M&E system (ICR, Annex 1 (C); (iv)
  Environmental Services were monitored/measured effectively and regularly; for specific examples, see
  ICR, para. 74; (v) Robust methodologies were piloted and validated to measure climate benefits:
  Reductions in GHG emissions were calculated based on estimates of CO2 sequestered as a result of
  project activities, including forest conservation; (vi) Impact evaluation succeeded in attributing changes in
  productivity and environmental variables to project activities: A quasi-experimental exercise assessed, in
  depth, the productivity results of different SPS approaches. For details, see ICR, para. 74; (vii) Integrated
  monitoring of SPS’ production and environmental outcomes supported the business case, regarding the
  socioeconomic and environmental benefits associated with the different land uses promoted by the
  project, and thereby paving the way for scaling up; (viii) The costly full geo-referencing methodology for
  monitoring PES-related land use was substituted by a more cost- effective, self-reporting methodology
  (ICR, Annex 7); (ix) Critical research initiatives/studies were conducted, complemented by activities to
  create awareness and provide SPS training (ICR, see Annex 6.6 and Annex 8).



c. M&E Utilization
  The Project’s M&E system generated information/findings that were utilized effectively, especially given
  the project’s pilot nature, based on the following evidence (ICR, para. 75, and Annexes 7 and 9): (i) M&E
  data were used extensively to generate accessible knowledge products. Beneficiaries and extension
  workers consulted these sources to implement project strategies which supported SPS technology
  adoption. M&E data findings were disseminated widely through a sound communications strategy to
  expand SPS awareness and adoption, and were the catalyst/evidence for adjustments to project
  mechanisms and approaches; (ii) Data generated by the M&E system were used to inform policy and
  programming. Dissemination of early project results strengthened the case for converting land to SPS,
  which translated into the inclusion of SPS targets in the NDP 2018–23 and the national PES policy and
  influenced other livestock policies and strategies.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The CMSCR Project was classified as Category B (partial assessment) because potentially negative
   impacts were expected to be local and limited. The project triggered the following safeguards:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Pest
   Management (OP 4.09). (i) Environmental Assessment (ICR, para. 78): Overall environmental

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



  safeguards compliance (ref. the above cited Ops/BPs) was satisfactory, based on the following actions and
  results: (a) an environmental assessment was prepared at design stage; (b) appropriate measures were
  taken to mitigate negative environmental effects and were mainstreamed throughout the project; (c) the
  project strengthened the capacity of partners to implement environmental safeguards, which also reinforced
  local approaches to sustainable natural resource management; (d) the project generated positive impacts
  on the protection, maintenance, and restoration of natural habitats, increased landscape connectivity and
  functionality, and improved the provision of ecosystem services; (e) the project’s integrated approach to
  agricultural extension improved local capacity for enhancing soil and water management and for helping to
  diversify production systems to protect against losses from climate variability; (f) the project strengthened
  biodiversity monitoring systems, which were tailored to each intervention area, and also expanded
  knowledge of the socio-economic impacts of SPS, iSPS and PES; (g) the project’s extension and TA
  activities built local capacity to: track good pest management practices in cattle ranching and reduce the
  use of chemical inputs. (ii) Social Assessment (ICR, para. 79): Compliance with social safeguards was
  satisfactory, based on the following evidence: (a) Social risks defined at appraisal included: limited
  participation by small-scale producers lacking funds to adopt SPS; farmer participation involving coercion or
  projects in contested lands; and potential conflicts with municipalities not selected for project interventions;
  (b) The project presented no social risks associated with respect to: (i) promotion of extensive cattle
  ranching (CR) or conflicts with peasants and small- scale producers; or (ii) indigenous peoples and
  community lands (project areas did not overlap with indigenous or Afro Colombian territories and project
  interventions had no indirect impacts on these groups); (c) No involuntary resettlement, land acquisition, or
  infrastructure development occurred. Municipalities with low levels of internal displacement were selected to
  curb risks associated with local participation and land tenure; (d) Prospective beneficiaries had to comply
  with legal requirements (e.g., access to land); (e) To encourage participation, a communication campaign
  informed producers about project benefits; (f) Project incentives reduced the constraints on SPS adoption,
  including financial; and (g) SPS adoption increased local incomes and livelihoods by reducing on-farm
  production costs, and by increasing productivity and the demand for local labor.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management (FM) (ICR, para. 81): The Bank’s Implementation Summary Reports (ISRs) rated
  Project FM performance as “Moderately Satisfactory” or “Satisfactory” throughout the project’s lifetime, with
  a final rating of Satisfactory at closing. The main performance features of FM include: (a) the GEF funds
  and DECC/BEIS funds were 100 percent and 99.1 percent disbursed, executed and reported, respectively;
  (b) the project complied with the Bank’s financial covenants; (c) Project interim unaudited financial reports
  were generally submitted to the Bank on time and deemed acceptable; (d) the project’s FM arrangements
  related to staffing, accounting, budgeting, funds flow and auditing were adequate; (e) internal controls and
  procedures were effectively implemented, and potential fiduciary risk associated with achieving project
  outcomes was limited; (f) Project funds were transferred to project partners (FEDEGAN, CIPAV and Fondo
  Acción), as detailed in the subsidiary agreements, with proper justification of expenditures; (g) the audit
  report covering 2018 was submitted to the Bank on time with unqualified opinions and approved; and (h)
  On June 25th, 2020, the Bank approved an extension for submission of the final audit report from June 30,
  2020 to December 31, 2020.

  (ii) Procurement (ICR, para. 82): The Bank’s regular ISRs rated Project procurement performance as
  “Moderately Satisfactory” throughout project implementation. Key performance aspects included:(a) The
  Bank provided procurement mentoring and training to FEDEGAN and project partners; (b) Procurement

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



  was conducted within the Bank’s procurement regulations and Bank oversight was continuous and
  comprehensive; and (c) Challenges facing the procurement function were associated primarily with high
  transaction costs of local procurement, high turnover of qualified procurement staff, and delays in updating
  procurement plans.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not Applicable.



d. Other
  The ICR highlighted 6 other positive and strategic result areas arising from the project. While recognizing
  some project attribution challenges, the substantive nature/scope of these other project-induced benefits
  are summarized below, based on evidence presented in the ICR, paras. 64 – 72, and also reflected in the
  Bank’s project team’s response to the IEG guide questions.

  (i) Women and Youth (ICR, para. 64): The project made tangible progress during implementation to include
  more female participants and service providers, and to reach younger people. It is noteworthy that the
  project’s initial design did not consider gender, but women’s and youth participation were increasingly
  pursued in an intentional manner and monitored during the project’s lifetime (for examples, see para. 64); at
  the same time, the Project's final results framework (ICR) showed limited number of gender indicators;

  (ii) Institutional Strengthening (ICR, para. 65): The project made good progress in carrying out various
  strategic activities which contributed to SPS-related institutional strengthening, including:

  - SPS planning and financial tools for beneficiary producers and entities/FINAGRO;

  - Systematic SPS training at the local and national levels;

  - Strengthened global knowledge on SPS in cattle ranching, based on generating several quality technical
  and scientific publications disseminated through various international conferences:

  - Inclusive and productive dialogue on sustainable livestock, which are still functional, post-project;

  - Showcasing SPS’s national agenda, fostering about 30 strategic alliances with outside partners.

  (iii) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing (ICR, paras. 66 – 67), with tangible results, including:

  - Substantial funding was mobilized from private sources: At closing, beneficiary producer contributions to
  sustainable land-use changes were US$21.85 M; this is equivalent to about 50 percent of the costs of
  establishing those systems, and almost four-fold the contribution expected at appraisal (US$6.0 M). It is
  estimated that the project leveraged/created US$3.6 for every US$1 provided by the funding agencies and
  project partners.




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



   - Role of private companies in scaling-up sustainable approaches to cattle ranching: The project supported
   public-private dialogue on Green Markets, reaching agreement on key practices of sustainable livestock, a
   more efficient value chain, and better environmental outcomes;

   (iv) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (ICR, para. 68), including six aspects:

   - The project monitored the contribution of SPS adoption to poverty reduction through various
   socioeconomic surveys, at baseline and end-line, with various positive results;

   - At baseline, 47.2 percent of the prospective beneficiaries were living below the poverty line;

   - The full income benefit of project activities has likely not yet impacted on poverty reduction, as many SPS
   areas at project closing were still in their establishment/growing phase;

   - Based on the project’s impact studies, there are 2 notable conclusions: participating households improved
   productivity and natural resources at the farm level and improved their asset base for cattle ranching; and
   longer term, project-induced changes are expected to help reduce poverty;

   - Beneficiaries reported (based on a survey of 345 beneficiaries) strong agreement on the landscape-level
   and environmental impacts of the land-use transformation promoted by the project;

   - Beneficiary selection was rigorous and complex, based on sound criteria (ICR, para. 70).

   (v) Contribution to National Policies (ICR, para. 71): Project actions contributed to the preparation of policy
   guidelines for sustainable CR, making “social, economic, and environmental sustainability” a national
   priority for the livestock sector, and informed efforts undertaken by the Rural Planning Unit on strategic
   planning for the dairy and beef sectors. The current National Development Plan (NDP 2018–22) includes a
   strong role for SPS and pledges to increase, importantly. Also, the project supported the formulation of the
   Bovine Strategy, and the strategic framework for GHG emission reduction for the livestock subsector.

   (vi) Contribution to Climate Resilience (ICR, para. 72): Results of a World Bank study (2019) suggest that
   well-established SPS, and especially iSPS, could help reduce vulnerability to climate shocks. Also, the
   project evaluation report shows that during periods of climate variability, farms with well-established SPS
   reduced significantly their milk productivity losses (e.g., 0.4 – 5.5% vs. 19% for farms without SPS
   coverage). At the same time, the ICR notes that SPS, especially iSPS, are vulnerable to climate shocks
   during the planting/establishment stage, hence these risks aspects need to be managed.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory   Quality at-entry was rated MS.

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents ten lessons which are based on project implementation experience and
supporting evidence, considering both positive and “mixed” performance (ICR, para. 87). While the
content is relevant, this ICRR consolidates and highlights the most relevant four lessons which also
have broader application beyond this project. These four lessons are summarized below.

(1) Approaches to Promoting Farmer Adoption of SPS Technologies: Scaling-up SPS/iSPS farmer
adoption depends on implementing effective approaches to convincing cattle producers of
the financial returns of such investments. Cattle rancher’s (CRs) were persuaded through a
delivery model that focused on 7 complementary elements, which are relevant for other countries:
(a) screening beneficiaries to help maximize economic benefits; (b) sound knowledge-sharing to
influence behavioral adoption changes of cattle farmers; (c) adequate and replicable financial
incentives for beneficiary farmers to invest in SPS/iSPS, including the role of appropriate Payment
for Environmental Service (PES) schemes; (d) appropriate upfront support, in the form of inputs and
sound technical advice; (e) careful consideration on the timing and likely weather conditions when
farmers establish SPS/iSPS; (f) selecting appropriate SPS demonstration sites; and (g) ensuring the
component parts are well-organized, well timed and reliably available, and key public/private
institutions work closely together;

(2) Importance of Effective Partnerships and Key Elements for Scaling-Up: Successful adoption
and scaling-up of SPS/iSPS technologies among wide range of cattle farmers requires
effective partnerships between private sector and farmer-driven organizations, which
represent the interests of the farmers, and the public sector, which provide important “public
goods”, in the form of targeted subsidies and technical advice to participating beneficiaries;

(3) A combination of on-farm SPS and ISPS technologies is likely to deliver the best productive and
conservation benefits and enhance beneficiary profitability. Higher environmental and productive
benefits – and profitability – can be achieved by planting a combination of SPS and iSPS
technologies. While non-intensive SPS such as dispersed trees can deliver important carbon
sequestration benefits once established, their impacts on farm productivity are more limited.
Intensive SPS, however, tends to deliver higher productivity benefits and contribute to diversity; and

(4) Realistic design and cost-effectiveness are key considerations when designing monitoring SPS
systems for land use changes at farm level. An integrated approach to monitoring SPS system
was fundamental for providing sound information to structure a clear business case for CRs
and other private and public actors, on the socioeconomic and environmental benefits associated
with the different land uses promoted by SPS systems. Sound M&E also enhances the national
visibility of SPS technologies, and therefore, its scalability. Accordingly, it is important to work out
appropriate and cost-effective approaches for monitoring on-farm land use changes. Also, good
practice integrated monitoring systems of SPS’ production and environmental improvements build
confidence in generating strong outcomes and scaling-up SPS technologies.




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well written, consistent with Bank ICR guidelines, analytical, and candid with respect to the
project’s modest shortcomings, especially given the complex nature of the project. It was an expanded pilot
project regarding the testing and scaling-up of innovative SPS/iSPS technologies for wider adoption by cattle
ranchers, located in diverse agro-ecological zones. The ICR reconstructs a generally sound ToC, which also
reflected important adjustments of the project during implementation, including using AF and three
restructurings to make important adjustments. While the project RF had an output orientation, there were efforts
to increase relevant outcomes, consistent with the pilot nature of the project. The ICR underpinned many of its
analytical results on various evaluation studies, which were used in a complementary manner to support with
relevant evidence important conclusions and lessons. The ICR was not clear on the relevant role of supporting
enhanced agricultural research systems and research-extension linkages to further strengthen the SPS
technology options, and therefore, prospects for further scaling up farmer adoption and sustainability. Written
and interview responses from the Bank project team provided credible evidence of the project’s support to
relevant research activities and their linkages to extension systems. Also, the ICR is not clear on the Bank’s
approach or plans for a follow-up operation, to further support the scaling-up of the innovative and strategic
SPS/iSPS technologies promoted by this project, building on relevant lessons and the unfinished agenda.
The project team clarified that the Bank is using relevant on-going activities and technical dialogue to support
the Government’s intentions to scale-up the results and lessons, while also considering the current fiscal crisis
faced by the Government.

The Bank's Project team also emphasized that the sustainability of the project outcomes, and concludes that
the eventual scaling-up of the innovative technologies promoted by the project will not depend on a Bank-
funded follow-up operation. The sustainability of the project outcomes will be ensured by the work that CIPAV,
FEDEGAN, other project allies, and many other relevant institutions are continuing to do individually and
through alliances. While the Bank is continuing to promote sustainable transformations in the cattle ranching
subsector through the on-going work in the Orinoquia region and through dialogue with the Government,
donors and other relevant stakeholders, the most important result of this project has been to make enhanced
sustainability in the cattle ranching subsector a high priority for the Government, for NGOs, for donors, and for
value-chain actors.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching (P104687)




                                                                                Page 23 of 23
