     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022433

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P125022                                    CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82350                                 31-Dec-2019                                          83,488,820.10

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Mar-2013                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           120,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             83,488,820.10                                               0.00

 Actual                                         83,488,820.10                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Lalrinpari Sailo            Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original PDO: The objective of the Project, as stated in the Loan Agreement (p.5), was “to increase the share
   of clean energy in electricity consumption and to demonstrate the viability of the renewable energy service
   company model for scaling up the deployment of rooftop solar photovoltaic systems in schools and other
   education institutions in Beijing Municipality”.

   The project objective, as stated in the PAD (p.3), was identical to the above.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



   The PDO was modified at restructuring, in June, 2017, to read: “To increase electricity generated from
   distributed solar photovoltaic systems, and demonstrate the viability of the renewable energy service
   company model for scaling up the deployment of such systems, in various sectors in Beijing Municipality.”

   For purposes of analysis, the PDO will be parsed as follows:

   Original PDO:

   Objective 1- “To increase the share of clean energy in electricity consumption”;
   Objective 2- “To demonstrate the viability of the renewable energy service company model for scaling up the
   deployment of rooftop solar PV systems in schools and other education institutions in Beijing Municipality”.

   Revised PDO:

   Objective 1- “To increase electricity generated from distributed solar PV systems, in various sectors in Beijing
   Municipality’;
   Objective 2- “To demonstrate the viability of the renewable energy service company model for scaling up the
   deployment of PV systems, in various sectors in Beijing Municipality”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Components before restructuring:

   Component 1: Sunshine Schools Program Support - Installation of 100 MW Rooftop Solar
   Photovoltaic (PV) Systems in Beijing (Estimated cost at appraisal: $226.0 million; of which US$120
   million [US$110.3 million, plus US$9.7 million interest during construction and front-end fees] IBRD
   financing; Actual cost: US$115.66 million, of which US$83.49 million IBRD financing). This component was
   intended to install 100MW of distributed rooftop PV electricity generation systems in about 800 schools and
   other educational institutions in Beijing under the Renewable Energy Service Company (RESCO) model for
   large scale rooftop solar PV deployment. The PV systems were to be installed, operated and maintained by
   Beijing Yuanshen Energy Saving Technology Company Ltd. (henceforth Yuanshen). RESCO would take
   the performance and financial risk of the investment by signing an energy service performance contract with
   each school/university, while earning revenue from (i) the sale of electricity to the schools, (ii) the subsidies
   provided (on a graduated scale) by Government through the “Golden Sun Program” and BMG though the
   “Sunshine Schools Program”. The schools/universities would pay RESCO only for the electricity consumed

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



  and not pay any up-front capital for the investment. After maturity of the RESCO contracts, Yuanshen
  would hand over the PV systems to the schools.

  To enhance coordination and bring on board concerned key stakeholders to tackle the policy and
  institutional challenges, it was agreed that during implementation the concerned Beijing government
  agencies (Beijing Education Commission, Beijing Development and Reform Commission, Beijing Finance
  Bureau) and the Project Management Office would supervise the project and assist Yuanshen in selecting
  schools and addressing other issues or difficulties.

  Component 2: Technical Assistance (TA) for developing local capacity for scaling up commercially
  viable solar energy deployment, project implementation, and other priority energy policy initiatives
  of the Beijing Municipal Government (BMG) (Appraisal estimated cost: US$4.0 million from BMG
  counterpart funding and potential parallel Global Environment Facility (GEF) financed project; Actual cost:
  US$2.0 million from GEF). The proposed TA activities included development of local capacity for scaling up
  commercially viable solar energy deployment; and engineering and technical support to Yuanshen for the
  design, procurement, construction supervision and project management of the PV systems. The proposed
  TA activities included: (i) Demonstration of the RESCO model for large-scale grid-connected rooftop solar
  PV deployment in Beijing Municipality, provision of engineering and technical support in relation to PV
  systems to Yuanshen Company, and independent monitoring and evaluation of implementation and results
  of such model; (ii) Demonstration of two-way metering in Beijing Municipality; (iii) Establishment of an online
  monitoring system for rooftop PV systems and a solar energy information portal in Beijing Municipality; and
  (iv) Improvement of renewable energy education in schools and other educational institutions in Beijing
  Municipality.

  Components after restructuring:

  Component 1: Distributed PV System Installation Support PV (revised estimated cost: US$95.26 million
  IBRD financing, local sources). The component description was revised to ‘installation of distributed PV
  systems in education institution, and other sectors in Beijing Municipality’. After the restructuring, only this
  component remained with the scope expanded as reflected in the revised PDO and project title. The
  installation target of 100 MW remained unchanged.

  Component 2: This component was formally dropped from the project as all TA activities originally
  proposed under this component were financed and also reported on by a parallel project, the China Urban
  Scale Building Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Project (CUSBEERE).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$239.7 million. Actual cost at project completion
  was US$115.66 million.

  Financing: The project’s original cost was financed through an IBRD loan of US$120 million,
  supplemented by counterpart funding and funding from a parallel GEF project. After restructuring in 2017,
  taking into account a significant reduction in cost of PV panels that had taken place during the preceding
  years, the estimated project cost was reduced significantly to US$137 million, and the loan amount from
  US$120 million to US$105 million.


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



   Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution, originally estimated at US$115.4 million, was reduced at
   restructuring to US$25.75 million.

   Dates: The closing date for the original loan was December 31, 2019.

   Restructurings: The project underwent a Level 1 restructuring in June 2017. This resulted in a change in
   the PDO and scope of activities, with the formal dropping of Component 2. The PDO indicators were
   updated to reflect consistency with the revised scope of activities. The title of the project was also changed
   from “Beijing Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic Scale-up (Sunshine Schools) Project” to “Beijing Distributed Solar
   Photovoltaic Scale-up Project”.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context:

At the time of appraisal in 2012, China had experienced growth of its economy at about 10 percent per
annum over the previous decade, with inflation having been kept largely under control. This growth had
spurred a massive consumption of total primary energy (TPEC) and electricity, which had increased at
the rate of 8 percent per annum during 2000-2011, more than three times the global rate of TPEC
increase. Electricity consumption in China had increased at the rate of 12 percent during the period and
this rapid increase was expected to continue for some years to come. The China Electricity Council
predicted that the country’s generation capacity would rise to 1,950 GW by 2020. Though coal would
remain the dominant fuel, accounting for more than 50 percent of the energy mix, the Government of
China (GOC) recognized that such tremendous growth in electricity generation could not be met by fossil
fuels alone, and was increasing its efforts to try and reduce the carbon intensity of the economy.

Towards this end, energy efficiency (EE) and renewable energy (RE) were two critical elements of the
Government’s development strategy, going forward, and were central to the country’s push to reduce the
carbon footprint of its economy. The GOC had pledged to reduce the 2005 carbon intensity by 40-45
percent by 2020, with binding targets having been set in the 12th Five Year Plan to reduce GDP energy
intensity by 16 percent and its carbon intensity by 17 percent.

Cities accounted for 75 percent of China’s energy consumption and were key to meeting the country’s
carbon emission reduction targets. At a per capita level, carbon emissions in some major Chinese cities
were among the highest in the world. By 2030, China’s cities were projected to add some 45 percent
more residents and 60 percent more buildings compared to 2010. It was therefore logical that the
introduction of programs and policies aimed at reigning in carbon emissions in urban areas would have to
be a key feature of China’s emission-reduction strategy. Towards this end, the National Development &
Reform Commission (NDRC) announced in 2012 that areas in 29n provinces were to pilot low-carbon
growth and carbon-emissions trading schemes, which would be incorporated within implementation of the
12th Five Year Plan.

As the nation’s capital and a pilot city for low-carbon growth, Beijing was striving to become a model for
other Chinese cities in promoting resource-efficient and environmentally-friendly urban economic

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



               growth. The Beijing Municipal Government (BMG) had set more stringent standards for reducing GDP
               energy-intensity and CO2-intensity than those of the GOC. To achieve these targets, the BMG
               developed a plan to increase the share of renewable energy in final energy consumption from 3.2 percent
               in 2010 to 6 percent by 2015. The Golden Sun Program for solar PV generation, initiated in 2009 by the
               Ministry of Finance (MOF), National Energy Authority (NEA) and the Ministry of Science & Technology
               (MOST), was part of this effort, by aiming to stimulate the domestic PV installation market.


               Alignment with Strategy:

               The project, with its updated PDO, was aligned with the objectives of the WBG Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for FY20-25, one of the three key engagement areas of which is “promoting greener
               growth”, with a sub-objective (objective 2.1) indicating “Facilitating the transition to a lower-carbon energy
               path”. Within this objective, the CPF indicates that the IFC, for instance, will focus on ‘greater adoption of
               scalable low-carbon and resource-efficient solutions among selected industrial sectors in China’ and
               provides as an example ‘technical intervention areas such as distributed renewable energy generation’.
               Furthermore, as the ICR points out, the results framework captures a key component of this project’s
               objective to ‘demonstrate and scale up the RESCO model for market-based roof-top solar photovoltaic
               systems’ with a target of 400 RESCO contracts signed by 2021 and directly cites this project (CPF, p.
               45). The project also supported the CPF’s first engagement area of “Advancing Market and Fiscal
               Reforms”, specifically, objective 1.2 on “Achieving more effective and sustainable subnational fiscal
               management and infrastructure financing” by supporting the scale-up of the RESCO model. A further
               supporting factor, as indicated by the ICR (para 30), was that new distributed PV projects implemented
               by RESCOs were now being financed by the commercial Huaxia Bank, leveraging IBRD financing via the
               recent World Bank project: “Innovative financing for air pollution control in Jing-Jin-Ji (P125022)”.

               The project was also in line with a key pillar of the 2018 China Strategic Country Diagnostic Report
               (SCD), making full use of market mechanisms to promote green growth by financing more technically and
               financially sustainable subprojects. That said, given the relatively small scale of the operation in relation
               to the overall level of energy generation in China (not limited to the PV sector), the level of ambition of the
               PDO could be called into question.

               In light of the above, relevance is rated Substantial.
               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To increase the share of clean energy in electricity consumption in schools and other education institutions in
                             Beijing Municipality”


                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)




Rationale
Theory of Change:

The project was originally designed to support the BMG’s Sunshine Schools Program and pilot the RESCO
model as a market-based mechanism to for delivering large-scale installation. In addition to increasing the
share of renewable energy in electricity consumed, the project would also pilot two-way metering systems for
distributed PV. Key assumptions of project design were: (a) the continued commitment of local governments
with stable subsidy provision to the project entities via the Golden Sun Program, (b) the willingness of schools
to participate in response to appropriate incentives, (c) enforcement of mandates for grid companies to buy
excess electricity from rooftop PV systems fed to the grid, and (d) close coordination between the project and
CUSBEERE to ensure that TA activities effectively supported scale-up of rooftop PV under the RESCO
business model in Beijing.

A fairly direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s activities and the expected outcomes. The
activities consisted of the installation of rooftop PV systems in educational institutions in Beijing (using the
RESCO model) and provision of TA for developing local capacity for scaling up renewable energy, project
implementation and related activities. Expected outputs included completed installation of rooftop PV
capacity and the signing of a target number of RESCO contracts, under the first component; and the piloting
of two-way metering, establishment of renewable energy laboratories, organization of RESCO business
training workshops and operationaling the monitoring of rooftop PV systems. These were expected to lead to
the higher-level outcomes of increase in share of clean energy consumption in schools and other educational
institutions in Beijing, and the demonstrated viability of the RESCO model in scaling up deployment of rooftop
PV systems in these institutions. Longer-term outcomes in the form of scaled-up deployment of such PV
systems, improved business environment for scaling up solar PV systems, and a contribution to reducing
GHG emissions, were expected – though it is difficult to say whether these activities, in aggregate, would be
of adequate scale to create a critical mass for change.

Outputs/Outcomes:

The following results were achieved under the project in 2016, prior to restructuring:

(a) 31.5 MW of PV capacity was installed, against a 2016 target of 90 MW (100 MW by 2018). On account of
weak incentives for schools to participate and subsidy termination, the average size of PV systems installed
was just around 100 kW.

(b) About half of the PV energy contracts were in place (309, against a target of 700, or 44 percent). Again,
this progress too was affected by the subsidy policy changes over 2015 and 2016, and the weakness in
incentives to schools to participate.

(c) PV energy generated was of the order of 14 GWh/year, against a target of 89 GWh/year, or only about 16
percent of target. This was on account of the slower-than-expected installation/commissioning of solar PV
capacity, and also a lower-than-expected capacity factor (6.3 percent actual vs. 11.4 percent estimated at
appraisal).

(d) CO2 emissions avoided were of the order of 10.3 kt CO2e/year (actual) as against a target of 80.6 kt
CO2e/year. However, this was significantly lower than expected partly on account of a lower grid emissions
factor than anticipated at appraisal.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)




Based on the above, the achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To increase electricity generated from distributed solar PV systems, in various sectors in Beijing Municipality”


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (Revised):
The restructuring addressed the issues that had stalled the project, by extending the market and including
economic entities, public and private, that were more efficiency oriented and environmentally conscious. The
significant decrease in PV panel cost that had occurred in recent years was also factored into the project cost,
which was decreased from US$239.7 million to US$137 million. The project’s scope was formally limited to
Component 1, as Component 2 was dropped at restructuring; however, it was expected that technical
assistance activities would continue to be provided via the CUSBEERE project, to support scale-up of rooftop
PV under the RESCO model in Beijing.

Outputs/Outcomes:

The target for increase in electricity generated from distributed PV systems in various sectors of Beijing was
met. Actual PV electricity generation was of the order of 111,510 MWh/year, against a target of 100,000
MWh/year. Some 102 MW of distributed PV system capacity was installed, “with high attribution to the
project” (ICR, p.17), in excess of the target of 100 MW. This represented some 20 percent of total PV
capacity in Beijing (of around 510 MW in 2019). The bulk (40 MW) of the installed capacity was in industry,
followed by schools (30 MW), commerce and infrastructure (18.4 MW), logistics (10 MW) and agriculture (3.6
MW).

The total number of people provided with access to electricity generated in education institutions was 560,000
in 2019 - in excess of the target of 500,000.

GHG emission reduction was estimated to reach tons 87,992 CO2 per year by project completion, exceeding
the revised target of 70,000 tons CO2e.

Based on the above, achievement of the revised objective is rated High.



Revised Rating
High



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To demonstrate the viability of the renewable energy service company model for scaling up the deployment
of rooftop solar photovoltaic systems in schools and other education institutions in Beijing Municipality”

Rationale
Outputs/Outcomes:

About half of the PV energy contracts were in place (309, against a target of 700, or 44 percent). This
progress too was affected by the subsidy policy changes over 2015 and 2016, and the weakness in
incentives to schools to participate.

Total finance disbursed by 2016 was of the order of US$18.95 million from IBRD sources (about half the
expected level of US$32.5 million by 2016), due to slow implementation progress, but also lower-than-
expected average cost of PV equipment. Yuanshen’s debt service coverage ratio was however greater than
1.1 at this stage, demonstrating the potential viability of the energy service model.

As argued in the ICR (pages 16-17), and also noted in the restructuring project paper (2017), in light of the
government’s changes in subsidy policy during project implementation, which had resulted in limited
incentives for schools to participate, it was unlikely that the PDO could be achieved without adjustments being
made to the RESCO model, so as to ensure viability. The slow progress was exacerbated by the lengthy
decision-making processes to determine how much subsidy would eventually be granted to the project
following termination of the Golder Sun Program, as well as by the lengthy grid connection approval process
following installation of the PV systems in the early years of implementation, leading to reduced electricity
surplus sales revenue, negatively impacting Yuanshen’s financial situation.

Based on the above, achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
“To demonstrate the viability of the renewable energy service company model for scaling up the deployment
of such systems, in various sectors in Beijing Municipality.”

Revised Rationale
The viability of the RESCO model was to be measured by the number of sectors across which Yuanshen was
able to sign renewable energy service contracts, as well as by the financial rate of return across all
subprojects in excess of a threshold value. In terms of results, this objective was fully achieved. Yuanshen
signed contracts across 5 sectors, meeting the target of 5. The Financial Rate of Return (FIRR) for the
project, aggregated across sectors, worked out at 6.5 percent, higher than the target value of 6.0 percent,
thereby demonstrating the viability of the RESCO model. The ICR points out (para 35) that the FIRRs tended



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



                              to be higher in industry, with high energy consumption and electricity tariffs, and lower in agriculture and other
                              sectors with lower consumption and discounted tariffs.

                              The project laid the cornerstone of Yuanshen’s PY business development. Its institutional capacity,
                              especially the PV project operation/management system, human resources and technical standards
                              development, all improved considerably through implementation of the project. The smart PV O&M
                              management platform established under the parallel CUSBEERE project provided the basis and tools for the
                              company’s project development and management. Through implementation of the project, Yuanshen was
                              able to improve its overall institutional capacity (ICR, p.22), strengthening its organizational structure,
                              establishing a suitable management system and corporate standards, and training a high-quality, professional
                              work team.

                              Under the incentive of the project, grid connection approval and acceptance procedures were streamlined
                              across different counties and districts in Beijing, which greatly facilitated development of similar distributed PV
                              projects undertaken by other companies in the municipality. The World Bank-financed subprojects also
                              served as benchmarks in terms of construction and operation for other players in Beijing to follow. Through
                              the removal of several barriers to grid connection, the project was also able to have an indirect impact in
                              terms of mobilizing private investment in distributed PV development in the municipality and elsewhere in
                              China

                              Based on this, the achievement of objectives for the above objective is rated High.



                              Revised Rating
                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy prior to restructuring is rated Modest. The project was only partially successful in its
                            objectives of increasing the share of clean energy in schools in Beijing, and in demonstrating the viability of
                            the RESCO model for scaling up rooftop PV systems in schools and other educational institutions in Beijing
                            Municipality.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                             After restructuring, the project was fully succssful in meetng its objectives of increasing electricity generated
                            from distributed solar PV systems in Beijing Municipality, whilst demonstrating the viability of the RESCO


                                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



  model. Outputs of the parallel CUSBEERE project supported this outcome. The post-restructuring overall
  efficacy of the project is rated High.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

Economic analysis of the project conducted at appraisal estimated the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) at 8.78
health costs (global, as well as local) resulting from the substitution of clean solar power for thermal power, and the pot
project closing, using updated social values of CO2 emissions and taking into account the restructuring, was a somewh
value scenario. The financial rate of return (FIRR) for the project at appraisal was negative, as it was acknowledged th
BMG, the project was not financially profitable (PAD, p.11) - though Yuanshen was expected to generate positive cash
estimated in the ICR (p.20), was estimated at 3.6 percent in the absence of subsidies and 6.5 percent with subsidies.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Actual costs for the project at completion were significantly lower than estimated at appraisal: US$115.66 million vs. US
mostly on account of the significant reduction in unit investment costs that occurred during the implementation period a
and the project closed on schedule, in December 2019. The significant cost savings was coupled with an expansion of
projects.

Based on the above, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  8.78
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               13.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were substantially relevant to the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework
(FY20-25). Efficiency was found to be Substantial, based on economic analysis conducted at appraisal and at
completion, and on the basis of significant cost savings achieved. Overall efficacy was Modest prior to
restructuring, when the project only partially achieved its objectives, but High subsequent to restructuring, when
it was able to fully achieve its objectives. On account of the change in the PDO introduced by the restructuring,
a split evaluation is necessary to assess outcomes. Assigning a numerical value of 3 (on a 6-point scale) to
pre-restructuring efficacy and 6, post-restructuring, and weighting by the relative share of pre- and post-
restructuring disbursements (US$18.22 m. vs. US$65.27 m., or 21.8% vs. 78.2%), leads to a weighted outcome
of 0.65 vs. 4.69 for the respective periods, equal to an average of 5.35. On this basis, overall outcome works
out to a rating of Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that the development outcomes would not be sustained is Modest.

The risk to development outcome of this project is modest. The China CPF for FY 20-25 emphasizes the
importance of investing in green growth to combat climate change. The Government has also made recent
commitments to hit peak emissions by 2030 and for carbon neutrality by 2060. Investing in renewable energy
sources like solar PV systems will be critical to fulfilling these commitments. In addition, the ICR notes that
Yuanshen has already developed 207 MW of distributed PV projects in other cities (mostly in Zheijiang
province) and has 60 MW in the pipeline, most of which received central and local subsidies. Yuanshen’s
experience suggests that the viability of the RESCO model is sustainable even without subsidies if the
capacity factor is above 11 percent and electricity tariffs are above 0.7 Yuan per KWh.

The appropriate policies and market incentives will need to be in place to allow these projects to scale up in
a sustainable manner. Issues related to grid connection and net metering may arise if the share of these
distributed solar PV systems continues to increase. Furthermore, the risk of reduced solar capacity if air
pollution continues to increase unabated in larger cities, including Beijing, could adversely impact the
sustainability of rooftop solar projects.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



  The design of the project benefited from the World Bank’s experience in the sector, particularly the China
  Renewable Energy Development Project (REDP). Lessons from REDP were fully taken into account,
  including the need to take country circumstances into account in project design, to foster synergies
  between market and technology development (with TA assistance), and to provide adequate support and
  adapt the procurement process based on the implementing agency’s capacity and technologies involved
  (PAD, p.7). The World Bank had also supported the development of three pilot ESCO companies during
  the 1990s, to promote the ESCO business model. Lessons from that experience were brought to bear in
  the development of the RESCO model for the renewables sector. Lessons from other countries, such as
  Germany, the US and Mexico, which indicated that free-flowing between distributed PV solar systems
  and local grid posed no essential technical problems for grid operation when the connected capacity was
  a small share of overall local capacity, were also taken into consideration in the design of the operation.

  Though the Bank team took all major aspects of the project, including technical, economic, financial,
  institutional and fiduciary, along with potential risks and mitigation measures, into account, the difficulties
  in marketing and the challenges in the low tariff and budget management system were underestimated,
  which caused delay in implementation, finally leading to the need for restructuring (ICR, p. 28). Another
  shortcoming in project preparation, according to the ICR, was that a more thorough market survey and
  consultation targeting larger school samples was not undertaken to better gauge schools’ willingness to
  participate and to better design customized incentive mechanisms to encourage schools to actively
  participate in the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project appears to have been adequately supervised, with eighteen supervision missions over the
 six years of its operation. Supervision was led by three TTLs over the period, two of whom were
 country-office based. This enabled them to be fully responsive to implementation issues, especially
 during the later stages of project implementation, and to more easily maintain a constructive dialogue
 and relationship with the client and key stakeholders. Formal supervision missions were held twice-
 yearly, supplemented by regular meetings with the PMO and stakeholders. The team for the parallel
 CUSBEEERE project also joined hands in the supervision of the project on a regular basis.

 The ICR reports (para 79) that during the final two years of implementation, the task team kept close
 contact with the client on a weekly basis, undertook frequent on-site supervisions and had numerous
 telephonic discussions. Yuanshen was requested to prepare an action plan with key milestones, and
 report to the Bank team on a monthly basis. Additional ISRs were prepared by the team during the final
 phase to keep management updated on progress and implementation issues arising. These strong
 efforts helped ensure that the project’s 100 MW installation target was achieved by project closing.




  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the ICR p. 26), the results framework was mostly adequate for the task of assessing the
 achievement of the PDO and attribution to the project. That said, the original outcome indicator of
 “materialized share of renewable energy from rooftop PV systems in electricity consumption in selected
 schools” was somewhat vague and difficult to quantify, and had to be dropped at restructuring. Additional
 changes were made subsequently during restructurings to strengthen project monitoring.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reiterates that a large number of supervision missions were carried out during the life of the
  project, to monitor detailed progress and provide support to Yuanshen, which was implementing the
  project. The task team regularly collected detailed progress data, and brought issues to the World Bank’s
  management’s attention. In addition to the supervision missions, Yuanshen set up a Centralized Control
  Center for data collection and monitoring of all PV systems installed. The data collected were used to
  verify generation data at the Beijing Energy and Environment Monitoring Center. The implementing
  agency also collected and provided other quarterly and financial management data on a regular basis.



c. M&E Utilization
  The information collected through the system helped identify the issues associated with the operation,
  as well as assisting in maintaining the PV systems installed in various sites. The data provided a
  comprehensive view of the operation of all subprojects in Beijing, and was used to inform the mid-term
  review, as well as providing the basis for the timely restructuring of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B, reflecting the limited likelihood of environmental,
   safety and health impacts. As designed, PV systems would be installed on the roofs of existing buildings,
   without the need for any land acquisition or resettlement. The project restructuring expanded the PV
   system installations to buildings not only in schools but other structures and some open green


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



   spaces. However, as per the Restructuring Project Paper, no additional environmental impacts were
   anticipated on that account and the environmental category remained B.

   The only safeguards policy triggered was Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). An Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP), acceptable to the Bank, was prepared, providing a set of environmental codes of
   practice for common environmental and safety issues. These were strictly enforced by Yuanshen during
   installation and operation. The ICR reports (p.27) that Yuanshen was able to obtain all relevant land and
   building documents of property owners and to complete proper lease agreements for their roof spaces. The
   environmental and social safeguards performance was reported to have been satisfactory throughout
   project implementation




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (p.27) that a sound financial management system was
   maintained throughout the implementation of the project, to ensure that project funds could be used for
   intended purposes. A total of 12 unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) was submitted to the Bank as
   per the legal document, but only 3 were submitted on a timely basis. The required annual audit reports
   were however submitted on a timely basis. It is noted that the external auditors issued unqualified opinions
   and raised no significant issues.

   Procurement: The ICR reports (p.27) that virtually all contracts under the project were subject to
   procurement post review (carried out by the Bank on a sample basis each year). No significant deviations
   from Bank procurement policies were identified, and overall procurement management was found
   satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   As the ICR notes, a significant unintended positive impact of the project is the institutional strengthening of
   Yuanshen in the PV business development. The PV project operation/management system, human
   resource, and technical standards development has improved considerably through this project. The
   company also received quite a few honors and prizes due to its strengthened institutional capacity.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



Bank Performance                  Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. It is critical to conduct thorough market surveys and consultation to test a new business
model in an emerging sector prior to its implementation. In the current project, the RESCO
model being piloted proved more challenging to implement than anticipated at appraisal, on account
of the reluctance of schools to participate. Part of the reason may have been that the market survey
conducted at preparation was limited to a small number of schools, and consultations carried out
lacked in-depth insight into the willingness issue. With more detailed insight, target installation
capacity might have been tailored to a smaller scale or scope of the project to have been widened to
include more sectors at the outset.

2. Close coordination between two interlinked projects can help bring about successful
project outcomes. The second component in this project, prior to restructuring, involved TA for
developing local capacity for scaling up commercially viable solar energy deployment, which was a
critical assumption for the success of this project. Although this component was formally dropped at
restructuring and subsumed by another parallel project, CUSBEERE, the teams continued to
coordinate closely and conducted supervisions jointly, which contributed to the successful outcome
of the current project.

3. Successful testing of a new business model in an emerging sector amid evolving policy
environment calls for close interaction and coordination with the client, to be able to monitor
evolving policy, proactively resolve any issues arising and make time adjustments to the
project. For the current project, the RESCO model was a new business model to be piloted in the
distributed renewable energy sector with the support of the national subsidy policy. The Bank team
established a constructive dialogue mechanism with key stakeholders, to be able to respond with
agility to any issues arising (e.g. in relation to grid connection or fiduciary aspects). This helped
build trust between the Bank team, the implementing agency and key stakeholders, and allowed the
for the timely restructuring of the operation and the eventual, successful accomplishment of key
project targets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CN-Beijing Distributed PV Scale-Up (P125022)



The ICR is clearly written, concise and consistent with guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s
activities. Its analysis and lessons are generally evidence-based and internally consistent. The analysis of
project performance and efficiency is results oriented, based on the foundation of a well-articulated theory of
change, for both the original formulation of the project and the revised formulation, post-
restructuring. Adequate detail is provided on the subsidy mechanisms facing the project at appraisal and the
performance-based mechanism introduced during implementation.

The review did have some weaknesses. In particular, in discussing the relevance of the project, information on
the Bank’s prior experience in the energy sector in China, and in the renewable energy/Solar PV sector in
particular (even at a global level), was lacking and would have been useful to provide an appropriate context for
subsequent discussion. Secondly, a fuller discussion on the adequacy of the project’s implementation
arrangements would have been helpful.

Based on the above, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 16
