     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022605

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127143                                   DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Djibouti                                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52620,TF-14757,TF-14765               31-Dec-2018                                        12,602,592.47

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2013                               31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            6,000,000.00                                   7,136,364.00

 Revised Commitment                            13,012,841.30                                   7,032,647.53

 Actual                                        12,602,592.47                                   7,032,647.53




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P127144_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127144                                   DJ-GEF Geothermal Power Generation Prgrm ( P127144 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                               0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2013

                                                                                                Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)




                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                                0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.6), the Global
   Environmental Facility (GEF) Grant Agreement (p.6), the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
   (ESMAP) Trust Fund Grant Agreement (p.6), all dated October 13, 2013, and the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p.11) dated May 14, 2013, the project objective was “to assist the Recipient [Republic of Djibouti] in
   assessing the commercial viability of the geothermal resource in Fiale Caldera within the Lake Assal region.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:

   A. Drilling Program. (Appraisal cost: US$27.18 million including US$4.5 million for contingencies; actual
   cost: US$48.64 million)

   This component was to finance the following activities: (i) the preparation of the drilling site in Fiale Caldera,
   including the strengthening of the roads and crossings between the Port of Djibouti and the drilling site, road
   construction, preparation of drilling pads, water pumping sites, and other infrastructure necessary for
   accommodation of operations; (ii) execution of the exploratory drilling program (four wells); (iii) provision of
   steel material for the execution of the drilling program; and (iv) the inspection and testing of reservoir flow
   rates.

   B. Technical Assistance for the Drilling Program. (Appraisal cost: US$1.8 million including US$0.17 for
   contingencies; actual cost: US$5.49 million)

   This component was to finance the following technical assistance activities: (i) designing a drilling program
   to be implemented under Component A; (ii) designing and execution of a well test protocol and third party


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



  certification of the drilling program; and (iii) preparation of a technical feasibility study for a geothermal
  power plant if the geothermal resource were found commercially viable.

  C. Project Management. (Appraisal cost: US$1.6 million including US$0.2 million for contingencies; actual
  cost: US$3.56 million)

  This component was to support project management, implementation, and M&E through the provision of
  goods and consultants’ services.

  Revised Components

  At the fourth restructuring, the number of wells to be drilled under the first component was reduced from
  four to three because of cost overruns.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$31.23 million. The project activities
  continued after the IDA credit and the GEF grant closed in December 2019 (the ESMAP grant closed six
  months earlier on June 30, 2019). The revised estimated project cost is US$57.69 million, and the project
  activities are expected to be completed within the first half of 2022. The project cost increase was because
  of the drilling cost overruns. The project was to finance the drilling of four wells, but because of the cost
  increase, the number of wells to be drilled was reduced to three.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit was estimated at US$6.00 million, the GEF grant at US$6.04
  million, and the ESMAP grant at US$1.00 million. By project closing in December 2019, the project had fully
  disbursed the IDA credit, the GEF grant and the ESMAP grant.

  The estimated contributions from other donors at appraisal were US$7.00 million from OPEC Fund for
  International Development (OFID), US$3.25 million from French Development Agency (AFD) and US$7.34
  million from African Development Bank (AfDB). When the Bank financing agreements closed in December
  2019, there was no change in the estimated contributions from OFID and the FDA. However, AfDB’s
  financing increased to US$25.35 million to cover the drilling cost overruns.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$0.50 million. When
  the Bank’s financing agreements in December 2019, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$9.08
  million to cover project implementation unit’s operation expenditures and the part of the drilling cost
  overruns.

  Restructurings: There were four project restructurings:

        First Restructuring (Level 2 – October 7, 2014): The credit effectiveness and the start of Bank-
          financed activities were contingent upon the recruitment of a project director and project team that
          was to be financed by the AfDB. The delay in the signing of the AfDB financing agreement had
          resulted in a nine-month delay in project effectiveness, and the Bank-financed activities had not
          started at the time of the restructuring. Therefore, a new category for consultants’ services was
          created, and funds were allocated to this new category, in consultations with AfDB and other co-



                                                                                                         Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



          financiers, to support project management through the recruitment of an interim project director, a
          procurement expert, and an accountant.
         Second Restructuring (Level 2 – September 21, 2015): The IDA credit and GEF grant
          disbursement percentages for drilling services and consultants’ services were amended to finance,
          with other co-financiers, 100 percent of the cost of both the drilling service company and consultants’
          costs to support the project implementation unit. Geothermal consultant was recruited after this
          restructuring, and this delayed the development of bidding documentation and the launch of the bids
          for the selection of the drilling contractor (ICR, p.19). By the time of this restructuring, the project had
          disbursed 0.1 percent of the IDA credit and none from the GEF and ESMAP grants.
         Third Restructuring (Level 2 – June 26, 2018): The slow mobilization of the project
          implementation unit, technical design issues, and coordination issues among donor because of
          different procurement policies and processes delayed project implementation. The drilling of the
          three wells was expected to start in July 2018. The procurement of the testing equipment to be
          financed by ESMAP grant was also delayed because of the same reasons. At the time of the project
          restructuring, the project had not disbursed any ESMAP grant proceeds. Therefore, at this
          restructuring, the ESMAP grant closing date was extended by 12 months from June 30, 2018 to
          December 30, 2019 to allow time for the procurement of testing equipment.
         Fourth Restructuring (Level 2 – December 20, 2018): Because of the reasons listed under third
          restructuring above, the drilling of wells could only start in July 2018. Therefore, the closing date of
          the IDA credit and the GEF grant was extended by 12 months from December 31, 2018 to
          December 31, 2019 to allow time for the completion of final production tests, feasibility study on a
          geothermal power plant, the tender package for the selection of a private geothermal power plant
          developer and the final project activity report. In the results framework, the number of wells to be
          drilled was reduced from four to three because of cost overruns, and a new indicator was added,
          i.e., grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits addressed, to comply with the
          changes in the Bank’s corporate requirements.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 5,2013. The financing agreements were signed on October 3,
   2013 and became effective on July 2, 2014. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in December 2017. The
   original closing date of the ESMAP grant was June 30, 2018. At the third restructuring, it was extended by
   12 months to June 30, 2019. The original closing date of the IDA credit and the GEF grant was December
   31,2018. In the fourth restructuring, the closing date of these two financing agreements was extended by 12
   months to December 2019. The project closed on December 31, 2019, but the project activities continued
   after the closing of the Bank financing agreements and were financed by other donors. The expected
   completion date of the project activities is the first half of 2022. The reasons for closing date extension have
   been outlined in the third and fourth restructuring entries above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was highly relevant to the country context at project closing in December 2019.
Electricity generation in Djibouti depends on thermal resources. Of the approximately 130MW installed
generation capacity, only 57MW is reliably available for a population of around 1 million. Only thirty percent
of the electricity consumed in the country is generated locally. Therefore, Djibouti depends on electricity

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



               imported from Ethiopia to meet its increasing power demand. The electrification rate is low; around 50
               percent in urban areas, i.e., Djibouti City, and only 1 per cent in rural areas. The government’s goal is to
               achieve universal access by 2035. Djibouti has one of the highest electricity tariffs in the world—around
               US$0.30 per kWh on average. This is a major barrier to economic growth and a high burden on the budgets
               of poor households. The development of a 50MW power plant utilizing the geothermal energy potential in
               the Lake Assal region would significantly improve electricity supply, decrease the country’s dependence on
               imported energy and power, and lower electricity tariffs. By financing the high-risk geothermal exploration
               phase to confirm the financial viability of the geothermal source, the project aims at facilitating the
               development of a geothermal power plant by an independent power producer. Therefore, the project
               objective is highly outcome-oriented and appropriately pitched for development status in the country.

               At project closing, the Bank’s Djibouti Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2020-22 was under
               preparation. The CPF is expected to be issued mid-2021. When assessed against the Djibouti Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-17, the project objective was highly aligned with the Bank’s strategy for
               Djibouti. The project objective fell under the second pillar of “Strengthening the Business Environment” of
               the CPS (p.27) and corresponded to the “Outcome 2.1: Improved access to affordable electricity through
               stronger capacity to assess the commercial viability of geothermal resources, increased connections, and
               reduced energy utility losses.” The project sought to address the development problems of poor power
               supply and high electricity tariffs. This was to be achieved by the development of a 50MW geothermal
               power plant, and the project was on the critical path for the development of a 50MW geothermal power
               plant by financing the exploration phase. Achievement of these goals would also support the Bank
               strategy’s overarching objective to support the Government of Djibouti’s Vision 2035 in reducing extreme
               poverty and building the foundations for shared growth by harnessing the country’s human and economic
               potential (CPS, p.18). The project objective is also aligned with the proposed CPF for FY2020-22 as it aims
               at reducing the cost of doing business in Djibouti (ICR, p.10); high cost of electricity is still an important
               barrier for doing business in Djibouti.

               At the time of project appraisal, the Bank had already been implementing the Power Access and
               Diversification Project since 2006; hence, the Bank had sufficient experience in the energy sector in the
               country. The Bank also had sufficient experience in the development of geothermal projects in Djibouti in
               1984 and 1989, and in other geothermal resource rich countries, such as the Philippines, Armenia, and
               Indonesia. When assessed with respect to the Bank’s relevant country and sector experience, the project
               objectives were adequately challenging and consistent with progress over time as compared with earlier
               and ongoing projects.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives at the time of project closure was high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To assist the recipient in assessing the commercial viability of the geothermal resource in Fiale Caldera within
the Lake Assal region.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project was to support the high-risk exploration phase of a geothermal power plant development project
by financing the design of a drilling program to be implemented in the Lake Assal region, the drilling of four
wells and construction of associated infrastructure, and the procurement of equipment to test the geothermal
flow rates. Based on the prior geological analyses, the success of these activities in confirming the financial
viability of the geothermal resource for the construction of a geothermal power plant was estimated at 80
percent. Provided that the financial viability was confirmed, the project was to finance a feasibility study on
power generation using the geothermal resource identified at the exploratory phase. A follow-on project would
finance the construction of a geothermal power plant by an independent power producer to be selected
through a competitive tender. The risk perception of the independent power producer would be expected to
be lower because of the completion of the exploration phase. The eventual utilization of geothermal resource
for power generation was expected to increase the availability and reliability of electricity to meet demand and
increase access to electricity, reduce electricity generation costs—hence, lower electricity tariffs—and
decrease the country’s dependence on imported fossil fuels for power generation resulting in lower
greenhouse gas emissions. The replacement of the thermal generation facilities with geothermal generation
capacity was also expected to save the government US$57 million per year, equivalent to around 10 percent
of the national budget. Increased economic activity and reduced poverty were the expected long-term impacts
of the project. Overall, the causal pathways from project activities to outcomes were valid and direct, and the
outcomes achieved could be fully attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the critical assumption that
there would be sufficient interest from contractors to implement the drilling program was too optimistic, and
the project inputs, i.e., funds, were insufficient to drill four wells.

Outputs

      Access to the drilling site was constructed.
      The drilling program was developed for only three wells because of cost overruns. The target was four
         wells.
        The contractor was recruited to implement the drilling program.
        Three wells were drilled but technical issues were encountered, such as the blockage in the second
         well.
        Geothermal well test protocol was developed and ready for implementation.
        Testing equipment was purchased.

Outcomes

      Initial drilling results, as reported by an independent evaluator, confirmed the existence of a high
         temperature (more than 290 degree Celsius) geothermal resource at depths around 2,000 meters that
         might be of commercial interest in two of the three wells. But the initial results from the wells were
         lower than the estimates at appraisal. Therefore, additional exploration activities and testing are still
         needed to better define the deliverability characteristics of the wells that would form the basis of a

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



                                    feasibility study (ICR, p.12). This would also include the clearing the blockage in the second well.
                                    These activities are planned to be completed during the first half of 2022.
                                   At the time of the project assessment in December 2020, a decision could not be made about the
                                    commercial viability of the geothermal resource for power generation because the drilling program
                                    was not completed; therefore, the preparation of a technical and commercial feasibility study was not
                                    initiated. The feasibility study is planned to be completed during the first half of 2022 along with the
                                    completion of the drilling activities.

                            To achieve its objective, the project was to complete the assessment of the commercial viability of the
                            geothermal resource in the Lake Assal region and prepare a technical and commercial feasibility study on the
                            utilization of the geothermal resource for power generation provided that commercial viability was confirmed.
                            The project could not deliver these outcomes because of the delays in the implementation of the drilling
                            program. The main reasons for the delays were the underestimation of the project cost at appraisal that led to
                            issuance of additional financing by other donors, difficulties in recruiting the project director and project
                            implementation team, insufficient interest from contractors to implement the drilling program (only two
                            companies participated in the bidding, and one of them could meet the bidding requirements), technical
                            difficulties encountered during drilling, and coordination issues among donors. At appraisal, it was estimated
                            that drilling of four wells would be completed in 2017, the third year of project implementation. The drilling of
                            three wells could only start in July 2018. However, the initial tests confirmed the existence of a high-
                            temperature geothermal resource and two of the three wells might be of commercial interest.

                            Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to assist the Government of Djibouti in
                            assessing the commercial viability of the geothermal resource in Fiale Caldera within the Lake Assal region is
                            rated modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Because of the delays in implementation, the project could not achieve its outcomes: (i) the assessment of
                            the commercial viability of the geothermal resource in the Lake Assal region; and (ii) the preparation of a
                            technical and commercial feasibility study on the utilization of the geothermal resource for power generation
                            provided that commercial viability was confirmed. However, the initial tests of the three wells drilled under the
                            project confirmed the existence of a high-temperature geothermal resource, and two of the three wells might
                            be of commercial interest. Additional activities and testing are needed to complete the assessment of the
                            commercial viability of the geothermal resources. These activities are planned to be completed during the first
                            half of 2022.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, the expected reduction in the net present value of the cost of the generation plan because of the
addition of a 50MW geothermal power plant was taken as the net economic benefit of the project. Based on the
geophysical evidence available at appraisal, the probability of a successful drilling program confirming the
commercial viability of the geothermal resource was estimated at 80 percent for each well. But given that this
was a new geothermal resource development (greenfield project), a range of probability values were used in the
analysis starting from 75 percent to 35 percent for well success. The difference in the net present value of the
costs of the expansion plans with and without the drilling program and a possible geothermal power plant was
weighted by the success probabilities, and this difference was then compared to the cost of the exploratory
drilling program (PAD, p.73). (In the without project scenario, the generation plan included power generation by
heavy fuel oil only.) The cost of the drilling program (four wells) was estimated at US$31 million. Other key
assumptions were as follows: (i) the capital expenditure for the geothermal power plant was estimated at
US$150 million; (ii) fifteen production wells would be needed to reach 50 MW generation capacity; (iii) crude oil
prices would increase gradually to US$199 per barrel in 2019 and decrease to US$130 per barrel in 2025; (iv)
the long-run electricity generation cost would be around US$0.20 per kWh; and (v) the peak-load demand was
estimated to increase from 57MW in 2008 to 218MW in 2035 (PAD, pp.73-79). In the base case scenario with
75 percent success probability and at least two successful wells, the analysis resulted in a net present value of
the cost expansion plan of US$930 million without the geothermal power plant and US$839 million with the
geothermal power plant. The economic analysis at appraisal concluded that the exploratory drilling program
followed by the construction of a 50MW geothermal power plant would result in substantial economic benefits
over a wide range well success probabilities (PAD, pp.77-78).

At project closing, since project activities were not completed and a feasibility study could not be prepared, an
economic analysis was not conducted. Instead, the ICR listed the significant changes in the key assumptions: (i)
the cost of the drilling program (three wells) was estimated at US$57.7 million, significantly higher than US$31
million estimated at appraisal; (ii) the oil price per barrel was US$60, less than half of the oil price estimated at
appraisal; (iii) the generation plan now includes a possible second interconnection to Ethiopia, construction of a
wind power plant, and potential construction of a solar power plant; and (iv) uncertainty about the size of the
geothermal power plant that was estimated to have an installed capacity of 50MW. Furthermore, the drilling
costs were very high by industry standards (ICR, p.13).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project implementation was adversely affected by shortcomings at appraisal. The credit effectiveness was
delayed because it was contingent upon the signing of the other donors’ financing agreements. Because of the
disagreements among the donors on procurement processes, the first tender for the hiring of the project director
was canceled and a second tender was announced. The project director arrived at Djibouti in December 2015,
more than two years after the signing of the financing agreements. Similarly, the recruitment of the geological
consultant, a critical position for the preparation of the bidding documents for the drilling contract, could only be
completed in September 2015. This delayed the preparation of the bidding documents and the launching of the
tender for the selection of the drilling contractor. The low project budget, the remote geographic location of the
project site, the small size of the drilling program and the perceived country risks were the main reasons for
receiving two bids for the drilling contract tender, only one of which could meet the bidding requirements. The

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



eligible bid was much higher than the original cost estimate. This necessitated additional financing from the
African Development Bank (AfDB). Drilling could only start in July 2018, five years after the signing of the
financing agreements. At the time of the project evaluation in December 2020, the remobilization dates of the
drilling contractor could not be confirmed because the AfDB’s no-objection on the extended drilling contract was
still pending (ICR, p.20). In the email dated May 13,2021, the project team informed that AfDB had approved the
USD$3.25 million additional financing and the parties had signed the financing agreement. However, the work
on the field has not resumed yet; remobilization has been delayed because of Covid-19 restrictions.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving modest outcomes is rated negligible because of significant decrease
in estimated economic benefits due to cost overruns and availability of cheaper power generation alternatives,
and significant operational and administrative inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives to the country context and the Bank strategy is rated high. The project activities
could not be completed to assess the viability of the geothermal resource for power generation; hence, a
technical and commercial feasibility study could not be prepared. However, the initial tests show that the
temperature of the geographical resource is high, and two wells out of the three drilled under the project are of
commercial interest. Additional project activities are needed to better define the deliverability characteristics of
the wells that would form the basis of the feasibility study. Although the likelihood of achievement is uncertain,
these activities and testing are planned to be completed during the first half of 2022. Therefore, the project’s
efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated modest. The project’s economic benefits are expected to be
low because of cost overruns and the availability of cheaper power generation alternatives. There were also
significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency, such as delays in operationalization of
the project implementation unit and the recruitment of the project director and the geological consultant, and
coordination issues among donors. Therefore, the project’s efficiency in achieving limited outcomes is rated
negligible. In accordance with the Bank Guidance (p.38), the project’s outcome is rated unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                       Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The possibility of incompletion or substantial delay of additional project activities because of cost
overruns and insufficient funds is substantial. The first test results showed that there exists a high
temperature geothermal source in the project area, and two of the three wells drilled are of commercial
interest. However, additional exploration activities and testing are needed to better define the deliverability
characteristics of the wells that would form the basis of a feasibility study. Currently, the AfDB committed
funds to finance the additional exploration activities, but the remobilization of the drilling contractor was
delayed because of the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic worldwide. Unforeseen technical and geological issues
could also further increase the project cost, and in the absence of additional financing, drilling program could
not be completed.

The availability of cheaper electricity generation alternatives can adversely affect the development of
geothermal sources for electricity generation. At appraisal, the impact of a new geothermal power plant
on the generation expansion plan was assessed the expansion through thermal generation capacity using
heavy fuel oil. At project closing, a wind power plant was under construction and expected to be
commissioned in 2021. A solar power plant project is also in the development stage, and the Government of
Djibouti is about to secure funding from the World Bank to install a second electricity interconnection to
Ethiopia where electricity is generated by hydropower. Because of these recent developments in cheaper
generation alternatives, the net positive contribution of a geothermal power plant to the generation expansion
plan might be lower than expected at appraisal.

As a mitigating factor to the above risk, the geothermal power plant will produce base load electricity
that will replace the ageing diesel generation capacity, hence the Government of Djibouti is highly
committed to complete the project to assess the commercial viability of the geothermal resource.
Unlike wind and solar power generation, which are intermittent because of their dependence on the
availability of wind and solar irradiation, respectively, geothermal power plants, like coal-fired power plants
but much cleaner, produce base load electricity due to the availability of continuous geothermal steam. The
Government of Djibouti is highly committed to exploit the geothermal potential of the country to increase the
availability and improve the reliability of power, and to increase the electrification rate. The government
established the Djibouti Office for Geothermal Development (ODDEG – Office Djiboutien de Développement
de l’Energie Géothermique), a national institution, to coordinate the geothermal resources in the country and
exploration activities are currently being implemented in other sites in the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At entry, the goal of developing Djibouti’s geothermal resources for power generation to improve the
  availability and reliability of electricity supply, and to decrease the country’s reliance on imported energy
  and power was of high strategic priority. The project’s approach was straightforward, i.e., implementation

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



  of an exploratory drilling program—the high-risk exploration phase—to assess the commercial viability of
  the geothermal resource. Technical aspects of the project were adequate; industry standard state-of-the-
  art systems were to be used for drilling and testing. The technical design benefited from the geothermal
  data gathered in the project site since 1980s and most notably in late 2000s by a renowned geothermal
  resource development company. The safeguard aspects of the project were adequately assessed. The
  M&E system was sufficiently designed to assess the achievement of the project objectives and test the
  links in the result chain. The project implementation unit’s lack of experience in implementing such a
  high-risk drilling program and unfamiliarity with the Bank procedures were to be mitigated by the
  recruitment of an international project director, a geological consultant, and independent geothermal
  consultant.

  However, the cost of the drilling program was significantly underestimated. In estimating the costs,
  conditions specific to Djibouti were not taken into consideration, such as logistical constraints, the remote
  geographical location of the project site, potential security risks, the size of the drilling program, and the
  limited geothermal drilling experience in the country (ICR, p.13). The limited availability of funds because
  of underestimation of project costs and the risk perception about the country resulted in only two
  companies bidding for the implementation of the drilling program. The identification of the donor
  coordination risk was inadequate, and mitigation measures, such as signing a Memorandum of
  Understanding among the donors, were not considered (PAD, pp.18 and 20). At the start of the project,
  coordination issues delayed project implementation by around 18 months. The project implementation
  schedule was unrealistic for such a high-risk operation. According to the original schedule, the drilling of
  all four wells would be completed by 2017, but the drilling program could only start in July 2018 and is
  expected to be completed in the first half of 2022. Risks inherent to geothermal exploratory operations
  were not adequately identified, such as drilling, mobilization of drilling equipment, maintenance and
  repairs, and staff (ICR, p.25). An important lesson learned from previous experiences, i.e., early start of
  procurement processes for key consultant positions and the mobilization of the project implementation
  unit during project preparation, was not incorporated into the project design.

  Overall, because of the significant shortcomings in the preparation and appraisal of the project, the
  quality at entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were held every six months, including seven joint donor missions. There was
 continuity in the project team, which was led by three different task team leaders from project preparation
 phase to project closing. The Implementation Status and Results Reports and Aide Memoires were
 detailed and candid in reporting performance. The project team’s supervision of the safeguard aspects of
 the project was adequate. However, although the Bank was the lead donor, the Bank’s project team was
 reactive, rather than proactive, to the procurement issues stemming from insufficient donor coordination
 that initially delayed project implementation by more than 18 months. The first and second restructurings
 reallocating funds to the hiring of the project director and mobilization of the project implementation unit
 were necessary, but they did not have the intended effect of accelerating project implementation. The
 project director could only arrive at the country in December 2015. The Mid-Term Review was carried out

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



 with substantial delay in December 2017 during which issues related to procurement were addressed (ICR,
 p.21).

 Because of moderate shortcomings listed above, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change was sound, and the expected outcomes could be attributed to the project’s
 intervention. The objective of assisting the Government of Djibouti in assessing the financial viability of the
 geothermal resource for power generation was clearly defined. The implementation of the exploration
 drilling program was to provide sufficient data to make a decision whether to construct a geothermal power
 plant or not. The geothermal test protocol to be developed under project was to be implemented to gather
 technical data that would be reviewed and certified by an independent technical consultant. The results
 framework included indicators to adequately capture these outcomes. The intermediate outcome indicators
 were adequate to monitor the progress in the project activities, such as the construction of the access to
 the project site and number of wells drilled. The indicators were specific, measurable, relevant, and time-
 bound.



b. M&E Implementation
  All indicators in the results framework were adequately measured and reported in the Implementation
  Status and Results Reports. The drilling contractor, geological consultant, and geothermal independent
  expert monitored and recorded the test results daily that provided the essential data to assess the
  technical quality and potential commercial viability of the geothermal source. The implementation of a
  state-of-the-art drilling and data collection system produced reliable and good quality data. These
  functions and processes could be sustained after completion of the drilling program if the commercial
  viability of the geothermal source is confirmed and the construction of a geothermal power plant is
  decided. The M&E implementation was effective.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were sufficiently communicated to various stakeholders. The M&E findings, with some
  delay, informed reallocation of Bank funds for the recruitment of the project director and the geological
  consultant to accelerate project implementation. The M&E data were sufficiently used to assess the
  achievement of the project outcomes as opposed to only providing evidence of achievement of outputs.

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



  If M&E findings confirm the technical and financial viability of the geothermal resource, the decision on a
  project for the construction of a geothermal power plant could follow.



  Overall, as a result of the use of a state-of-the-art drilling and testing system, the M&E system was
  sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and test the links in the results chain, and the
  M&E findings were used to inform the direction of the project, though with some delay. The M&E quality
  is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) safeguard policy.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
   limited adverse environmental impacts expected during the exploration activities and the construction of
   associated infrastructure including access roads, the operation of a quarry, drill pads and rigs, drilling,
   temporary accommodations, seawater supply, solid waste management, and power generation for drilling.
   The expected environmental implications of these activities were surface disturbances, noise, fluid
   withdrawal, thermal pollution, chemical pollution, and degradation of ecological environment. But the exact
   nature of the impacts could not be determined at project appraisal because the detailed design of the
   drilling program was not prepared. Therefore, an environmental and social impact assessment framework
   (ESIAF) was prepared detailing the process to be followed to manage environmental risks associated with
   the project (PAD, p.31) and disclosed in Djibouti and the Bank’s InfoShop on December 1, 2012. The ESIAF
   was to serve as a blueprint for the preparation of a detailed environmental and social impact assessment
   (ESIA) and the environmental and social management plan (ESMP).

   After the preparation of the drilling program, the ESMP was prepared and implemented. A grievance
   mechanism was established, but no complaints were received. The Bank’s safeguard specialist was located
   in the country office during project implementation. The safeguard specialist visited the project site regularly
   to monitor the implementation of the safeguard policies. The reporting of the implementation of safeguard
   policies in the project documents was detailed. There were no major safeguard-related issues, but the
   selection of an environmental auditor was delayed (Implementation Status and Results Report, No:11, p.7).
   Overall, the project was compliant with the requirements of the environmental safeguard policy.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): This safeguard policy was triggered because of the proximity of the project
   site to Lake Assal, a protected area under the Djiboutian law, and the Gulf of Goubet, a potentially sensitive
   ecosystem. The ESIAF contained measures to manage the risk of untreated geothermal and drilling fluids
   discharge to these water bodies or their watersheds. The ICR did not report about the implementation of
   this safeguard policy. In their email dated May 13, 2021, the project team stated that the environmental


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



  auditor reviewed the procedures for the use of natural resources and natural habitat reservation and were
  found to be compliant with the requirements of this safeguard policy. All drilling well liquid and solid releases
  were analyzed. The analysis of water discharges and sludge from boreholes was carried out—occasionally
  with delay—and was certified to satisfy the requirements of environmental rules and procedures.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The financial management arrangements were adequate. The Bank’s financial management specialist was
  located in Djibouti and provided support to the newly formed project implementation unit in financial
  management. The project’s quarterly unaudited financial reports were submitted to the Bank without delay.
  The independent audits were completed within the timeframe defined in the financing agreements, except
  the audit in 2018 that was delayed because of the hiring of a new firm financed by the AfDB. The audits
  were unqualified and acceptable to the Bank. There were no issues with the availability of counterpart
  funds. Internal control procedures were in place and there were no issues of corruption or misuse of funds
  associated with the project. The project’s financial management complied with the Bank’s requirements.
  However, there were coordination issues in planning and budgeting and flow of funds. The effectiveness of
  the Bank’s financing was contingent upon the execution of the co-financing agreements between the
  Government of Djibouti and other donors. Because of the delays in the execution of these co-financing
  agreements, the Bank’s financing could only become effective about one year after the signing of the
  financing agreement, which resulted in two project restructurings to allocate funds to activities originally to
  be funded by other donors. At project closing, all Bank funds were accounted for.

  Procurement

  Procurement of Bank-financed activities was implemented in accordance with the Bank’s procurement
  policies and procedures. The Bank’s procurement specialist was stationed in Djibouti and provided support
  to the project implementation unit and the procurement consultant hired under the project. However, the
  donor coordination and procurement risks were not adequately identified at appraisal (ICR, p.19). The
  project implementation was adversely affected by delays in procurement because of different procurement
  policies and procedures of the donors. For example, the initial procurement of the project director was
  cancelled and relaunched because of disagreements among donors on procurement processes. There
  were also delays in issuing no-objections by other donors. Such procurement issues contributed to a
  delayed start of drilling program in July 2018, five years after the signing of the financing agreements. As
  the lead donor, the Bank intervened to improve donor coordination on procurement through frequent and
  direct consultations with the project implementation unit and the donors (ICR, p.21).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                The ICR erroneously rates the
                                                                                outcome of the project as
                                                                                moderately unsatisfactory.
                                                                                According to the Bank guidance
                                                                                (p.38), with relevance of
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Unsatisfactory              objectives rated high,
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                                achievement of the objectives
                                                                                rated modest, and efficiency of
                                                                                the project rated negligible, the
                                                                                outcome rating should be
                                                                                unsatisfactory.
                                                                                Quality at entry is rated
                                                                                moderately unsatisfactory
                                                                                because of shortcomings in
                                                                                estimating the project cost and
                                                                                identifying the risks. The quality
                                                                                of supervision is rated
                                                                                moderately satisfactory.
                                                                                According to the Bank guidance
                               Moderately           Moderately                  (p.23), when the assessment of
Bank Performance
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              one dimension is in the
                                                                                satisfactory range, and that of
                                                                                the other dimension is in the
                                                                                unsatisfactory range, overall
                                                                                Bank performance depends on
                                                                                the outcome rating. Since the
                                                                                outcome rating is unsatisfactory,
                                                                                the Bank performance is rated
                                                                                moderately unsatisfactory.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are taken from the ICR.



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



If the cost of the high-risk exploratory drilling phase of a geothermal resource development
project is not appropriately estimated including an allocation for contingencies, it can result
in low interest from contractors and critically affect the achievement of project outcomes. At
appraisal, project costs were estimated based on international industry benchmarks. In estimating
the costs, conditions specific to Djibouti, a country with limited experience in geothermal resource
development, were not taken into consideration, such as logistical constraints, the remote
geographical location of the project site, the size of the drilling program and the overall country risk.
The project budget was much lower than the actual costs of implementing such a high-risk drilling
program in the Djibouti country context. Two companies bid for the implementation of the program,
of which only one satisfied the bid requirements, but the bid was much higher than the cost
estimated at appraisal. This delayed the implementation of the project because of lengthy
negotiations, and at project closing, the expected outcomes were not achieved.

An early start of the procurement processes of the main contracts for key professionals
during project preparation can prevent lengthy delays in project implementation. Since the
skills and experience of the borrower’s staff in geothermal resource development was limited, the
project was to hire professionals to key positions, such as project director and geothermal adviser.
The procurement processes were not started during project preparation and bidding documents
were not prepared. These were to start after project effectiveness, which was delayed by almost one
year. Subsequent coordination issues among the donors further delayed the hiring of these
professionals. After the completion of the hiring processes, the project director and the geothermal
adviser arrived in Djibouti in the second half of 2015, more than two years after project approval.

Weak and fragmented coordination among donors can adversely impact project
implementation. The Bank was the lead donor of the project, and the AfDB and the FDA were the
co-financiers. A protocol or a memorandum of understanding defining the coordination mechanisms
among the donors was not concluded during project preparation. Donors had different procurement
processes that conflicted with each other. The first hiring process of the project director was
cancelled because of these conflicting procurement processes. These led to significant delays in
project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative is candid in explaining the
shortcomings in project implementation. There is sufficient clarity in the report’s message. It is internally
consistent and focused on what occurred as a consequence of the project. The report is generally evaluative
and consistent with the Bank guidance. There is a logical linking and integration of the various parts of the
report. The theory of change is adequately presented. The lessons are mostly useful and based on evidence
outlined in the report. However, the outcome is erroneously rated moderately satisfactory. Given the sub-ratings
for relevance of objectives (high), efficacy (modest) and efficiency (negligible), the outcome rating stipulated by
the guidelines should be unsatisfactory. Moreover, the economic analysis at project closing was incomplete

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DJ Geothermal Power Generation Project (P127143)



because of the absence of a feasibility study. The ICR also did not provide information about the
implementation of the Natural Habitats safeguard policy that was triggered at appraisal.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
