     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0022455

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P120860                                   PERU CAT DDO

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-79760                                09-Dec-2013                                                   0.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Dec-2010                               09-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Stephen Hutton               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD
 Krishnamani



2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Program Document (PD, page 1) was:
   " To strengthen the Government's capacity to mobilize resources in case of disaster and to promote
   risk reduction".
   For the purpose of this evaluation, the individual objectives of this Development Policy Operation (DPO) are
   identified as follows:
   PDO 1. To strengthen the Government's capacity to mobilize resources in case of disaster.
   PDO 2. To promote risk reduction.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 11
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PERU CAT DDO(P120860)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
   The PDOs were to be achieved through reforms under three policy areas /pillars (PD, page 22).
   1. Risk reduction policies in public investment. Under this policy area, reforms supported the budgetary
   program for Disaster Risk Management (DRM) and emergency response activities. Specifically, the policy
   area aimed to allocate annual budget for DRM activities.
   2. Vulnerability reduction actions in priority sectors. Under this policy area, reforms aimed to
   promote DRM in the two priority sectors identified in the Government's Disaster Vulnerability Response
   Program. Specifically, the policy area aimed to incorporate DRM in the health and water and sanitation
   sectors. These sectors had been affected by the 2007 earthquake, and faced challenges associated
   with resuming service delivery in the wake of the earthquake.
   3. Mechanisms for financial protection against disasters resulting from natural events. Under this
   policy area, reforms aimed to implement a financial protection strategy to reduce the financial impact
   of disasters. Specifically, the policy area aimed to: (i) provide liquidity in the case of medium-size disasters
   that cannot be funded with internal reserves, and to provide bridge financing while other sources of financing
   are being mobilized: and (ii) supporting the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) in developing guidelines
   for public investment projects in a post-disaster context.



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Financing This DPO, with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO) was financed by an IBRD
   Loan of US$100.0 million. There were no requests for withdrawals under this operation. There was parallel
   financing for complementary DRM operations by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB).
   Dates. The operation approved on December 20, 2011, was scheduled to close on December 9, 2013. The
   operation was renewed for three-year periods in 2013 and 2016 respectively. The operation closed on
   December 9, 2019.
   Other changes. The following changes were made when the operation was renewed in 2013 and 2016. Six
   of the seven expected results under the three pillars were fully achieved by June 2013. No new target for
   the health sector indicator was set, as the target for this indicator was fully achieved later in 2013. New
   targets for the results indicators for the three policy areas were established, when the operation was
   renewed in 2016.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  Country context. Peru with six major earthquakes in the past century, is vulnerable to natural disasters,
  including earthquakes, droughts, floods, and other hydro-meteorological events. This operation was prepared


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 11
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



against the backdrop of the country recovering from the 2007 earthquake, and the challenges encountered
with resumption of delivery of critical services, in the wake of the earthquake.
This operation aimed to address two development challenges. In the years before this operation was
prepared, Peru did not have budgetary allocations specifically aimed to promote Disaster Risk Management
(DRM) activities. In the absence of adequate financing, the priority sectors had insufficiently mitigated disaster
vulnerability. Likewise, the Government did not yet have a comprehensive financial strategy for addressing
DRM measures. It was important for the government to access immediate liquidity for addressing medium-
sized disasters, that could not be funded with internal reserves. This operation responded to the development
challenges of promoting risk reduction in priority sectors through integrating DRM policies in Peru's
development and planning processes, and ensuring immediate liquidity to resume service delivery in priority
sectors following a natural disaster, as the Government was developing a comprehensive financial DRM
strategy.
Government strategy. The tenth policy of the National Agreement of 2004, highlighted the importance of
allocating resources for promoting DRM policies. In the years before appraisal in 2011, the government
enacted several laws, signaling its intention to move away from the hitherto emergency response approach to
natural disasters and moving towards integrating DRM policies in the development and planning
processes. These laws, included authorizing the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) to
access contingent credit for disasters, implementing a results-based budgeting approach for allocating public
resources to sectors, incorporating a "disaster protection" category in public investment projects, and
establishing a new national DRM system and related policy framework.
Bank strategy. The PDOs were and remain priorities for Bank support, given the economic losses and social
impacts due to natural disasters in Peru in the past, and most recently in the wake of the El Nino Costero
event in March 2017. This first pillar of the World Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2007 -
2011, emphasized the need for sustaining economic growth through reducing vulnerabilities to natural
disasters. The pillar three of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017 -2021, highlighted the
importance of addressing natural and climate management risks.
The Bank has supported Peru's development goals in the past through a mix of Development Policy Loans
(DPLs), investment lending and technical assistance. This operation approved in 2011, was the first
Catastrophe Development Policy Operation with a Deferred Drawdown Option (DPL -DDOs). The analytical
underpinnings of the operation were sound, and the operation was designed on the practical experiences
from operations executed by the Bank in Latin America (discussed in section 8a). Alongside this
operation, the Bank approved a second DPL-DDO in 2015, with activities complementary to this
operation. The second DPL built on the progress of the first operation, adding policy areas aimed
to support DRM practices in the education and housing sectors. The two operations intended to provide bridge
financing in the event of natural disasters, that would enable a quicker response to emergency
needs. Although there were no withdrawals under the first operation, Bank funds under the second operation
aided in responding to the national state of emergency caused by landslides and flooding, in the wake of
the Nino Costero event.



Rating


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 11
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



       ---

   b. Relevance of Design
         ---



       Rating
       ---


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     Pillar one objective. Risk reduction policies in public investment.

    Rationale
    The Strategic Budgetary Program on Disaster Vulnerability Reduction and Emergency Response Program
    (PREVED) was created in 2010 to provide public resources to sectors for emergency response, and
    promote DRM measures in public investment projects. Unlike in the past when there was no dedicated public
    resources for this program, the budget was to allocate funding annually specifically for this program. Through
    this program, the Government aimed to address some of the challenges it faced, such as dispersed
    information on investments, lack of an institutional planning process, and monitoring and evaluation
    mechanisms for the DRM activities. The program allocated funding for the three levels of government - 12
    ministries at the national level, 26 regional governments and over 1,000 local level governments - along
    products related to risk identification, estimation, prevention, risk reduction, emergency response and
    rehabilitation processes.
    The National Budgets from 2011 -2019 annually allocated funding specifically for this program. The ICR
    provides no information on the share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) allocated to the program each
    year. The absolute amount allocated for the program in US$ terms (using the conversion rate One US$ =
    3.57 Peruvian Nuevo Solo (PEN).;

        •    2011.   US$15.4 million.
        •    2012.   US$39.6 million.
        •    2013.   US$202.4 million.
        •    2014.   US$229.6 million.
        •    2015.   US$280.1 million.
        •    2016.   US$596.5 million.
        •    2017.   US$ 245.0 million.
        •    2018.   US$245.0 million.


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



        •   2019. US$377.8 million.

    The ICR (paragraph 28) notes that funds allocated were more in 2015 and 2016 due to the forecasts of
    potentially strong El Nino events, which affected the country in 2017. The amounts allocated to the program
    is publicly available through the website of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. Given that unlike in the
    past, there is now a dedicated source of funding for emergency response and DRM activities, this pillar
    made a major contribution to the achievement of the PDO. This pillar is rated as satisfactory.
    When this operation was prepared, the MEF identified two lines of action relating to public investments:
    (a) update the procedures for post-disaster investments in the National Public Investment System (SNIP)
    and (b) integrate DRM considerations in public investments. In 2017, a new investment system was
    approved, which required an upgrade to all processes. The general guidelines to formulate and evaluate
    public investment projects was approved in 2019, included guidelines to integrate DRM considerations in
    public projects. The ICR lacks evidence on what changes have been made for implementing post-disaster
    public investments. Given this, the contribution of this pillar is rated as moderately satisfactory.
    The overall relevance of this pillar is rated as satisfactory.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     Pillar two objective. Vulnerability reduction actions in priority sectors.

    Rationale
    2a. Vulnerability reduction actions in health sector.
    Reforms in this area aimed to promote risk reduction in the health sector. Three results were expected: (a)
    completing at least 20% studies of structural vulnerability of the Ministry of Health's (MINSA) hospitals that
    qualified for retrofitting: (b) evaluating 90% of the MINSA's existing hospitals with the Hospital Safety Index:
    and (c) incorporating risk analysis during the formulation phase in all new hospitals built after 2011.
    In 2010, the health sector approved the National Safe Hospitals Policy. This policy included a broad
    framework for vulnerability reduction actions in health facilities, that were to be implemented through master
    investment plans. Activities to operationalize the policy included: (a) using the Pan American Health
    Organizations Hospital Safety Index (HSP) to provide a snapshot of the probability that a hospital will
    maintain operations during and after an emergency situation: (b) carrying out structural vulnerability studies
    of MINSA's hospitals : (c) structural retrofitting: (d) vulnerability reduction of non structural elements: (e)
    update of technical specifications for new infrastructure: and (f) contingency plans. The first National Safe
    Hospitals Policy and the corresponding action plan were valid from 2010 - 2015. A new policy and action
    plan for 2017 - 2021 was updated and approved through a Supreme Decree 027-2017. The ICR notes that
    between 2016 -2017 Peru did not have an active national health policy.



                                                                                                           Page 5 of 11
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



    Fifteen structural vulnerability studies of MINSA hospitals were completed in 2016, as compared to one at
    the baseline in 2010. By 2015, 91% of hospitals were evaluated under the Hospital Safety Index, exceeding
    the target of 90%. In 2017, MINSA signed an agreement with the Peruvian-Japanese center for Seismic
    Research and Disaster Mitigation for retrofitting works in five hospitals in Lima. The ICR (paragraph 33)
    notes two of the hospitals were determined to be cultural heritage and hence required coordination with the
    Ministry of Culture to preserve the historic buildings. All the technical details were only completed by
    early 2020. The five hospitals were allotted US$24 million by the PREVED program. Retrofitting works on
    these hospitals are expected to be completed by March 2022, on account of the delays in initiating the works
    due to the COVID - 19 pandemic. All Public Investment Projects for new hospitals built after 2011 included
    risk analysis in the formulation phase. This pillar is rated as satisfactory.
    2a. Vulnerability reduction actions in the water and sanitation sector.
    In 2007, the National Superintendence of Sanitation Services (SUNASS) approved a regulation for the
    Quality of Provision of Sanitation Services. This regulation mandated the Water and Sanitation Services
    (EPS) to develop plans to respond to emergency situations, including disasters caused by natural
    hazards. As of October 2019, 42 of the 50 EPS had set aside funds to implement DRM and climate change
    adaptation actions, at an estimated US$119 million. The goal was to set two percent of the annual income of
    the EPS on average for DRM activities. SUNASS also had an indicator for DRM for monitoring the following
    activities: (a) establish an emergency Committee: (b) present a plan for mitigation measures: (c) present an
    emergency plan: and support the dissemination of the emergency plan. By 2019, only 16 of the EPS had
    fulfilled all the four activities. Given the limited achievement of reducing vulnerability in the water and
    sanitation sectors, the overall contribution is rated as moderately satisfactory.
    The overall contribution of this pillar is rated as moderately satisfactory.



    Rating
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 3
    Objective
     Pillar three objective. To strengthen the Government's capacity to mobilize resources in case of disaster.

    Rationale
    Reforms in this area aimed at strengthening the Government's capacity to quickly mobilize resources in the
    wake of a disaster. Two results were expected originally: (a) The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)
    mobilized a pool of financial instruments to better respond to the financial impact of disasters: and (b) the
    MEF revised its current framework for implementing post-disaster public investments.
    1. To mobilize resources in the event of a disaster.
    Under the National Disaster Risk Management System (SINAGERD) law, the MEF was responsible for
    identifying and evaluating mechanisms to ensure that Peru has the financial capacity to manage major
    disasters, the reconstruction phases and mechanisms for DRM. By 2013, the MEF created the Directorate


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 11
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



    Risk Management, and three contingency loans were under preparation, with the Development Bank
    for Latin America (CAF), the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and the Japan International
    Cooperation Agency (JICA). At the time of the second renewal, the MEF had contingent credit line to
    respond to the impact of disasters of almost US$1.2 billion. This included both Cat DDO operations for a
    total of US$500 million, US$300 million from CAF, US$300 million from the IADB, and US$83 million from
    JICA.
    In 2018, the Government signed the first catastrophe bond issued by the World Bank, as part of the Pacific
    Alliance for providing insurance protection of US$200 million against earthquake losses. The ICR (paragraph
    40) notes that this was the first time the Pacific Alliance - Chile, Colombia and Peru - accessed the capital
    markets to obtain insurance for natural disasters. In May 2019, after the earthquake in the Amazonas region
    in the northeast of country, a partial payment of US$60 million was made and the funds were transferred to
    the Fund for Intervention in the Event of Natural Disasters (FONDES). The relevance of this prior action for
    the achievement of the program objective is rated as satisfactory.



    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The Peru CAT DDO's design relevance is Satisfactory. Of the three pillars, two were clear and credible. The
  operation achieved most of its results. Given these achievements, outcome is rated as satisfactory.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  Macroeconomic and Government Commitment risk. The ICR (paragraph 5) notes that the Government is
  currently managing the COVID - 19 pandemic and its financial and economic impacts. This includes a financial
  response package estimated at 12% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Given the economic impact of the
  pandemic, there is a risk that funding for DRM activities may be undermined.
  Technical risk. There is a technical risk, given that the retrofitting of the hospital infrastructure is yet to be
  completed. .
  Institutional risk. Although guidelines for formulating public investment projects incorporating DRM
  considerations were approved, it still remains to be seen whether there is adequate implementation capacity for
  executing such projects.

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 11
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         PERU CAT DDO(P120860)




a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
    ---

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   ---


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  ---

b. Quality of supervision
   ---


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  ---

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
    ---


  Government Performance Rating
  ---

b. Implementing Agency Performance
   ---


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  ---

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating
   ---


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                             Page 8 of 11
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



a. M&E Design
       ---


b. M&E Implementation
       ---


c. M&E Utilization
       ---


  M&E Quality Rating
  ---

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
       ---




b. Fiduciary Compliance
 ---


c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
       ---


d. Other
       ---



11. Ratings
                                                                          Reason for
Ratings                      ICR               IEG
                                                                          Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                      Satisfactory      Satisfactory               ---
Bank Performance             Satisfactory      Satisfactory               ---
Relevance of Results
                                               Moderately Satisfactory    ---
Indicators

                                                                                            Page 9 of 11
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        PERU CAT DDO(P120860)



Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                 ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lesson from the experience of implementing this operation, with some
adaptation of language.

  •  When prior actions and indicators are selected appropriately, a cat DDO can provide significant assistance
  in influencing important disaster-related policy reforms. In this operation, annual budgetary allocation for
  DRM was clearly an appropriate quantitative indicator for driving sector reforms, aimed to promote disaster
  risk management in priority sectors.

The IEG draws the following lesson from this operation.

  • For a Cat DDO that is renewed multiple times, revisions and updates of indicators and targets around each
  renewal are important for monitoring and providing evidence on downstream operationalization of reform
  trajectories. Where indicators are updated, this provides an opportunity to continue to influence sectoral
  reforms even without new prior actions. Where indicators are not updated, it becomes more difficult to know
  whether reform trajectories are being sufficiently sustained or are lagging.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well prepared and concise. It provides a good analysis of the prior actions and for the most part,
clearly discusses the causal links, between the prior actions and the project outcomes. The ICR, including
annexes presents a robust evidence base to support the achievements achieved. The ICR is consistent with
the guidelines with regards to ratings. The ICR appropriately includes the Borrower comments in an annex.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 11
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PERU CAT DDO(P120860)




                                                                  Page 11 of 11
