     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022591

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P122776                                    Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Gabon                                      Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81500,IBRD-86290                      31-Dec-2016                                         78,129,443.91

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2012                                31-Oct-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           58,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            78,739,092.81                                               0.00

 Actual                                        78,129,443.91                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs), as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 10), were:

    " To contribute to increase geographical reach and usage of the regional broadband network services
   and reduce their prices in the territory of the Gabonese Republic".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



   This review is based on the three sub-objectives: (i) To contribute to increase geographical reach of regional
   broadband network services; (ii) To contribute to reduce the prices of regional broadband network services;
   and (iii) To contribute to increase the usage of regional broadband network services.

   This review is not based on a split rating of objectives, as the PDOs did not change and targets were
   expanded with the increased scope of Additional Financing (AF) for the project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  22-Nov-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project was the fourth phase of the Central African Backbone (CAB) program, aimed at catalyzing
   private sector investment in the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector
   and providing broadband connectivity to all capital cities and main secondary cities in Central Africa. The
   first phase of the program was in Central African Republic, Cameroon and Chad, the second in Sao Tome
   and Principe. and the third in the Republic of Congo.

   There were three components (PAD, pages 12 -13):

   1. Enabling environment. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$6.0 million. The revised estimate
   with AF was US$10.9 million. The actual cost was US$12.4 million. This component aimed at creating an
   enabling environment for development of the ICT sector. Activities included: (i) Technical Assistance
   (TA) for implementing an Open Access Regime, and Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements
   for international and national connectivity (Open Access refers to an arrangement through which network is
   open to independent service providers); (ii) TA for developing telecoms and information laws; (iii) capacity
   building of key stakeholders (Ministry of Communication, Post and Digital Economy (MCPEN), the National
   Agency for Digital Infrastructure and Frequencies (ANINF), and the Posts and Electronic Commissions
   Regulatory Agency (ARCEP); (iv) TA for increasing broadband access in rural areas, establishing an
   Internet Exchange Point (IXP), management policy for Internet domain names, and scaling-up the e-
   government strategy.

   Revised component 1. This component was scaled up to include TA for strengthening and deepening local
   and regulatory reforms in the digital sector, and to ensure the sustainability of impacts already achieved
   under the parent project.

   2. Connectivity. The estimated cost of this component was US$65.0 million. The actual cost was US$59.5
   million. This component aimed at increasing connectivity on the basis of an open access regime and PPP

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



  arrangements. Activities included: (i) financing a share of the government's US$15.0 million consortium fee
  for participating in the Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) cable; (ii) a terrestrial fiber optic link with the Republic
  of Congo to interconnect with the Congolese link, and additional links in the first phase of roll out of a
  national backbone; and (iii) setting an Internet Exchange Point (IEP) and a Carrier Hotel to
  access international and national backbone capacity (a carrier hotel refers to a secure physical site or
  building where data communications media converge).

  Revised component 2. The scope of this component was increased to extend the existing backbone
  network, and to finance the strategic terrestrial fiber link between two additional provincial capitals
  (Lambarne and Oyem) and Gabon's borders with Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea.

  3. Project Management. The estimated cost of this component was US$3.0 million. With AF, the revised
  estimate was US$5.04 million. The actual cost was US$3.5 million. This component provided project
  management support in the areas of social and environmental studies, audits, monitoring and evaluation,
  and capacity building of the relevant agencies.

  Revised component 3. Strengthen the client's capacity to implement the Additional Financing.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$109.0 million. The revised estimate with AF was
  US$132.0 million. The actual cost was US$78.9 million.

  Project financing. This project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$58.0 million. AF of US$23.0 million
  was approved on June 29, 2017. With this the Bank financing for the project was US$81.0 million. The
  amount disbursed was US$78.9 million.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US51.0 million at appraisal. According
  to the information provided by the team, their actual contribution was US$53.1 million (including US$51
  million for the original project and US$2.1 million for the AF project).

  Co-financing. None.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 28, 2012, became effective on March 6, 2013, and was
  scheduled to close on December 31, 2016. AF was approved on June 29, 2017 with a closing date of June
  30, 2018. The project closed on October 31, 2020.

  Restructurings. There were five Level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime.

  These changes were made through the first restructuring approved on November 22, 2016.

        The closing date for the original project was extended from December 31, 2016, to June 30, 2018, to
         match the closing date of the AF.
        Changes were made to the results framework, targets for some key outcome indicators were
         increased, and an intermediate indicator on affordability of ICT services was added.




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



         Procurement arrangements were changed in line with the Bank's most recent procurement
          guidelines (2014).

   These changes were made through the second restructuring approved on May 16, 2018.

         The closing date for the original project was extended by four months to November 30, 2018, for
          completing activities associated with the first phase of the fiber optic backbone that had been subject
          to procurement delays.
         The closing date for the AF project was extended by a year from June 30, 2018, to June 30, 2019,
          due to the procurement delays associated with the second phase of the fiber optic infrastructure.

   The closing date for the AF project was extended by nine months from June 30, 2019, to March 31, 2020,
   through the third restructuring approved on April 11, 2019, due to procurement delays and delays
   associated with getting the passive equipment from abroad, that was required for the second phase of the
   fiber optic backbone.

   The closing date for the AF project was extended by three months from March 31, 2020, to June 30,
   2020, through the fourth restructuring approved on March 4, 2020, to operationalize the fiber-optic
   infrastructure, and finalize the ongoing PPP negotiations for the new infrastructure.

   The closing date was extended by four months from June 30, 2020, to October 31, 2020, through the fifth
   restructuring approved on June 26, 2020, to complete the ongoing component two activities that had been
   impacted by the restrictions due to the COVID - 19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Gabon, with a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of US$9,814, is a
middle-income country in Sub-Saharan Africa, with an economy highly dependent on the oil sector (the
sector accounted for 45% of GDP). Diversification of the economy was important in the country
context. Gabon in the years before appraisal had demonstrated a strong commitment to liberalizing the
telecommunication sector, and the sector at the local level was competitive, with four operators in
the mobile telecom sector, and voice telephony penetration rate of 145%. Mobile data and fixed broadband
penetration was however limited to 13.5% and 0.5% of the population. This was mainly due to the
high prices charged by the incumbent Gabon Telecom's monopoly on international connectivity through the
country's only submarine cable - the West African Cable System (WACS). That monopoly ended on
February 2012, with the creation of an independent sector regulator, the Posts and Electronic
Communications Regulatory Agency (ARCEP), just before this project was approved on March 2012.

Government and Regional strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were well-aligned with the Government's
three-year strategy, articulated in its July 2012 Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan"
(PSGE). The strategy aimed at increasing the geographical reach, usage, and affordability of broadband
services, through providing new international and national connectivity. The Government's vision for
2025 outlined in the PSGE, was reinforced in January 2021, through the Government's Plan for the


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



               Acceleration of Transformation. At the regional level, the PDOs were aligned with the Central African
               Economic and Monetary Community's (CEMAC), and the Economic Community of Central African States
               (ECCAS) goals of creating an integrated and competitive economic space in Central Africa.

               World Bank country strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal the
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2012 -2016 underscored the need for increasing geographical
               reach and usage of regional broadband network services, and reducing their prices. The PDOs are also
               aligned with the priorities listed in the Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Gabon, issued on
               June 26, 2020 (job creation, economic diversification, improved service delivery and connectivity). The
               PDOs are relevant to the objectives of the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) under preparation.
               The third and the fourth objectives of this CPF highlights the need for "further diversification of the
               economy" and "increasing public-service digitization and connectivity."

               Bank's regional strategy. The PDOs are consistent with the objectives of the Bank's Regional Integration
               Assistance Strategy (RIAS) " Partnering for Africa's Regional Integration" for Africa, issued in 2011. The
               RIAS highlighted the need for supporting the "completing the connection of countries to submarine cables".
               The PDOs remain relevant to the priorities outlined in the recent Regional Integration and Cooperation
               Assistance Strategy for Africa (2018-2023). The second strategic objective of the RIAS specifically
               underscores the need for expanding telecom/ICT access, reducing costs to consumers, and promoting
               regional digital connectivity. Further, the ongoing COVID -19 pandemic has underscored the importance of
               connectivity to manage and respond to the crisis, with evidence showing that countries with advanced
               digital connectivity can better mitigate the negative effects of the pandemic. The Bank's COVID -19 crisis
               response paper views digital connectivity as an enabler of the response to, and recovery from the
               pandemic.

               Prior Bank experience. The activities of this ICT project, the fourth phase of the CAB program,
               were similar to the projects implemented in countries in the other phases. The areas of intervention were
               appropriate, with the project targeting provinces with weak network coverage, and populations with poor
               broadband access (ICR, page 45). The project design included activities aimed at providing technical
               support for conducting PPP negotiations, and building capacity of the newly created independent sector
               regulator. The project scope was expanded with AF to extend, the existing backbone network,
               and the strategic terrestrial fiber link to additional provincial capitals and Gabon's borders with Cameroon
               and Equatorial Guinea. Given that the project activities aimed at driving the ICT sector reforms, the project
               reach was appropriate. The relevance of PDOs is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



To contribute to increase geographical reach of regional broadband network services.

Rationale
Theory of change. The project activities included capacity building activities and infrastructure investments
and the causal links between activities, outputs, outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were
measurable. Strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, capacity building of the relevant sector
agencies on policy and the newly created independent regulator on regulatory matters, promoting an Open
Access and PPP regime, were aimed at fostering competition and private sector participation in the ICT
sector. While joining the Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) consortium and constructing the terrestrial, national
fiber-optic network were aimed at improving access to international connectivity, constructing an Internet
Exchange Point were aimed at faster and cheaper exchange of local traffic. These activities were likely to
increase the geographical reach of regional broadband network services, and reduce their prices.

Outputs (ICR, pages 15 - 17).

      The capacity building activities were completed as targeted. These included: (i) TA for promoting PPP
       and Open Access (the open-access model enables service providers to reach subscribers without
       having to deploy new infrastructure themselves); (ii) the review of telecom and information laws; (iii) a
       study on Gabon's universal access strategy; (iv) capacity building of the Ministry of Communication,
       Postal Services and Digital Economy (MCPEN) and the National Agency for Digital Infrastructure and
       Frequencies (ANINF) on policy, and of the Regulatory Authority for Electronic Communications and
       Postal Services (ARCEP) on regulatory issues. The ICR (paragraph 15) notes that Gabon's overall
       rating in the International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) Independent Regulatory Tracker Index
       increased from 50 to 64 between 2012 and 2019, with the sub-ratings for regulatory regime and
       competition framework increasing by 58% and 50% respectively.

      Gabon became a member of the Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) Consortium and was connected to the
       global internet through the ACE submarine cable (ACE is a submarine cable system that connects 24
       countries on the West Coast of Africa to Europe. It is managed by a consortium of 19 members). The
       1,760 kilometer (km) fiber-optic terrestrial backbone connected 26 cities in Gabon to the capital,
       Libreville and the borders of Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea. The first 1,140 km (phase one) of this
       fiber-optic backbone was operating commercially from February 2019, under PPP arrangements with
       Axione (a subsidiary of France's Bouyges Energies and Services).

      The physical interconnection with the Republic of Congo Republic was completed and internet traffic
       was being exchanged between operators across the border as of December 2020.

      The 620 km extension of the fiber-optic backbone (phase 2) was completed on March 2020. This
       extension was however not yet operational, due to the delays in the renegotiation of the terms of the
       original PPP between the Gabonese authorities and Axione. Negotiations around the network
       extension were however concluded successfully in October 2020, and the revised PPP agreement
       was signed in March 2021. According to the clarifications provided by the team, this link is expected to
       be commercial by June 2021.

      Exchange of internet traffic between Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea was still pending when the
       project closed, due to factors beyond the control of the Gabonese authorities (Although the
       Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between Gabon and Cameroon was signed in 2019, the


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



       physical interconnection on the Cameroonian side still has to be finalized. Regarding Equatorial
       Guinea, although the final draft of the MOU was finalized in September 2020, the signing of the MOU
       was delayed due to COVID - 19.

      21 operators and Internet Service providers were buying capacity from the deployed regional
       infrastructure as targeted.

      International Communications (Internet, Telecoms and Data) bandwidth increased from 1.20 Gbps at
       the baseline to 48.8 Gbps at project closure, exceeding the target of 37 Gbps.

      225 localities had broadband access when the project closed, as compared to three at the baseline
       and the target of 30 localities.

Outcome

The project activities increased the geographical reach of regional broadband services. The international
internet bandwidth (measured in bits per second (bps) per person increased from 4,620 bps in 2010
(baseline) to 35,321 bps, exceeding the target of 14,712 bps by 140%.

Although, the 620 km of the fiber optic backbone (Phase 2) was not commercial at project close, the key
outcome was exceeded. Efficacy of the objective is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To contribute to reduce the prices of regional broadband network services.

Rationale
The theory of change under the first objective is applicable here, with the associated activities likely to reduce
the prices of regional broadband network services.

Outputs (ICR, pages 17 - 18).

      The outputs associated with adoption of an Open Access Regime aimed at fostering
       competition were also relevant for this objective.

      The Gabon Internet Exchange (GABIX) was operational since 2014.

Outcomes

The activities described above were expected to reduce the prices of regional broadband network services.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)




      The average monthly price of wholesale international E1 capacity link from the capital city of Gabon to
       Europe decreased from US$10,500 in December 31, 2020 (baseline) to US$273, slightly short of the
       target of US$235.

      The retail price of internet services (per Mbit/s per month) decreased from US$218 at the baseline to
       US$8 on December 31, 2018, as targeted.

      The average cost of a three-minute mobile call dropped from US$0.71 at the baseline to
       US$0.36, short of the target of US$0.30.The ICR (page 18) notes that this could have been due to the
       imposition of a new excise tax on operators.

      The indicator associated with affordability of internet prices was not monitored as envisioned.

Although there were some shortcomings, given that the outcomes were realized for the most part, efficacy of
this objective is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To contribute to increase the usage of regional broadband network services.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The activities described above to increase the geographical reach of regional broadband
network services and reduce their prices were expected to contribute to the increased usage of broadband
services.

Outputs (ICR, page 17).

      These TA activities were completed as targeted: (i) a review of Gabon's universal access strategy; (ii)
       developing a strategy for promoting broadband usage; (iii) revision of laws on electronic transactions,
       electronic communications, privacy and data protection, cybersecurity, and cybercrime.

      The management policy for domain names for developing local web sites was implemented.

Outcomes

      The number of beneficiaries (defined as people who were connected to the internet or more generally
       to the communications network) increased to 1,706,086, exceeding the original target of 1,448,410.
       51% the beneficiaries were women as targeted.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)




                                  Access to telephony services (fixed mainlines and cellular phones) per 100 people increased to 167,
                                   exceeding the end target of 147.

                            The ICR notes that the e International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) indicator "international internet
                            bandwidth per internet user" more than doubled from 5.8 kb/s in 2012 to 11.84 kbs/s in 2017, and the ITU's
                            "percentage of individuals using the internet" indicator jumped from 24% in 2012 to 62% in 2019.

                            Given that the outcomes were realized, efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The key outcome indicators were realized for the most part, with minor shortcomings. The project
                            substantially contributed to increased geographical reach and usage of regional broadband network services
                            and reduced their prices in the Republic of Gabon. Overall efficacy is rated as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Financial analysis. A financial analysis was performed at appraisal of the original project in 2012. The analysis
   considered several radio wave, satellite, and fiber optic options. The analysis concluded that given the pent-up
   demand for internet services, terrestrial fiber links were the best overall option in terms of long-term cost
   effectiveness and bandwidth availability. All scenarios showed a positive Internal Rate of Return (IRR), even in
   adverse conditions caused by higher-than expected project costs or lower than expected demand. The Net
   Present Value (NPV) at 15% discount rate was US$8 million and the IRR was 26%. The financial analysis of
   the original project was revised in 2016 to simulate the impact of the additional fiber links financed under the AF
   to reflect the higher than expected internet penetration impact of the additional fiber links financed under the AF.
   Using a discount rate of 15%, the scaled up project was estimated to have a NPV of US$2.2 million and
   an IRR of 16%. The ICR (paragraph 47) notes that financial analysis could not be updated, as no business plan
   had been received for the operationalization of the "Phase 2" network constructed under the project.

   The ICR (paragraph 47) notes that the data provided by the private operator Axione in April 2021 indicated that
   revenues generated through the PPP were 20% higher than expected at the time of signing (after five years).



                                                                                                                             Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



The ICR also notes that project management costs were 4.7% of the total project costs, lower than the ratios in
comparable projects (Congo 7.6%, Liberia 6.5% and Benin 5.1%).

Administrative and operational issues. There were no cost overruns. However there were shortcomings that
caused time overruns. These shortcomings included: slow implementation due to delays in the national
procedure for the approval of the loan agreement, procurement delays, and lengthy PPP negotiations.

Despite some operational issues, most of the activities were completed with no cost overruns. Efficiency is rated
as substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  26.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs to the Government and the Bank strategy is high. The project substantially
contributed to increasing geographical reach and usage of regional broadband network services and reduced
their prices in the Republic of Gabon. Efficiency is rated substantial. Taking these ratings into account, overall
outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Ownership/Commitment. The broadband and digital technologies are likely to remain top
priorities of the Government in the medium and long terms, as outlined in the Emerging Gabon Strategic
Plan 2023. This risk is assessed as low.



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



Operational risk. The ICR (paragraph 94) notes that technical audits showed that issues pertaining to
outages and defects were addressed promptly by the authorities during the operationalization of the first
phase (the backbone network was commercialized in February 2019). This risk is assessed as low.

Economic risk. Although cross-border traffic with the Congolese Republic was exchanged since December
2020, there is substantial risk that cross-border traffic with Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea may not
materialize in the near future - due to factors that are largely outside the Gabonese Government’s control:
construction delays on the Cameroonian side, and an unsigned interconnection MOU with Equatorial Guinea
due to COVID-19 restrictions.

Technical risk. To sustain usage of internet services, the Bank's eGabon Project (P132824) intends to
promote digital entrepreneurship and leveraging access to broadband connectivity to support the delivery
and management of public health services across the country. This risk is assessed as low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on lessons from the Bank-financed Telecom/ICT projects, such as the
  previous phases of Central Africa Backbone (CAB) projects, West Africa Regional Communications
  Infrastructure Program (WARCIP), and Regional Communications Infrastructure Program. Lessons
  incorporated at design included incorporating management structures for high capacity broadband
  backbone networks on an "open" basis under PPP arrangements, and TA on legal and regulatory
  issues (PAD, paragraph 32).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with the weak
  implementation capacity, and design risk (practical details associated with implementing Open Access
  principles and conducting PPP negotiations). The design included a Project Preparation Advance (PPA)
  of US$3.0 million to cover Gabon's initial Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) submarine membership
  fee payments, technical assistance to introduce policy reforms and design and structure PPP and Open
  Access, environmental and social studies, and capacity building of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
  and all key stakeholders. Mitigation measures incorporated at design included: stakeholder training,
  technical support for conducting PPP negotiations, and capacity building of the Gabonese shareholders.
  Even with mitigation measures, the project risk was rated substantial at appraisal, given the weak
  implementation capacity (PAD, page 17).

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Fiber Optic Commission responsible for
  overall guidance, and using a previously established Project Implementation Unit (PIU) (which had
  executed Bank projects) for implementation (PAD, paragraph 9). Appropriate arrangements were made
  at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation and safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in
  sections 9 and 10).

  One shortcoming of project design was lack of focus on gender - there was no plans/interventions to
  increase girl's and women's use of broadband, although the project tried to incorporate the gender
  dimensions in two indicators.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was continuity of leadership, with two task team leaders based at headquarters during the project
 lifetime. According to the Borrower's ICR, the Bank showed a great deal of flexibility by extending the
 project in Phase II, given the delays recorded during the first phase. The core supervision team - the
 fiduciary and safeguards specialists and legal experts - were based in Gabon. 18 supervision missions (on
 average twice a year), and nine technical missions were held. The team provided technical assistance to
 help the Government select a wholesale operator based on international best practice, and this helped in
 PPP negotiations. On policy reforms, the team leveraged the presence of a regulator to push for reforms,
 and supported the Government's sustained communication campaign to sensitize stakeholders and get
 their continuous buy-in.

 There were some supervision shortcomings. Given the two year delay involved in the Government's
 fulfillment of disbursement conditions, the sensitivity of reforms, the relatively slow pace of the construction
 of the backbone network and the defects unveiled through the technical audit, the supervision team could
 have recruited additional full- time technical staff and digital policy experts in-country early on. This
 recruitment, coupled with additional field visit, could have helped in expediting implementation. The
 supervision team was not proactive at reiterating to the Gabonese authorities the importance of monitoring
 the indicator associated with the affordability of internet services. Likewise, the team could have been more
 proactive in addressing the fiduciary and safeguard issues that arose during implementation (discussed in
 section 10).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key outcome indicators for the project were the same as the outcome indicators for the regional
 program, and were standard quantitative ones that covered geographic reach, usage and price of ICT
 services. The three key outcome indicators (the volume of international traffic, the volume of national
 communication traffic and the average price of international communications) were attributable to the
 project activities, relevant, and in principle, measurable. An additional indicator on affordability of internet
 services was added with the AF as an intermediate outcome for the project.



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



 There were some shortcomings. First, the first PDO indicator " Number of direct project beneficiaries" was
 defined in the parent PAD as " people who are connected to the communications networks (including
 telecom services and internet users) to be measured as the number of active and mobile subscribers", and
 assigned a base value of 1,545,255 - equivalent to the entire Gabonese population. In the AF's paper, the
 definition was revised to designate "the number of people having access to telephone services", and the
 baseline value was revised down to zero with the justification that "no one has benefitted from the project
 prior to start date". Also it is not clear why the target value for PDO indicator international internet
 bandwidth, remained unchanged, when the original target had nearly been achieved.

 The Regulatory Agency - the Posts and Electric Communications Regulatory Agency (ARCEP) - was in
 charge of collecting the data for monitoring, in the context of its market oversight duties (PAD, paragraphs
 40 -41).



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicator associated with affordability of Internet services was not monitored, due to the lack of
  capacity of the regulator. The ICR (paragraph 67) notes that M&E data was analyzed in a
  methodologically sound manner. The Regulatory Authority for Electronic Communications and Postal
  Services (ARCEP) collected the relevant data by getting information directly from the operators and this
  data was provided to the Project Implementation Unit. The gender dimension of the project was not
  monitored during implementation, due to the lack of capacity of the implementing agency.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for monitoring performance throughout implementation and to adjust indicator
  targets during the AF. The data was used for the Bank's dialogue on pricing and interconnection cost
  models and tariffs with the regulator, and to inform the CAB - Gabon project that is being prepared by
  the African Development Bank.

  The ICR notes that the regulatory agency continued to collect data beyond the project's closing date.

  In sum, although there were some shortcomings in design, M&E is rated as substantial, given that the
  indicators were the same as the indicators for the regional program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment Category B (Partial Assessment) project and
   five safeguards were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



  Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement
  (OP/BP 4.12). No other safeguards policies were triggered with the AF for the project.

  Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, and Physical Cultural Resources. The PAD (page 32)
  notes that the environmental impacts were expected to be minimal and site-specific. An Environmental and
  Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted for addressing issues relating to environmental
  safeguards, natural habitats and Physical Cultural Resources, and an Environmental and Social
  Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared. Both documents were publicly disclosed at appraisal (PAD, page
  31).

  The ICR (paragraph 72) notes that the overall safeguards compliance was rated as moderately satisfactory
  in the final ISR, due to the delays in conducting safeguards audits and pending social risks due to the non-
  compensation for the accidental destruction of assets in Lalara (Ogooue -Ivindo Province), that has not yet
  been resolved to date (according to the information provided by the team). The team clarified that there
  were no issues pertaining to natural habitats and physical cultural resources.

  Indigenous Peoples. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an Indigenous
  Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) were prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal for addressing
  issues relating to indigenous people. The ICR (paragraph 71) notes that an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
  was prepared during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 72) further notes that this plan was not fully
  implemented, and that some implemented project activities could trigger complaints from indigenous
  populations. The team clarified that this issue has not yet been resolved to date.

  Involuntary Resettlement. An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and publicly-
  disclosed at appraisal. The team clarified that there was no land acquisition. The ICR (paragraph 72) just
  notes that a Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) was established during implementation. Of the 168
  complaints received relating to loss of revenue, 129 complaints were resolved, and the pending ones are
  still being processed to date.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. A financial management assessment of the implementing agency was conducted
  at appraisal. The assessment concluded that the financial arrangements were satisfactory. The
  financial risk was rated moderate at appraisal, since the implementing agency was an existing and
  adequately performing PIU endowed with all fiduciary requirements (PAD, page 29). The ICR (paragraph
  73) notes that there were some old debt and issues relating to o unjustified mission advances of
  approximately US$39,000. The final financial management rating was moderately satisfactory. The ICR
  notes that the final financial audit of the original project, that was deemed to be acceptable by the Bank,
  was submitted 13 months late (in July 2020). The last annual audit for AF was submitted on time. The
  team clarified that audits were unqualified.

  Procurement. A procurement assessment of the PIU was conducted at appraisal. Having executed a prior
  Bank-financed project, the PIU was familiar with the Bank's procedures and the procurement risk was rated
  moderate (PAD, page 31). The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that the procurement plan prepared at
  appraisal was updated regularly to respond to the project's needs during implementation. The ICR notes
  that there were some procurement delays during implementation. There were no reported cases of

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



   misprocurement. There were procurement delays relating to the choice of constructor for the backbone's
   extension.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, which
are presented here with some adaptation of language:

1. Policy reforms aimed at creating an enabling environment for the ICT sector can help in
private sector participation and bring about transformational change in the
sector. Government demonstrated strong commitment to reforms, by establishing an independent
regulator just before this project was approved. This project included activities aimed at institutional
strengthening of the regulator and other stakeholders in conducting PPP negotiations. The lesson
from this project is that policy reforms are crucial for private sector participation in the ICT sector,
and bringing about transformational change in terms of boosting broadband penetration.

2. Implementation arrangements that foster stakeholder coordination are crucial for
successful implementation. The implementation arrangements of this project included a high-level
supervisory body (the Fiber Optic Commission) led by the Presidency and representatives from the
relevant ministries. The special advisor to the President was part of the Fiber Option Commission,
and played an important role through continuous follow-up on implementation activities. The
commitment at the highest level proved useful in implementing this project.

3. Country Management Units (CMUs) could be leveraged to expedite activities that require
cross-country coordination. Since the CMUs are well connected to the political establishment and
decision makers in the countries they cover, the project could have leveraged the Cameroon CMU -
which covers Gabon, Cameroon, and Equatorial Guinea, to expedite the signature of the

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Central African Backbone-APL - Gabon (P122776)



interconnection Memorandum of Understanding with Equatorial Guinea and the ongoing
construction on the Cameroonian side prior to the closing date of this project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The quality of evidence provided in the ICR is credible. The theory of change
provides clear links between project activities, outputs and outcomes that were attributable to project activities.
The ICR candidly discusses the issues in the initial years of the project and also the difficulties associated with
PPP negotiations that contributed to delays during implementation. The Borrower's ICR provides useful
information. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

There were a few minor shortcomings: there is discrepancy in the figures in the ICR text and Annex for
objective two. The ICR is also long (with the main body of the text at 28 pages), almost double the
recommended length of 15 pages.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
