     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022293

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P160570                                  ASERCA

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87290                               24-Mar-2022                                           4,455,279.19

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2017                              31-Jan-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          120,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             4,455,279.19                                             0.00

 Actual                                         4,455,279.19                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Keith Robert A. Oblitas    J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The project development objective (PDO) was to "improve access to grain storage and information for
   agricultural producers in Mexico". Source: Loan Agreement: November 13, 2017

   No changes were made to the project objectives, components or key indicators during implementation.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



   For the purpose of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved in Section 4 of this review it will be
   parsed into two parts, namely;

         Improve access to grain storage for agricultural producers in Mexico
         Improve access to information for agricultural producers in Mexico



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   The ‘Grain Storage and Information for Agricultural Competitiveness Project’ had two components (the
   component costs exclude the front end fee of US$0.30 million):

   Component 1: Grain Storage Infrastructure and Operation (estimated costs at appraisal - US$170.0 million;
   actual costs at project completion – US$6.13 million.)

   This component sought to improve grain storage infrastructure and strengthen capacities for the operation
   and application of norms and standards for grain quality, through: (a) supporting investments in grain
   storage infrastructure; rehabilitation and or upgrading of existing grain storage facilities, and purchasing and
   installation of grain handling/storage equipment including collection and trade centers; and, (b) supporting
   capacity building for long-term sustainability of infrastructure investments including: the preparation of
   business plans, capacity building for control, operation and maintenance of grain harvest facilities, financial
   and administrative management, and application of relevant grain quality norms, standards and certification
   processes for grain storage facilities.

   Component 2: Information for Grain Management, Markets and Monitoring (estimated costs at appraisal -
   US$24.7 million; actual costs at project completion – US$0.73 million.)

   This component sought to improve access to information for empowering agricultural producers in their
   decision making by: (i) development, operation and maintenance of an information system for grain
   markets, including data collection and dissemination; (ii) capacity building on the use of the system; (iii)
   strengthening commercialization of grain storage facilities, including participation of grain producer
   organizations in agricultural fairs and other relevant events; (iv) analysis of new market opportunities and
   market segmentation potential; (v) improving access of grain producer organizations to the information
   system; and, (vi) support for the preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the project.

   The Government (the United Mexican States) was the borrower. The implementing agency, in an overview
   role, was the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (SADER) and, for hands-on implementation,
   the Agency for Services for the Commercialization and Development of Agricultural Markets (ASERCA),
   an autonomous agency under the ministry. However, ASERCA was later dismantled as part of a


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ASERCA (P160570)



  government reorganization, and responsibility for project implementation was transferred to the ministry
  (see below).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


  Project Costs. Total project costs were estimated at appraisal to be US$195 million. The actual total
  cost at project completion (including the front end fee of US$0.30 million) was US$7.16 million, about 3.7
  percent of the original appraisal estimate.

  Project Financing. The project was intended at appraisal to be financed by an IBRD Loan of US$120
  million, with expected contributions from the commercial banking sector of US$60 million and contributions
  from agricultural producers of US$15 million. Actual financing at completion was US$4.46 million from
  IBRD, US$1.72 million from commercial banks, and US$0.98 million contributed by producers. The
  US$4.46 million disbursements from IBRD were 3.6 percent of the original World Bank Loan. The share
  estimated at appraisal of Bank financing between the components was: US$95 million for Component 1 (79
  percent of the Bank Loan); and US$24.7 million for Component 2 (21 percent of the Loan). The front end
  fee was US$0.30 million.

  In early 2019 Additional Financing was requested by the then incoming Government following an election in
  order to scale up the project to an additional 9 states (the project was planned at appraisal to cover six
  states). As indicated above, at that time IBRD disbursements were less than 4 percent of the Loan. The
  Additional Financing was never approved and the project was closed a year later, in January, 2020.

  Dates and Key Events

  The project was approved on 24 March, 2017 and became effective nine months later, on 13
  December, 2017. The original closing date was 24 March, 2022. There were no restructurings other than
  the advancement of the project closure date to 31 January, 2020, accompanied by the cancellation of the
  Loan. The following key events had a particular influence on the project’s implementation:

        Subsequent to national elections in March-July, 2018 (about a year after this project's approval) a
         new government was formed in July, 2018. During the election period, a moratorium on all actions
         and expenditures, lasting about six months, was applied to public sector institutions
        The newly elected government declared an austerity national expenditure program, and took time to
         assess national priorities and budget allocations. One outcome was that ASERCA’s budget was
         reduced by 14 percent.
        A reorganization in the Ministry of Agriculture in 2019 eliminated ASERCA and placed project
         implementation directly under the ministry (SADER), a body having limited hands-on experience with
         grain storage and agricultural market information.
        Following a letter to the Bank from the government dated January 8, 2020, requesting cancellation
         of the Loan, "citing budget limitations and recalibration of farm programs to focus support on small-
         scale producers as key factors" (ICR, para 21), the Loan was cancelled. The project closed on
         January 31, 2020, with 96 percent of the Loan undisbursed. The cancellation reduced the planned



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       ASERCA (P160570)



                           project implementation period by 26 months, cutting the period from 57 months planned at appraisal
                           to 33 months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Mexico Grain Storage and Information for Agricultural Competitiveness Project was intended as a
response to two key rural development needs. First, insufficient and poorly functioning traditional storage
systems for grain resulting in high post-harvest losses, ranging from 5 to 25 percent of farm production; and
second, a paucity of market and production-related information, reducing the efficiency of agricultural
markets and the value of agricultural production. Both constraints reduced agricultural productivity
considerably, to the detriment of rural incomes and the costs of foodstuffs for consumers. In this context,
the project was aimed at providing matching grants to stimulate private investment in grain storage
infrastructure, and for the development of an agricultural market information system.

Economic development and poverty alleviation are core development goals in Mexico. About 25 percent of
Mexicans live in rural areas, and, although agriculture employs only about 13 percent of the country’s labor
force, rural areas have particular significance for overall national welfare because 62 percent of the
population in rural areas is classified as poor, compared with 41 percent in urban areas. There are also
regional imbalances; the population in central and southern states being poorer, and having a larger
proportion of indigenous persons than in the more advanced northern states.

The project was anchored in the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (2014-2019), in particular because
the CPS’ strategic theme of ‘Unleashing Productivity” to which the project’s objectives—improving grain
storage and agricultural market information—were designed contribute directly. The ICR also comments
that the project complemented other Bank-financed rural projects active in Mexico at the time of appraisal
(which were mainly aimed at sustainable rural development; rural finance; agricultural production systems;
and enhanced biodiversity) by filling a niche in the Bank’s overall agricultural lending program. The ICR also
noted that, at the time of closing, the PDO remained aligned with the new 2020-2025 World Bank CPF
under Objective 2 to reduce regulatory and competition barriers to economic growth" (para 22).

The project’s objectives were also highlighted in Government’s National Development Plan (NDP, 2013-
2018). In particular, the Plan emphasized improving productivity including the promotion of investments and
competitiveness, increasing producer incomes, and enhancing value added from agricultural production.
The PDO also remained consistent with Mexico's subsequent NDP (2019 to 2025) with regard to facilitating
credit and supporting farmers through priority programs (ICR, para 22).

In summary, the project responded to a rural development need in Mexico and was consistent with the
Bank’s and the Government’s rural development strategies. This review rates the project’s relevance
as Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   ASERCA (P160570)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective

                Improve access to grain storage for agricultural producers in Mexico.

                Rationale


                Theory of Change

                The intention of Objective 1 was strategically sound and provided a base for actions that could significantly
                increase the availability and efficiency of grain storage.

                The two priority thrusts for achieving Objective 1 were: (a) to invest in grain-storage infrastructure; and (b) to
                develop the technical skills of the grain storage operators. The project design provided for both of these
                activities. For investments, a major program to construct or rehabilitate 300 storage facilities was developed.
                For developing the relevant technical skills, a commensurate program for rapid improvement of
                implementation capacity at all levels, from managers to facility operators, was drawn up. These action areas
                were well chosen as both could be expected to significantly improve incentives for increasing agricultural
                productivity. Also, from discussion between IEG and the Bank task team, the quality of technical assistance to
                assist implementing the activities was good.

                Implementation Issues.

                Project participants (agency staff, producer organizations, commercial banks) needed more training than was
                actually provided for during implementation, and farmers had minimal or no experience in making strategic
                storage decisions. The project’s detailed design had provided a good technical foundation for the construction
                that each facility needed, but the intended size of the construction and capacity building programs were much
                larger than could realistically be attained in the project period of five years, and consequently the
                achievements were considerably below the intentions at appraisal. There were also multiple fiscal and
                political constraints to project investments before and after the change in government in December 2018.


                Outputs

                The main achievements (investments and improved technical skills) for Objective 1 are listed below. For the
                first three outputs – (i) grain storages created; (ii) storages used; and (iii) producer organizations trained –
                achievements were less than five percent of targets. The “software” activities - technical assistance and



                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ASERCA (P160570)



training - as reflected in the last four outputs listed below namely items (iv) to (vii) - were only modestly
achieved.

(a) Investments


(i) Grain storage facilities equipped and in use – 6 facilities (chosen from 96 applications) were completed
and in operation (2 percent of the appraisal target of 300 facilities).
(ii) Volume of grain stored in project grain storage facilities: 10,000 metric tons (3 percent of the targeted
500,000 MT).
(iii) Number of producer organizations trained to operate storage facilities: 12 (5 percent of the targeted 250
producer organizations).

(b) Training and Technical Assistance

(iv) Development of a certification system for grain storage to strengthen commercial participation of small
grain collection centers (achievement not quantified in the ICR).
(v) Preparation of training and implementation guidance material (used during project implementation and
post-project) (no targets).
(vi) Training (no targets) as follows: capacity building of 88 technicians and 29 producer organizations, and
57 study visits to grain storage facilities.
(vii) Development of collaboration with international agencies with high-level expertise (e.g. the International
Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO); cross
country exchanges with countries such as Brazil, India and Chile; and, at lower levels, hands-on training of
technicians and operators.

Outcome

As specified in the appraisal report, the indicator, chosen for the Outcome of Objective 1 was the “number of
beneficiaries using project-supported grain storage facilities.” Achievement was 11 percent of the target.
There were 1,422 beneficiaries compared with the targeted 12,500 beneficiaries. The proportion of female
beneficiaries was also low, namely 332 women or 9 percent of the targeted 3,800 women.

Thus, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved was Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

Improve access to information for agricultural producers in Mexico.

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ASERCA (P160570)




                            Theory of Change

                            This objective sought to empower farmers to access agricultural market information and other relevant
                            information to improve their knowledge of market prices and climatic risks affecting the production of
                            agricultural commodities on a real-time or continuously updated schedule. Thereby, farmers could plan and
                            market their products to take advantage of price peaks and avoid intervals of low prices, and production
                            shocks. The implicit goal would be higher revenues and incomes for farmers and lower prices for consumers.
                            The operational platform for this was to be the creation of a widely accessible Agricultural Market Information
                            System, including data collection and its integration. Success, though, depended on rapid creation and
                            deployment of the information system, but the actions needed to achieve this were mostly incomplete.

                            Outputs

                            (i) Number of beneficiaries accessing project-enabled grain market information. None (the target was 12,500).

                            (ii) Number of local areas where grain price information was generated daily. None (target 14).

                            (iii) Number of site visits to the Early Warning System and Food Prices Platform. 1,901 visits (no target).



                            Outcomes

                            The indicator for the efficacy of Objective 2 was the number of beneficiaries accessing project-enabled grain
                            market information. However, the system was insufficiently developed at project closure for there to be any
                            beneficiaries.

                            Nevertheless, the project made partial progress on a number of fronts that could eventually contribute to the
                            objective. At the time of project closure the information system was under preparation; a climatic risks
                            platform was 80 percent complete; the market information system was under preparation; a decentralized
                            “spot pricing” tool for the maize market had been developed and validated; and some staff training had been
                            carried out to operate the systems and analyze results.

                            Such progress, although with incomplete results and failing Objective 2’s intentions for the project period, may
                            nevertheless be expected to lead to a better achievement over time, if the progress noted above is
                            continued. Taking account of this potential, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ASERCA (P160570)




  Rationale


  A number of factors influenced this project's poor performance after it was approved and before it was
  cancelled, including the government's country-wide six month moratorium on public expenditures; a 14
  percent cut in ASERCA's budget; and the transfer of project management from ASERCA to the Ministry of
  Agriculture and Rural Development (Section 2e). There were also some design issues which will be
  mentioned in Section 8 of this review.

  For both objectives, achievements at the project's close were significantly below intentions. The core to
  achieving Objective 1 was the construction of 300 grain storage facilities, yet only six facilities (2 percent of
  this target) were constructed. The volume of grain stored (3 percent of the targeted volume) reflected the low
  construction achievements. The efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is therefore rated Negligible.
  Component 1, supporting Objective 1 formed the bulk of the project, comprising 87 percent of project costs at
  appraisal.

  The achievements for Objective 2 were also far less than expected with no targets met and no beneficiaries
  able to access market information, except for some progress made on parts of the system. The efficacy with
  which Objective 2 was achieved is rated Modest because of the expectation that in the near future agricultural
  producers will have access to improved information. Nevertheless, the Overall Efficacy with which the
  project's development objectives were achieved is rated Negligible.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                Low achievement


5. Efficiency


Implementation Efficiency.

Project implementation and disbursements were well below appraisal projections (ICR, para
39). Implementation efficiency was at first detrimentally affected by Inadequate government budget provisions
for the project (ICR, paras 15, 21, 23 and 24), as well as underestimates at appraisal of the time required for
associations to be trained in grain facility management, and for the establishment of the market information
system.

Cost Effectiveness

Given the small number of grain storage facilities completed, project overhead costs (e.g. management,
coordination, and M&E not identified separately in the ICR) may have been a larger share of actual project costs
than estimated at appraisal. The average cost of the six grain storages completed was about US$1 million per
facility, including overheads, compared with the appraisal estimate of US$0.6 million. There are no cost
comparisons for similar grain storage facilities in the ICR between Mexico and other countries. However, the



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ASERCA (P160570)



actual average cost per grain facility constructed for this project was significantly higher (by 67 percent) than the
appraisal estimate.

Economic Efficiency

Compared to the estimated economic rate of return (ERR) at appraisal of 17 percent, this project’s ERR at
completion, as estimated in the ICR, was 13 percent. That estimate was based on the costs and estimated
benefits associated with a small number (six) of grain storages constructed which may not apply to a larger
program. The analysis of switching values in the ICR indicates vulnerability to moderate changes in costs
or benefits. For example, if costs were increased by only 14 percent or benefits were reduced by only16 percent
the ERR would be reduced to a rate equal to the discount rate of 10 percent. The potential benefits from
improved access to better grain market information (anticipated from the implementation of Component 2 of the
project) are not included in the ICR's efficiency analysis because there were no results from the incomplete
component.

Overall Efficiency

Implementation efficiency was weak, with disbursements from all sources only four percent of the loan. The
average construction cost of grain storage facilities was two-thirds higher than estimated at appraisal, Based on
assumptions for net benefits from grain storage, the estimated ERR for the project at completion was 13% which
was above the cost of capital of 10%, but likely to be below 10% if costs were to increase by more than 14% or
net benefits were to decline by more than 16%. Nevertheless, the Bank Task Team advised IEG that a follow-on
project is under preparation with a redesigned financing system, and other improvements, and, to the extent that
the present project has served as an effective learning vehicle for an efficient future grain storage development,
the utility of the project is enhanced. Thus, while the project's implementation efficiency and cost effectiveness
were weak, taking account of its learning value regarding the potential profitability of future grain storage
development by the private sector, the project's Overall Efficiency is rated Modest..


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       87.00
 Appraisal                                                   17.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       89.00
 ICR Estimate                                                13.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ASERCA (P160570)




The project was Substantially relevant, since it is consistent with the Government's and the World Bank’s
development strategy for Mexico and responded to an evident need in the agricultural sector. The project’s
achievements, however, were far below targets. Only six of the planned 300 grain storage facilities were
completed; hence, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved was rated Negligible. For Objective 2, the
market information system was still being developed at project completion, but some progress had been made
in developing modules for the eventual overall system, and its efficacy is rated by this review as
Modest. Nevertheless, the overall efficacy of the project is rated Negligible, based on actual achievements,
especially of its largest component, namely grain storage development by the private sector which accounted
for 87 percent of estimated project cost. It is acknowledged that part of the project’s underperformance was due
to the financial and political constraints it had to contend with during implementation . The average economic
rate of return for the six grain storage developments was above the opportunity cost of capital, although the rate
of return was sensitive to changes in benefits or costs. In addition, investment costs per grain facility were
higher than expected, and implementation of the project was slow. Nevertheless, the project's experience is
likely to improve the design of a follow-on project currently under preparation, with benefits as a learning vehicle
for future development of Mexico's grain storage sector. Hence, although implementation and cost effectiveness
were inefficient, grain storage investments were found to be economically viable and there are likely to be spill-
over benefits from the project's learning impact. The project's efficiency was therefore rated Modest.

Project performance, however, has been well below targets. Six of the planned 300 gain storages were
developed - an achievement of only two percent of the target for this major component (grain storages
comprised 87 percent of project costs estimated at appraisal). In addition, the agricultural market information
system was only partially developed. Given the major shortcomings in this project's achievement of its
objectives, its modest efficiency and despite its substantial relevance. the project's overall outcome is
rated Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

As demonstrated during implementation, the greatest risk stems from the history of the project’s budgetary
shortfalls. If this continues, even what has been achieved risks deterioration and eventual dysfunctionality.
Nevertheless, there are several potential positive drivers for the government’s future engagement. First,
improved grain storage and agricultural market information are integral parts of Mexico’s agricultural
development strategy. Second is a likely continued demand from the farming community for grain storages
(a possible indication of this was that 96 formal completed applications for grain storages were received
during project implementation). Third, based on the ICR’s analysis of financial rates of return for each of the
six grain facilities, there is some evidence that financial returns to investments in grain storages are
remunerative. Finally, commercial banks provided loans for six storage facilities, suggesting favorable
assessment of their financial viability. These optimistic features could provide a basis for a continued
investment program in grain storage arguably motivated by profitable prospects. The ICR states in
paragraph 63 that "the GoM has continued to demonstrate interest in investing in grain storage facilities with
the Bank’s support and using alternative financial instruments". However, given the history of this project,
there are arguably uncertainties regarding the extent of government's support for grain storage facilities. On
the other hand, as indicated in Section 4 of this review, the development of an agricultural market information

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



system may ultimately be sustained. Overall, however, the Risk to Development Outcome is rated
Substantial.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  Project design was well anchored in Mexico’s and the Bank’s rural development strategies, filling a gap in
  the support framework for agricultural development and growth. The project focused on some core sector
  issues, and had clear objectives. Project preparation was done by a team containing the skills needed,
  which delivered a technically sound project design

  Based on additional information provided to IEG by the Bank Task Team, project preparation included
  significant studies and consultations: five studies were undertaken, including demand for grain storage,
  the political economy, and technical capacity of the implementing agency; a literature review, and in-
  depth technical consultations. There was also experience from other grain storage development
  programs. There was, therefore, a broad technical base for project design and implementation, except in
  three respects – the size of the project’s investment program, its financing, and the time frame for
  implementation.

  While Mexico had some experience with construction of grain storage facilities, the technical assistance
  needed for individual grain storage development and management was clearly not enough to quickly
  implement the very large number of investments envisaged (300 facilities), as evidenced by the actual
  number of only six storages completed. The project’s design included a large technical assistance
  program, but during project implementation it was found that it could only partly develop the skilled labor
  force required. A similarly overambitious program was designed for the agricultural market information
  system. In actuality, parts of the information system were developed, but the complex and multi-functional
  design of the system might, if a modular design was possible, have been simplified to a more limited, and
  hence more manageable scope. The short project implementation period exacerbated this problem. As
  originally planned, implementation was to be for five years, quite tight for a large complex investment and
  technical assistance project. But this was shortened by 26 months when the project was prematurely
  closed, resulting in an actual implementation period of 34 months. The financing constraints resulting
  from Government policies described in Section 4 of this review had not materialized at the time of
  appraisal. However, even without the financing constraints, it is questionable whether a program of
  this project’s complexity and capacity-building needs could have been successfully implemented in such
  a brief time frame. The project also got off to a slow start. Effectiveness took nine months, and the state
  of readiness for implementation was aptly described in the ICR: (there was) ... "a pressing need for more
  up-front, targeted TA to help organizations prepare quality business plans to present to financial
  institutions." (ICR para 26). In addition, the unexpected constraints on public investment for 15 months
  from March 2018 to May 2019, introduced by the Government after project effectiveness, eliminated
  much of the usual period for adjusting to the two above-mentioned quality at entry shortcomings.

  The project's design required substantial familiarization and training, all to be done in a five-year project
  period. Shortfalls in training were later compounded by the early closure of the project cutting the project

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



  implementation period by 42 percent, virtually assuring low achievement, especially as the project was
  not fundamentally restructured to a smaller and revised project design during supervision (see discussion
  of supervision performance below). The ICR (para 65) comments on the time required for familiarization
  and training: “Investment approaches for subprojects that support the improvement and use of grain
  storage facilities take time to consolidate and require capacity building at all levels. The experience from
  the subproject proposals and their implementation confirmed that investments require a period of
  preparation and assimilation by the implementing agency as well as by the producer organizations and
  the development banks. implementing officials and beneficiaries need time and training to support,
  mature and develop ideas into actual project proposals."

  In summary, the project had a number of serious strategic shortcomings at entry, in particular: an
  underestimation of training needs, an overambitious project size and a short project implementation
  period. Nevertheless, taking account of the good quality technical side of preparation and the constraints
  introduced by the Government, Quality at Entry is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were regular and comprehensively covered project progress, including monitoring of
 safeguards. Procurement benefitted from continuous involvement of the same procurement specialist on
 the Bank team. These missions included Bank specialists as needed, and also benefitted from integrating
 the help of specialized international organizations. Supervision teams discussed with government
 counterparts adjustments in implementation to cope with the changes in political priorities and funding
 constraints imposed by the Government.

 A significant flaw throughout project implementation was that the ratings of project implementation were not
 aligned with actual project performance. In the February 2019 Implementation Status and Results Report
 (ISR #4), nearly two years after project approval, disbursements were US$0.4 million, only 3 percent of the
 Loan, and all key monitorable indicators showed minimal progress, yet the progress toward achievement of
 the Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Overall Implementation Progress (IP) ratings were both
 recorded as Satisfactory, which was also endorsed in the management comments. Satisfactory ratings for
 progress toward the PDO and IP were also recorded in all other ISRs throughout project implementation
 other than the final one. The final ISR generated at the time of project closure (ISR #5) issued a year later
 than ISR #4, in January, 2020 rated progress toward achievement of the PDO and Implementation
 Progress (IP) as Moderately Unsatisfactory. Even this downgrade, however, over-assessed
 project performance since only US$4.5 million had been disbursed and project achievements were well
 below targets (Sections 4 and 5 in this review). Overoptimistic performance ratings would typically reduce
 staff and management attention to the need for major reforms, and this might have been the case for this
 project. However the Bank Task Team advised IEG that Bank management was kept informed throughout
 implementation by means of E Mails, detailed briefs, updates and frequent communications. Such
 communications were undoubtedly important, though ISRs consistent with performance would have added
 important metrics to the information available for management decisions on the project, and provided
 periodic opportunity for more comprehensive stock-taking and strategic choices.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



 The ICR also indicates a continued dialogue between the Bank Task Team and th e Government on
 challenges facing the project, but this was mainly focused on avoiding termination of the project rather than
 more fundamental restructuring to significantly enhance the chances of improved project performance (e.g.
 through radical downsizing, reduced project activities, reduction in complexity, major strengthening of
 institutions, training, and a more realistic implementation period). This was the principal shortfall in the
 Bank's supervision, although it should be born in mind that the unpredictable changes and reversals in
 Government policies and institutions may have made any formal restructuring difficult to
 achieve. Nevertheless, during this time the Bank Task Team was proactive in its discussions with
 Government, especially on technical matters, measures to improve project performance. and in mobilizing
 international consulting expertise. The Government proposed additional financing which the Bank
 considered positively but the Government subsequently requested that the operation be
 cancelled. Nevertheless, a dialogue between the Bank Task Team and the Government on the future
 direction of the grain storage sector, ultimately contributed to the preparation of a follow on project.

 Thus, balancing the limited consideration of more fundamental restructuring options against some
 proactive supervision of project implementation, and a dialogue on a future project, the Bank's Quality of
 Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 With both Quality at Entry and Quality of Supervision rated as moderately satisfactory, Overall Bank
 Performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The key indicators for measuring the extent to which the project’s objectives were achieved were stated
 clearly and provided a good basis for assessing the project's outcome. The institutional design for M&E
 primarily involved ASERCA in an executive role and CIMMYT responsible for support in the monitoring of
 safeguards information. The PAD specified that ASERCA would be responsible for carrying out monitoring
 activities and collection of relevant project data which in the event (as noted above) became the
 responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (SADER). The Ministry was
 also responsible for preparation of semi-annual reports. Monitoring data were to be collected at the
 beginning of the project (the baseline), at mid-term-review, and at project closure. This review suggests
 that some variables relevant to the management of each storage facility to form a base for comparisons
 between facilities (such as operating costs, extent of storage losses, and their relative efficiencies) would
 have been useful.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was able to generate management information sufficient for tracking part of project
  implementation and to report final results for the Results Framework (Annex 1 of the ICR). An M&E
  specialist was hired to guide the M&E program. But for the intended “Management Monitoring and
  Evaluation System (SIGE), which was to provide comprehensive monitoring of project implementation,
  only the procurement sections got underway. The SIGE was in any case more a management
  information system than an M&E tool or institution. The key intended evaluation surveys – the impact
  evaluation, final impact evaluation, and studies - were not undertaken. A mid-term review was also not
  held.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project management data were useful to report implementation deliverables; to inform the Bank's
  Implementation Status and Results Reports; as data for Bank missions and Government reviews; and
  for project's oversight generally.

  Summary of M&E Quality

  The absence, largely due to budget constraints, of intended key reports reduced the utility of the M&E
  program, although SADER was able to generate routine data for monitoring project implementation
  progress. But ultimately, the financing shortfall limited what could be done for evaluating the project's
  performance. The Quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   Environment

   The project was Environmental Category B and triggered the following safeguards: environmental
   assessment (OP/BP 4.01), natural habitats (OP/BP 4.04), and pest management (OP/BP 4.11). ASERCA
   prepared an Environmental Assessment and an Environmental Management Plan. No significant adverse
   environmental impacts were detected. Four environmental monitoring stages were applied: registration
   during call for proposals; preparation of the business plan; construction/installation of equipment; and
   operation of the facility. There is no assessment in the ICR of the degree to which the environmental
   monitoring processes were effective. Nevertheless, the ICR stated that "Environmental safeguards
   compliance was rated Satisfactory throughout the project’s life" (para 56).

   Social


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



   The project triggered OP 4.10 (Indigenous People). A Social Assessment and an Indigenous People’s Plan
   were prepared in consultation with indigenous communities, and efforts to include indigenous persons were
   incorporated into the design and operations of storages. The safeguard on Physical Cultural Resources (OP
   4.11) was also triggered, and provisions for safeguarding against any such impacts were incorporated in the
   review process for infrastructure. The ICR (para 57) advises that no threats to cultural resources were
   found. It also advises that provisions were made in the project's operations guidelines and in the investment
   registration requirements to identify any threats to physical cultural resources. The ICR stated that "Social
   safeguards compliance was rated Satisfactory throughout the project’s life" (para 57).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   .Financial



   Unaudited financial reports were generally submitted to the Bank on time and deemed acceptable.
   Financial management was less satisfactory, being affected by untimely budgetary provisions. Another
   difficulty was that key financial staff were not contracted in a timely fashion. The result of these constraints
   was that payments for project expenditures were often late.

   Procurement

   Procurement was conducted in accordance with Bank guidelines, and performance was rated satisfactory
   throughout project implementation. Performance benefited from having the same Bank procurement staff
   over the entire project period. ASERCA’s procurement capabilities were limited at the beginning of the
   project, but were made serviceable by ASERCA’s hiring of a procurement specialist, bolstering both
   procurement capability and training of associated staff.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ASERCA (P160570)



Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons



The following lessons have been derived from the ICR as potentially having broad application to
similar projects:

1. Projects need “rightsizing” in scope, duration and complexity to take account of the specific
circumstances of a country’s sector experience and implementation capacity.

The project was too ambitious in its scope, assumed high level of implementation-capacity, ability to
handle complexity, rate of learning needed during implementation, and the short duration of the
project period in the face of such constraints. Familiarity with grain-storage investments and
operations was limited, necessarily requiring a build-up of skills and experience. The agricultural
market information system was also complex and new in most elements, and it had multiple
components. The project was not restructured, and targets for objectives were not changed. At
project completion only two percent of the targeted number of grain storages had been completed,
the market information system was only partially developed and not in use, and only 3.6 percent of
the loan had been disbursed.

2. Projects experiencing difficulties may require fundamental restructuring and/or loan cancellation.

The project's progress was impeded by financing and management constraints imposed by
government and by overambitious targets set at appraisal. Despite serious Implementation
difficulties and minimal disbursements, three years elapsed before the loan was cancelled. With only
US$4.5 million of the US$120 million loan disbursed, and most project activities still in start-up
mode, more fundamental and earlier actions during implementation might have been considered –
such as, for instance, a restructuring of the project or part cancellation accompanied by reduction in
the size of the project, simplified technical features, attainable implementation targets, and extension
of the project period.

3. Partnerships with international centers of excellence or other sources of expertise can help a
project’s implementation performance.

Through proactive engagement, the Bank task team fostered an association with international
agencies such as the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center, and the Food and
Agriculture Organization, including hands-on training and direct guidance of activities.

4. Performance ratings during implementation need to realistically reflect a project's performance to
better identify any needs for restructuring or significant changes in project scope and
implementation.

Throughout project implementation, performance ratings in Implementation Status and Results
Reports were graded as Satisfactory for both Progress Towards Achievement of Project

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ASERCA (P160570)



Development Objectives (PDO) and Implementation Progress (IP). Yet actual performance was
poor, with low achievements and only 3 percent of the Loan disbursed after nearly 2 years of project
implementation. Rating disconnects such as for this project, could reduce staff and
management perceptions of any need for major changes in project scope, restructuring/cancellation,
or other significant remedial action.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is a candid review of a poorly performing project, and states the issues forthrightly and arranged
according to the OPCS guidelines. A particular strength is the substantial and analytical background and
discussion of the sector policies and issues within which the project was situated. The ICR also provided
considerable, clear and concise evidence on what the project achieved and did not achieve, as well as
providing cogent lessons based on evidence in the ICR.

There are several areas where the report could have been strengthened. In particular, the project options
available during implementation (e.g. major restructuring, part cancellation of the loan with reduced scope and
simplified objectives, refer section 8 of this review) could have been elaborated further. This would have
provided significant value added to the discussion of the project's main challenges. Second, comment could
have been made on project performance ratings during project supervision compared with actual performance.
Third, there are several gaps in information (for instance, on preparation studies where only one study is
referred to whereas based on subsequent information from the Bank task team preparation actually included
five studies, a better reflection of performance during project preparation). And fourth, reference (as relevant)
might have been made to the government's ICR report (at Annex 5 of the ICR). All in all, though, the ICR is a
thoughtful document and this review rates its quality as Substantial.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ASERCA (P160570)




                                                                  Page 18 of 18
