     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022163

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P119815                                    CF-Health System Support Project (FY12)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Central African Republic                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51340,IDA-D0610,IDA-H7840,TF-          31-Mar-2018                                           38,637,799.55
 13380

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-May-2012                                31-Mar-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            17,000,000.00                                     11,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             38,928,367.39                                     11,199,095.89

 Actual                                         38,637,799.55                                     11,199,095.89




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Rocio Manchado              Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Garabito




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original objectives. The original objectives of the project were to increase utilization and improve the quality
   of maternal and child health services in targeted rural areas of the Recipient’s territory (Financing Agreement,
   7/31/2012, p. 5). The statements of objectives in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and the ICR are
   consistent with the Financing Agreement.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



   Revised objective: A new objective was added during a level 1 restructuring on 3/19/2014, responding to a
   political crisis in 2012-2013 that triggered a civil war.. The revised objectives were stated as follows: (a)
   increase utilization and improve the quality of maternal and child health services in targeted rural areas of the
   Recipient’s territory; and (b) provide emergency health services to the general population” (Financing
   Agreement, 6/19/2015, p. 4).

   Because of the added objective on emergency health services, this review performs a split rating. At that
   restructuring, 3.78% of the proceeds had been disbursed. In addition, some outcome targets were revised at
   both the 2014 restructuring and an Additional Financing (AF) in 2015. Achievement was consistent under both
   the original and revised outcome targets for each objective, and therefore a further split rating related to the
   revision of outcome targets is not required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Mar-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The original project contained two components, targeting five of the country's seven health regions based
   on their poor health status and deterioration of health service coverage between 2006 and 2011:



   Component 1: Improvement of health facilities performance through performance-based financing
   (PBF) (Appraisal: US$25.7 million; Actual $20.60 million). This component was to finance pilot PBF
   implementation in nine selected health prefectures through the contracting of performance purchasing
   agencies (PPAs).

   This component had two subcomponents:

          Performance payments to health facilities: the implementation of PBF to support the delivery of
           Maternal and Child Health (MCH) services and provide technical support and capacity building
           activities to health centers in the targeted districts through PPAs and non-governmental
           organizations (NGOs) contracted by the Ministry of Health at regional, district, and local levels in the
           selected prefectures.
          PBF implementation and supervision: activities related to PBF implementation and supervision
           through the PPAs including: (i) strengthening the capacities of health service providers; (ii)



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



       development, monitoring, and evaluation of the provision of technical support packages and MCH
       packages; and (iii) support for coordination efforts among local, district, and regional stakeholders.

Component 2: Strengthening the capacity of the Recipient’s Ministry of Health and Population
(MOH) (Appraisal: US$2.5 million; Actual: $5.6 million)

This component had two subcomponents, covering support for:

      PBF technical unit at the central level of the MOH and an External Evaluation Agency (EEA) to carry
       out monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the project, including: (i) M&E of Component 1 through
       independent verifications of the delivery of technical support packages and MCH packages; and (ii)
       strengthening capacity to monitor and evaluate delivery of the technical support packages and the
       MCH packages.
      Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for project coordination, implementation, and management,
       including goods, consultant services, training, and operating costs.



Revised Components:

A level 1 restructuring was approved on 3/19/14 in response to an evolving crisis in CAR characterized by a
significant number of displaced persons and a reduction in the Bank's ability to engage with the
government. The project's original intention of rolling out PBF changed after the 2014 restructuring to
respond to emergency health needs resulting from the country's armed crisis. There were significant
changes regarding the implementation arrangements and the focus on emergency health services, moving
from government contracting of non-state actors for supporting the implementation of PBF to establishing
agreements with United Nations agencies to support the delivery of emergency response-related health
services. As a result, a new component 3 was created to provide emergency support for health services for
vulnerable populations. Also, a sub-component 2.3 was included to strengthen MOH's capacity to support
the delivery of MCH services. Most of the Bank funds under component 1 (US$12.6 million) were
reallocated to the newly created component 3 and sub-component 2.3. The rollout of PBF was put on hold.

Component 3: Emergency health services (Appraisal: US$14 million, Actual: US$14 million): The
project was restructured in April 2014 to deliver emergency health services during the crisis through
UNICEF, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) under
the authority of the MOH.



Additional Financing (AF): An AF of US$12 million was approved on 5/22/15 to mobilize additional
resources to relaunch PBF in the project’s targeted areas.



Revised PDOs indicators and targets:

At the 2014 restructuring, two PDO indicators were dropped (new cases of tuberculosis treated in targeted
areas, and number of acceptors of modern contraceptives in targeted areas), one was added (number of


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



  women victims of violence supported by social and medical health providers), and one target was reduced
  (direct project beneficiaries). Also, six intermediate indicators were dropped, and four new ones included.

  The AF in 2015 also involved a revision of PDO-level indicators: the targets for four PDO indicators were
  increased (number of people with access to a basic package of health, nutrition, or reproductive health
  services; number of women victims of violence supported by social and medical health; number of direct
  project beneficiaries; and number of female beneficiaries), and two PDO indicator targets were reduced
  (number of children immunized, and number of births attended by trained personnel in health facilities in
  targeted areas). The AF also added a new PDO indicator: the average score on a quality of care checklist.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Financing

  According to the PAD (p. 13), the project was to be financed by an IDA credit of US$17 million, along with a
  US$11.2 million Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF) (TF-13380). Thus, the total estimated project
  financing at appraisal was US$28.2 million.

  At the 2014 level 1 restructuring, most of the IDA funds under component 1 (US$12.6 million) were
  reallocated to the new component 3 and sub-component 2.3. The rollout of PBF was put on hold.

  In May 2015, an AF was approved to add US$9.6 million to component 1 to extend its geographic scope
  and to relaunch PBF in the project’s targeted areas, US$2.5 million to component 2 to strengthen
  information systems, and US$0.5 million to component 3 to continue providing emergency health services.

  At closing, the actual financing was US$38.6 million.



  Cost

  The PAD (p. 13) reported a total estimated project cost of US$28.2 million at appraisal, with US$25.7 million
  for component 1 and US$2.5 million for component 2. At the 2014 restructuring and the 2015 AF, the
  revised Bank costs were US$20.6 million for component 1, US$5.6 million for component 2, and US$14
  million for component 3, for a total cost of US$40.2 million (ICR, p..48). At closing, actual Bank costs
  were as envisioned for each component.



  Dates

  The project was approved on 5/17/12 and became effective on 10/28/12.

          A level I restructuring was carried out in April 2014 to create a new component 3 in response to the
           country's evolving crisis.
          An AF (IDA-D0610, US$12 million) was approved on 5/22/15 to replenish the component 1 funds for
           PBF.

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



         A mid-term review was carried out on 5/11/16.
         Two level II restructurings were carried out, one on 9/27/16 to reallocate funds between
          disbursement categories, and another on 2/20/18 to extend the HRITF (TF-13380) closing date.
         The project closed on 3/31/18, a year later than the original closing date of 3/31/19.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were highly relevant to country conditions at appraisal. CAR had recently emerged from over
a decade of armed conflict. Political and social unrest had led to years of instability and fragility. As a result,
the country faced adverse consequences in economic growth with substantial challenges to social welfare.
In 2017, the country ranked last on the Human Development Index, with over twenty-five percent of its 4.7
million people displaced. At appraisal, MCH indicators ranked among the worst in the world. The health
system was characterized by weak governance, low and inequitable health financing, and lack of national
health accounts. The government's capacity in health financing was deficient and heavily reliant on
international community support. The absence of infrastructure led to difficulties accessing essential
medicines and supplies, shortages in the pharmaceutical supply chain, and scarcity of service delivery,
especially in rural areas (both facility-based and community-based). Among health care users, 53.6%
reported dissatisfaction. The most significant barriers were long wait times, treatment ineffectiveness,
limited access, long distance to health facilities, and high cost. A significant obstacle was the shortage of
qualified health workers to manage maternal and child health complications. Also, Health Management
Information Systems (HMIS) or current health-related data and information were not available, as most
databases were outdated and no longer relevant.

The project was highly aligned with previous Bank work in the sector, and with Bank and country strategies
at appraisal and closing. It aimed at consolidating, expanding, and improving progress achieved in the
health sector through the Bank-financed Multisectoral HIV/AIDS Project (US$17 million, 2001-2012,
P073525), which had objectives to reduce HIV/AIDS prevalence in CAR and mitigate the impact of
HIV/AIDS on persons living with or affected by HIV/AIDS. It was consistent with Axis 2 of the Bank's
Country Partnership Strategy FY09-12, "to ease the infrastructure bottlenecks hindering the rehabilitation
and development of key sectors, and to improve basic service delivery and the living conditions of the
population." It was also aligned with CAR's Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper at appraisal (PRSP II, 2011-
2015), which defined the low performance of the health system and high maternal/infant mortality as priority
problems. The project contributed to two priorities outlined in the National Health Development Plan II
(2006-2015): a) increase access to essential social services and strengthen human capital, and b) promote
partnerships with the private nonprofit sector and create a conducive environment to improve health by
strengthening management capacity.

At restructuring through closing, the project incorporated elements of social and medical care to victims of
violence, and provided emergency response to communities affected by the conflict at the time. These
priorities, as well as the re-introduction of PBF at the AF, were consistent with the second pillar of the CAR
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan 2017-2021, which focused on renewing the social contract
through building state presence and capacity to provide basic social services. They were also highly aligned
with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY21-25), which identifies poor access to basic

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



               health services as a binding constraint to poverty reduction and stabilization. The first of the CPF's two
               focus areas is "Human Capital and Connectivity to Boost Stabilization, Inclusion, and Resilience," covering
               sectoral engagement in health and specific investments in the empowerment of women and girls.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase utilization of maternal and child health services in targeted rural areas

                             Rationale
                             The objective's theory of change was based on the idea that PBF would increase motivation and
                             accountability of health providers through payments based on health services provided, upon verification.
                             Increasing resources to health facilities for investing in infrastructure and supplies would contribute to
                             increasing overall coverage of services, and reduce financial barriers for those in need.



                             Outputs:

                                        The PBF approach was extended to approximately 1/3 of the country: approximately 1,200 primary
                                          and secondary care health facilities were part of PBF (in 5 regions), and PBF contracts were signed
                                          with 13 health districts, for a total of 359 health centers in 5 out of 6 health regions in the country
                                          (Regions 2, 3, 4, 5, 6).



                             Outcomes:

                                        The number of direct project beneficiaries reached 6,164,360 in 2019, exceeding the original target of
                                         695,069 and the revised target of 3,092,508.
                                        The number of people with access to a basic package of health, nutrition, or reproductive health
                                         services increased from a baseline of 400,000 in 2012 to 3,541,480 in 2019, exceeding the original
                                         target of 600,000 and the revised target of 2,869,330. Of these, 2,664,727 were female, exceeding the
                                         original target of 400,429 and the revised target of 1,546,256.
                                        The number of births attended by trained personnel in health facilities in targeted areas increased
                                         from 26,500 in 2012 to 179,908 in 2019, exceeding the original target of 33,819 and the revised target
                                         of 137,071.


                                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)




        The number of children immunized increased from 31,360 in 2012 to 99,734 in 2019, exceeding the
         original target of 41,000 and the revised target of 82,716.
        The number of HIV+ pregnant women who received prevention of mother-to-child transmission care
         increased from 1,049 in 2013 to 10,838 in 2019, exceeding the original target of 4,669 and the revised
         target of 7,529.
        The number of mothers in the project’s target area who received two doses of intermittent preventive
         treatment for malaria during their last pregnancy increased from 1,312 in 2014 to 468,563 in 2019,
         meeting the original target of 468,563 and exceeding the revised target of 335,664.



Targets for every indicator on health services utilization, including key maternal and child health services,
were exceeded. Achievement of this objective is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of maternal and child health services in targeted rural areas

Rationale
The project’s theory of change was based on the hypothesis that implementing PBF would increase the
motivation and accountability of health providers and provide financing for improving the quality of
infrastructure. Also, providing additional financing at the local level would increase the autonomy of health
facilities to make managerial and procurement decisions appropriate for providing necessary and
quality care. The need to provide data to verification systems would also provide incentives to strengthen the
monitoring and evaluation system, further improving quality of services.



Outputs:

        The number of health facilities operating daily reached 332, against an original target of 400 and
           revised target of 1,107.
          The number of health professionals available in health facilities on a monthly basis reached 1,266,
           exceeding the original target of 1,200 but short of the revised target of 1,604.
          The percentage of health facilities in project areas with at least one qualified personnel increased from
           a baseline of 36% to 56%, short of the target of 80% (this target was not revised).
          The number of health facilities submitting complete monthly HMIS reports reached 332, short of the
           target of 345 (this target was not revised).
          The number of health personnel trained in HMIS reached 460, exceeding the original target of 372 but
           short of the revised target of 708.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)




Outcomes:

      The average score on the quality of care checklist increased from a baseline of 32.85% in 2015 to
       61.40 % in 2019, short of both the original target of 80.00% and the revised target of 67.85%.



Neither output nor outcome targets were reached for improving service quality. According to the ICR (pp. 29-
30), the security situation produced occasional delays in payment to providers that limited the impact of the
incentives; there was inadequate supervision and coaching at the level of the health facility and district health
teams; and there were shortages of qualified health personnel available to staff health facilities. Achievement
of this objective is therefore rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
The original project did not contain a third objective.

Rationale
The original project did not contain a third objective.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Provide emergency health services to the general population

Revised Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was based on the premise that establishing agreements with UN
agencies (WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA) to support emergency response-related health and social services would
increase coverage for the population affected by the crisis, particularly internally displaced people (IDPs) and
vulnerable groups (women, widows, and orphaned children).



Outputs:


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)




                                   150 health facilities received support from UNICEF, UNFPA and WHO.



                            Outcomes:

                                   The number of women victims of violence supported by social and medical health providers reached
                                    3,872, close to the target of 3,891.
                                   The number of children under age of five treated for severe acute malnutrition increased from 14,077
                                    in 2014 to 79,424 in 2019, exceeding the original target of 16,800 and the revised target of 52,246.



                            Targets for provision of emergency services were almost fully met. Achievement of this objective is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the project achieved the PDO of increasing utilization and improving the quality of maternal and child
                            health services in rural areas of the country, and providing emergency health services to the population.

                            Targets for all of the outcome indicators related to the utilization of maternal and child services were
                            surpassed, responding to PBF coverage of approximately 40% of the country’s total population in 5 regions
                            through 1,200 primary and secondary care health facilities. More than 85% of these health facilities opened
                            bank accounts to receive their payments directly. With the incentivization for performance, an increase was
                            observed in the average scores of the technical quality of the service provided at health facilities from 33%
                            (2015) to 61.4% (2019), short of the target but still an improvement. The variation of this score across and
                            within provinces was very high, as were scores on different items and areas within the
                            scorecard. Evaluations conducted with local authorities and community and religious authorities and groups
                            showed strong satisfaction levels.

                            The ICR did not directly address issues of attribution. It noted (p. 21) that coordination among development
                            partners was "very weak" at appraisal, but indicates that there was more communication and attention to
                            division of labor among partners after the crisis (p. 18). While there is therefore not strong evidence of direct
                            attribution of the entirety of observed outcomes to the project's interventions, the integrity of the project's
                            intervention logic indicates that at least partial attribution is plausible.




                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall efficacy for the revised project included the original objectives and the added third objective. Both the
         PDO and intermediate indicators used to assess the third objective surpassed targets. Quarterly reports from
         contracted UN agencies (UNICEF, UNFPA, and WHO) showed continual improvements in the availability of
         qualified health personnel, drugs, and medical equipment in the assistance given to internally displaced
         persons (IDPs) and other populations affected as a result of the crisis. The implementation of this component
         led to the expansion of the coverage of the project across rural areas and conflict-affected zones where the
         community was not receiving health services before the project’s intervention.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD's economic and financial analysis included two scenarios (low-growth baseline scenario and a high-
growth scenario). It was assumed that the PBF's scaling-up after the Bank operation's completion would be
financed mainly by creating a current expenditure line within the national health sector budget (considering that
public health expenditure includes external donor contributions, alongside government expenditures). The
project, as a result, would be sustainable; overall financing of US$ 9.7 million per year would represent less than
the total government current expenditure per year as estimated for the last year base-case scenario (US$ 11.2
million), and 70% under the frame of the high-growth scenario.

The PAD conducted a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) using an "input-output" approach to generate net benefits
from the project's activities. These net benefits were used to determine the net present value (NPV) and the
economic rate of return (ERR) of the project's investments to determine its economic viability. The CBA
estimated the NPV as US$ 8.4 million, with an ERR of 50%. The sensitivity analysis did not significantly change
the CBA results (PAD, p. 23). The CBA was not updated during the restructuring or the AF.

The ICR referred to international evidence from low and middle-income countries to infer that the services
included in the package of interventions were both cost-effective and adapted to the specific context and needs
of CAR (ICR, p. 24).

The ICR (p. 24) rates operational efficiency as substantial, based on the quality of implementation
arrangements, the responsiveness of the MOH, and the timely delivery of interventions, despite the difficulties in
a fragile and unstable context. At the end of the project, 100% of planned financing was disbursed. However, the
ICR describes moderate shortcomings in implementation efficiency. For instance, the project’s contribution to
improving the health sector’s allocative efficiency by using PBF was limited by instability and lack of adequate
capacity. Also, due to security concerns and challenging geographical terrain that increased the logistic and

                                                                                                            Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



administrative costs for activities (such as verification of results), the budget allocated to the EEA was
insufficient to cover the entire project intervention area, resulting in higher transaction costs. Compared to other
PBF programs in the region, the price for PPA activities in CAR was significantly above average, reducing the
proportion of funds paid directly to health facilities for service delivery (ICR, p. 33). Other shortcomings included
challenges in supply chains for drugs and medical material.

Given the lack of updated economic analysis and evidence of implementation inefficiencies, efficiency is rated
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   50.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high across the entire project, as the objectives continued to be consistent
with Bank and government strategies and responsive to the country's needs. Efficacy is rated Substantial under
the original objectives, as improvement in utilization of maternal and child health services was highly achieved,
but improvements in the quality of maternal and child services were modest. Efficacy is also rated Substantial
under the revised objectives, as the provision of emergency services to the general population during and
following the crisis period was substantially achieved. Efficiency is rated Modest, based on lack of economic
analysis at completion and evidence of inefficiency during implementation. These ratings indicate that there
were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation under both the original and revised
objectives. Overall Outcome is therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)




The risk to the development outcome is significant due to deterioration of the country's political and security
situation that has led to the abandonment of some state responsibilities in providing essential social services.
Although there have been improvements, the political situation remains fragile. Security challenges limit
supervising and verification capacity, and some areas of the country are not accessible for future
interventions (ICR, p. 28).

Some institutional strengthening achieved through the project is likely to be sustained. CAR institutions were
strengthened by expanding the PBF approach that included training for health personnel, technical
assistance, and the transfer of competencies. The MOH adopted the project's PBF manual as an official
national document (National PBF Manual) to be used by all partners. However, some critical functions of the
PBF pilot, such as the PPA or service delivery during an emergency, were performed by external agents; this
approach could preclude technical capacity and ownership at the country level and hinder PBF sustainability.
Moreover, the fragmentation and lack of coordination of the health sector among various actors may leave
some areas of the country without sustained health care after the departure of these organizations (ICR, p.
29).

At the end of the project, there was not a budget line for PBF within the national health sector budget, posing
an additional risk sustainability of project outcomes. According to the project team, there is resolve within the
government to commit to a development policy operation for a reform that would include PBF, free
healthcare for mothers and children, and a component to reduce gender-based violence. In December of
2018, a new Health System Support and Strengthening Project (US$43 million, 2018-2021), was signed to
consolidate this project's achievements in PBF and child and maternal health. The most recent World
Bank Economic Update for CAR (November 2020) notes that the impact of COVID-19 will fall hardest on
people who are already vulnerable, including IDPs, women, and children.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed to address significant health issues by targeting institutional weaknesses,
  based on global evidence and consistent with the Bank's partnership strategy with CAR. Its design was
  simple, focused on strengthening the health system through three components (increasing performance
  of health service delivery with PBF, strengthening the MOH, and after the AF, providing emergency
  health services). Its technical design was based on promising results from a pilot experience of PBF in
  other countries with similar contexts, such as Cameroon and Burundi, as well as international PBF
  lessons. In addition, its design was informed by lessons from the prior multisectoral HIV/AIDS project, an
  EU-financed PBF pilot ("Amélioration des Soins de Santé de Base Dans Les Régions Sanitaires 1 et 6"),
  and the experience of the Catholic Organization for Relief and Development Aid, which had been acting
  as a PPA for PBF since 2009 in Health Region 2. There was a prelaunch mission in October 2012 to two
  of the five project regions that contributed to raising awareness and understanding of the project's
  objectives, structure, scope, and implementation arrangements (ICR, p. 27). Moreover, the ICR (p. 27)
  reported adequate consultation with stakeholders. Adequate environmental and social safeguards were
  prepared, as were implementation and financial management arrangements, including solid technical
  assistance, training, and gradual scale-up, all as part of the project's risk mitigation strategy. According to


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



  the ICR (p. 33), the project preparation team included all the necessary expertise, understanding,
  familiarity with CAR, and relevant global experience.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided consistent implementation support and adequate technical guidance (ICR, p. 33)
 under conditions of conflict and emergency. The task team leaders (TTLs) were not based in-country,
 but in-country consultants and frequent missions were used to supervise implementation. The TTL was
 changed three times; however, sectoral colleagues and core team members remained the same
 throughout, and there was minimal turnover in the rest of the team. Restructuring and AF were promptly
 considered and adopted in response to the emergency situation in 2013-2014. Reporting through
 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) was adequate for the duration of the project, with thirteen ISRs
 produced. The Bank team focused on capacity strengthening for PBF and led a robust policy dialogue on
 the PBF approach with the government and with other partners involved in the sector (such as EU,
 UNFPA, UNICEF, and WHO), to ensure the sustainability of the mechanism.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were adequate to the country's context and consistent with the Bank’s strategy for CAR.
 The theory of change was well defined, with straightforward objectives and logical, plausible connections
 between planned activities and intended outcomes The M&E system was solid and tailored to respond to
 the weaknesses of the health sector information system in CAR and reinforce the national system by using
 existing indicators and data sources to measure the project's progress. PDO indicators and intermediate
 results indicators were measurable, with baseline and end project target values specified. The PIU's PBF
 technical unit was to monitor the progress of PBF implementation in the field. The ICR (p. 30) described
 some shortcomings with M&E design; for example, the target for the number of direct project beneficiaries
 target was low, which suggests that it was underestimated. However, other quality targets, especially for
 the number of health facilities functioning daily and available staffing, were ambitious and did not
 fully account for the contextual factors of the country.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR highlighted the critical role of the National PBF Unit in leading the rollout of the PBF program.
  Data on project indicators was collected and made available in a PBF portal and through counter-
  verifiers. According to the ICR (p. 31), the rigorous data collection system set up for the PBF was found
  to be adequate. In addition, both the original project design and the AF were informed by health facility
  and household surveys conducted in project areas in 2011 and 2017. Data and reporting produced by
  WHO, UNICEF, and UNFPA under component 3 were comprehensive and of high quality. The project
  team added that the PIU reallocated funds to contract a person to work exclusively on the information
  system, leading to a significant improvement of the system over the course of the project period.
  However, due to the conflict situation, supervision of M&E was challenging for both the Bank team and
  counter-verifiers. The ICR (p. 29) also noted shortcomings related to unreliable data infrastructure,
  resulting in unreliable data in some regions, as well as poor maintenance of some health facility records.
  The impact evaluation planned to assess the PBF component of the project (PAD, p. 20) was canceled
  due to the crisis and security situation.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 31), the utilization of M&E findings was significant for tracking progress,
  identifying gaps, and taking course-corrective actions, including the restructuring and AF and
  adjustments to indicator targets. Results from the bi-annual PBF counter-verification were shared
  through workshops at the regional level.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered safeguard policy OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. It was classified as
   Environmental Category “B,” due to the expected increase of medical equipment and drugs through project
   interventions that increased medical waste. There were no construction works planned under the project
   except for minor refurbishments and renovations. A Health Care Waste Management Plan initially
   developed for the HIV/AIDS project was revised to respond to this project's needs and was disclosed at
   appraisal. Waste management practice was monitored as part of the PBF quality checklist. Additionally,
   some health facilities used their PBF bonuses to improve hazardous medical waste management, including
   the purchase of incinerators.

   The project also triggered safeguard policy 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (IP). An Indigenous People
   Planning Framework (IPPF) was adopted to ensure that IPs would benefit from the project, even though
   there were no expectations of negative impact. The IPPF was disclosed on 2/1/12. The ICR (p. 32) stated
   that the project did not pose any significant social safeguards risk. The PBF approach was expected to
   positively impact community voice by monitoring the quality of health services and improving health care



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



   services access, especially for the poorest. Appropriate mechanisms were in place for grievances to be
   reported, resolved, and communicated effectively.

   The Medical Waste Management Plan and translation of the IPPF into an Action Plan were updated during
   the 2014 restructuring. The TTL noted that it was not possible to identify and contract a safeguards
   specialist until 2018. The ICR did not make a straightforward statement about safeguards compliance, but
   according to ISRs, after the July 2018 supervision mission, the project's safeguards performance was rated
   Moderately Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR (p. 32) described the overall fiduciary and procurement management of the project as satisfactory
   in terms of adequacy and consistency with the Bank's financial management guidelines. The ICR noted
   that the project had a fiduciary manual detailing critical internal control procedures, updated after the
   restructuring, and also that there was a clear separation of duties within the PIU. The disbursement rate at
   project closure was 99.46 percent. However, the ICR (p. 24-25) described some difficulties with the PBF
   verification mechanism (supervision challenges for Bank and project staff and the counter-verifiers),
   producing some discrepancies between amounts validated and amounts paid to health facilities. Also, the
   ICR (p. 29) noted some unspecified irregular financial and accounting processes within the MOH,




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   According to the ICR (p. 26), the project played an essential role in enabling commercial banks to open
   branches in regions where in the past there had been none, which resulted in increased autonomy in
   health facility management and accounted for 82 percent of health facilities opening bank accounts. That,
   in turn, enabled them to establish their performance payment invoices and transmit them to the executing
   agency. This allowed the separation of function with the payer and the EEA that helped enhance
   accountability in the system and delivery of services.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



Quality of ICR                      ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p0. 34-35) offered several useful lessons, including the following adapted by IEG:

        Contracting with NGOs to deliver services can facilitate achievement of results in fragility,
           conflict and violence (FCV) settings. In this case, the NGO contracting model used in the
           health sector allowed for provision of a flexible, well-prioritized package of services even in
           an FCV situation. NGOs had the independence to deliver services in a deteriorating security
           context and were able to forge alliances and agreements with local leaders and adapt to
           specific local conditions in ways that would not have been possible for government
           employees.
          Investment in monitoring and evaluation can lead to sound data and analysis and strengthen
           national health information systems. In this case, the reinforcement of the M&E and health
           information systems, as well as the strengthening routine data collection and management
           (annual statistical reports and data produced by PBF), led to good quality data for tracking
           results. It also reinforced confidence among stakeholders and was used as a tool for
           accountability. Also, contracting independent experts and an impartial agency to
           undertake various data analyses and publications ensured high-quality and reliable data and
           knowledge management.
          Different mechanisms of health financing need to be integrated with tangible investment from
           domestic resources. In this case, although the project was adequately costed, the
           government's declaration of a policy of free health care for mothers and children in 2018 did
           not consider a streamlined and integrated PBF. Hence, a free care services approach
           created potentially contrary incentives for health providers.
          Partnerships and solid national leadership are essential ingredients of success. In this case,
           some institutional stability at the ministerial level, decision-maker level, and the anchor of the
           PBF technical unit contributed to the adoption of results-based approaches by the
           government and other stakeholders.
          Pragmatic adaptation in PBF design and implementation is essential. Proactive adjustments
           to the program to address changing contexts and needs contributed to ensuring appropriate
           and context-specific support to target populations. In this case, adaptation of the PBF design
           to the requirements of the different health zones provided resources to deliver free services
           to the poorest populations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                         Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CF-Health System Support Project (FY12) (P119815)



The ICR provided a clear narrative and comprehensive overview of the project’s experience. It was results-
oriented and candid, carefully linking outputs with observed outcomes under each objective. However, the
evidence presented was not well referenced; for instance, some targets and indicators did not match. The ICR
included annexes with relevant information to support the narrative of the project achievements. For the most
part, the ICR followed guidelines, but it did not apply the split rating methodology even though one objective
was added and PDO indicator targets were modified. There was some inconsistency in the presentation of data
(mismatches between the main text and annexes), and some acronyms and terms were not fully defined or
explained. Also, in its discussion of M&E, the ICR did not clarify the challenges of getting data from specific
areas to measure the indicators' achievement. While the lessons were insightful, they were not linked in detail
to the narrative.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
