     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022603

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152136                                    Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                  Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0720                                  30-Sep-2020                                          59,224,365.65

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Jun-2015                                30-Sep-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         59,224,365.65                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Salim J. Habayeb            Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to: (a) strengthen quality and access to health services; (b) contribute to
   adapting the public health system to the Recipient's changing epidemiological profile; and (c) secure financial
   support in case of Public Health Alert or Public Health Emergency (Financing Agreement dated June 26,
   2015, p. 5).




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Project scope and selection of municipalities: 66 municipalities (out of a total of 153 municipalities in the
   country) and all 19 Local Systems of Integrated Health (SILAIS) participated in the project. According to the
   ICR (p.17), the selection of participating municipalities was based on (i) weak performance with respect to
   maternal and child health indicators; and (ii) a caveat that such municipalities were not supported by the
   Integrated Health Care Networks Project financed by the Inter-American Development Bank. In terms of
   poverty aspects, health services improvements under the project were expected to benefit the poor in
   particular, as 24.9% of target populations were living in poverty, including 6.9% in absolute poverty,
   according to the National Institute of Development Information.

   Explanation of SILAIS: In 2005, the Ministry of Health (MOH) created the Local Systems of Integrated
   Health Care (Sistema Local de Atención Integral de Salud, SILAIS) to manage municipal health networks
   (ICR, p. 5). Hence, SILAIS constituted an intermediate administrative level between MOH at the center and
   municipalities at the lower level.



   Components:



   1. Strengthening the Quality and Access to Health Care Services (Appraisal US$28 million; Actual
   US$28 million).

   Subcomponent 1.1: Improving the quality of health care services in selected municipalities through the
   financing of Capitation Payments to Municipal Health Networks, based on Annual Performance Agreements
   and Quality Health Care Plans.

   Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening and expanding the provision of basic health care services,
   including support to: (a) the national immunization program at the primary level of health care; (b) the
   national clinical laboratory diagnosis capacity; (c) repair and maintenance of medical equipment by MOH;
   (d) training programs for health workers; (e) mainstreaming of culturally acceptable traditional medicine; (f)
   implementation of the adolescent sexual reproductive health strategy; (g) the development of preventative
   and curative oral health services; and (h) the consolidation of health information systems of MOH.



   2. Institutional Strengthening of MOH to Respond to the Country’s Changing Epidemiological Profile
   (Appraisal US$24.6 million; Actual US$24.2 million).




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



  Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening MOH's capacity to prevent and respond to chronic diseases
  through support to, inter alia: (a) preparation of a national chronic disease strategy; and (b) strengthening of
  the national cervical cancer prevention and treatment plan.

  Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening MOH's capacity to prevent and respond to trauma injury through
  support to, inter alia: (a) preparation of a national trauma strategy; (b) improvement of distribution of medical
  supplies; (c) provision of orthopedic materials for trauma patients; (d) strengthening of the referral
  emergency units and intensive care units; and (e) promotion and implementation of road safety programs
  and communication campaigns.



  3. Contingency Financing of a Public Health Emergency or Public Health Alert and Capacity Building
  (Appraisal US$6.6 million; Actual US$6.1 million).

  Subcomponent 3.1: Provision of contingency financing in the case of an eligible Public Health Alert
  or a Public Health Emergency.

  Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening entomological surveillance and raising awareness of vector-
  borne diseases through, inter alia: (a) the acquisition and maintenance of equipment to control vector
  spread; (b) household preventive visits to vector-infested areas; (c) development of communication
  strategies; (d) training; and (e) strengthening and creation of entomological units and laboratories.

  Subcomponent 3.3: Strengthening the implementation of hospital waste management in selected
  hospitals through, inter alia, support to: (a) implementation of waste management plans in selected
  hospitals; (b) acquisition of equipment for hospital waste management; and (c) training.



  4: Project Management (Appraisal US$0.8 million; Actual US$0.9 million).

  Financial support for strengthening MOH capacity for administering, implementing, supervising, and
  evaluating project activities, including support for carrying out external audits.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing. At appraisal the project cost was estimated at US$60 million. The project was fully
  financed by an IDA Grant (No. D0720-NI) amounting to SDR 42,700,000. The actual cost was US$59.2
  million. According to the Operations Portal, disbursement reached 100%, but the marginal difference
  between the original commitment and the final cost was due to exchange rate variations between SDR and
  USD (ICR, p. 43).




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



   Dates. The project appraisal document was finalized on May 13, 2015. The project was approved on June
   4, 2015, and was declared effective on September 17, 2015. A Mid-Term Review was carried out on May
   14, 2018. The project closed on September 30, 2020, as originally planned.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
During the past two decades, Nicaragua was pursuing efforts to decentralize health services and improve
their coverage. In 2007, the country created a Family and Community Health Care Model (MOSAFC) based
on a primary health care strategy to provide free access to basic health and nutrition services, with a focus
on maternal and child health, to prioritize access to vulnerable populations, and to involve the community as
a primary partner in the health sector. The project continued a long engagement with the Bank, and was
part of a sequence of four operations spanning over two decades of support to decentralization and
incremental strengthening of Nicaragua's public health care system (ICR, p.25).

An evolving challenge was the need to respond to changes in the country’s epidemiological profile, and to
further strengthen public health promotion (PAD, p. 6). Specifically, the country faced an expanded burden
of disease: in addition to an unfinished agenda related to infectious diseases, malnutrition, and reproductive
health, the overall burden of disease was shifting towards non-communicable and chronic diseases and
external causes such as injuries, with high mortality related to vascular diseases, tumors, and major
traumas. It was also recognized that public health activities could play an important role in promoting
behavioral changes at the community level to prevent or reduce risk factors of such conditions. Hence, the
project was designed to continue the Bank’s long-standing support to the health sector in basic care while
also adapting to the country's evolving needs in non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and conditions.

Strengthening quality and access to health services continues to be the cornerstone of the National Primary
Health Care Strategy. Adapting to the changing epidemiological patterns is fully relevant to the country's
evolving public health needs, particularly when considering that the top causes of death in 2019 were all
related to NCDs (ICR, p.10 based on the National Health Map, MOH, 2020). Securing financial support to
respond to public health alerts or emergencies is also relevant in view of the country’s experience with past
challenges, such as the H1N1 flu pandemic and the dengue epidemic that strained the government's
financial and institutional resources. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic confirmed the importance of quick
resource mobilization to confront unforeseen public health incidents.

At project closing, the development objectives remained aligned with the Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for the Period FY18-FY22. The operation supported CPF Pillar 1 - Investing in Human Capital
Particularly for Disadvantaged Groups. In particular, the project provided direct support to Objective 2
(Improved health and early childhood development) by improving the quality of preventive and curative
health care services with a particular focus on women, children, and indigenous populations. The operation
is also consistent with Pillar 3 - Improving Institutions for Resilience and Sustainability.

The objectives also remain aligned with the goals of the Bank’s sector strategies for achieving universal
health service coverage and protecting households from catastrophic health care costs, with a particular



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



               focus on the most vulnerable. In addition, the objectives remain consistent with Nicaragua's efforts to
               achieve the UN Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen access to health services.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was based on the premise that results-based capitation payments for health services
                             and the provision of goods, works, vaccines, consulting services and training (see below under outputs)
                             would be reasonably expected to result in strengthened and expanded provision of health care that would
                             plausibly contribute to enhancing access to health care services.

                             According to the ICR (p. 7), strengthened and expanded provision of services also included: (i) adolescent
                             sexual reproductive health; (ii) immunizations; (iii) oral health services; (iv) traditional medicine; (v) MOH
                             technical capacity; (vi) clinical laboratory diagnosis capacity; and (vii) maintenance of medical equipment.



                             Outputs and intermediate results

                                        The project purchased and provided four vaccines (pentavalent, MMR, and adult and pediatric flu
                                           vaccines) and immunization supplies. A total of 322,154 children received immunizations under the
                                           project.
                                          A total of 149 laboratory facilities (11 pathology and 138 clinical laboratories) were constructed,
                                           renovated, and/or equipped, exceeding the target of 44 facilities.
                                          The project equipped 103 traditional medicine health clinics; trained health workers in natural
                                           medicine and complementary therapies; and rehabilitated the Institute of Natural Medicine and
                                           Complementary Therapies. The number of municipal health units implementing traditional medicine
                                           increased from 0 to 188, exceeding the target of 12 units.
                                          Output-based payments for oral health services among school-age children served on average
                                           734,651 children per year.
                                          The percentage of rehabilitated cold chain networks at the primary health care level increased from
                                           88% to 93% (or 959 out of 1,031 health units), attaining the target.
                                          A maintenance plan for medical and non-medical equipment was implemented by the Medical
                                           Equipment Maintenance Center, including maintenance training for technicians.

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)




      The project deployed information and communication technologies at MOH, including software
       applications within the National Health Information System.
      The Comprehensive Adolescent Sexual and Reproductive Health Plan was implemented in
       coordination with the Ministries of Youth, Education, and Family, Adolescence and Childhood.
      The number of schools participating in the children fluoridation program increased from a baseline of 0
       in 2014 to 8,558 schools in 2020, exceeding the original target of 4,040 schools.
      4,910 health personnel received training under the annual training plans of MOH Five-Year Human
       Resources Development Plan to address three main priorities: (a) addressing skills gaps in dealing
       with the epidemiological pattern of the country; (b) improving the quality of care while prioritizing
       primary health care; and (c) providing an added focus on the most vulnerable in the society, all of
       which aimed at contributing to the long-term effectiveness of the health care system. Training
       recipients included two main groups: (i) health care personnel, including nurses, laboratory, and
       service personnel, and medical staff including general doctors, gynecologists, pediatricians, internists,
       and surgeons; and (ii) community members who are part of the extended health network, including
       midwives and volunteers, e.g., in epidemic-related activities, disaster prevention, and information
       collection (Task Team clarifications, April 29, 2021).

Note on certification of results: During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic prevented field visits to municipalities
and delayed certification activities. Final project results were therefore reported as of December 2019 as
originally envisioned, and their final verification was pending during ICR preparation. However, according to
the ICR, no major variations were expected.

Outcomes

Note on the stratification of municipalities based on past performance: Municipalities were classified at the
outset into groups based on past performance. This allowed a more granular monitoring of municipal
performance (ICR, p. 20). Municipalities were classified into three groups: (a) Group 1 consisting of weaker
performers, with project monitoring focusing on quality and access; (b) Group 2 consisting of average
performers, with project monitoring focusing on quality; and (c) Group 3 of relatively stronger performing
municipalities, with project monitoring focusing on the sustainability of quality control measures that were
introduced (ICR, p. 12).

The percentage of women who had at least four prenatal care visits increased in the three groups of
municipalities from the 2014 baselines (G1: 53%; G2: 71%; G3: 83%) to the following levels in 2019: G1:
77%; G2: 81%; and G3: 96%, exceeding the targets for G1: 70%; G2: 80%; and G3: 85%.

The percentage of women receiving postpartum care within 2 to 10 days of delivery increased in the three
groups of municipalities between 2014 and 2019, but with Group 1 partially achieving its target. Postpartum
care increased from the 2014 baselines (G1: 37%; G2: 58%; G3: 73%) to the following 2019 levels: G1: 53%,
short of the target of 55%; G2: 74%, exceeding the target of 70%; and G3: 90%, exceeding the target of 82%.

The percentage of children under 1 year of age who received three doses of pentavalent vaccine increased in
all project municipalities between 2014 and 2019 from a baseline of 96% to 100%, exceeding the target of
98%.




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



The percentage of pregnant adolescents less than 20 years of age having institutional birth deliveries
increased from baselines in the three groups of municipalities of 44%, 76% and 88% to 94.9%, 99.2% and
98.4%.

The gap in terms of the provision of prenatal care, pentavalent vaccination, and post-partum care between
the weakest and better performing municipalities (Groups 1 and 3) decreased from 36% to 20%; from 2% to
0; and from 49% to 41% respectively (ICR, p. 17).

Cumulatively, a total of 888,624 people received essential health, nutrition, and population services under the
project.

The capitation and quality assurance mechanisms developed under the project were sustained and adopted
countrywide.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the quality of health services.

Rationale
Theory of change. The implementation of Quality Health Care Plans (QHCPs) in 66 municipalities and their
consideration in results-based capitation payments, the adoption of homogenous clinical and reporting
protocols for health care services, the certification of health care centers on the quality of care, and improved
skills through training (see above under Objective 1) could be reasonably expected to contribute to improved
quality of health care services. Enhanced diagnostic capacity of clinical laboratories and better maintenance
of medical equipment were also expected to contribute to the desired improvements in the quality of health
services.

Explanation of Quality Health Care Plans and quality assurance steps:

      MOH entered into Annual Performance Agreements with SILAIS, who would be responsible for:
       ensuring the delivery and supervision of health services; transferring funds received as capitation
       payments to municipalities; entering into separate municipal agreements with municipalities; keeping
       records of health services and progress reports set forth in each municipal agreement; and complying
       with the provisions of the Operations Manual and Anti-Corruption Guidelines (PAD, p. 36).
      In turn, each SILAIS entered into a Municipal Agreement with each municipality for the provision of
       health services. The agreements established agreed health care services that were included in the
       QHCP drawn up every year by each municipality to enhance municipal commitment to the provision of
       quality health care (PAD, p. 36).
      Certification steps had several layers of oversight: (a) municipalities were responsible for the
       submission of semi-annual self-evaluation reports to SILAIS; (b) SILAIS was responsible for the
       review of municipal reports and their presentation to the Technical Council (within MOH) and the
       Citizen Council (at the SILAIS level); (c) the Project Verification Commission visited the municipalities;

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



       (d) annual population projections per municipality were verified by the National Institute of Statistics;
       and (e) the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO), acting as an independent third party, was
       responsible for certifying the achievement of agreed indicators and the implementation of the QHCPs
       through regular field visits to municipalities focusing more tightly on the weaker performers and, on a
       random basis, on the higher performing ones (ICR, p. 19).



Outputs and intermediate results indicators

Results-based capitation payments of US$8.3 million were made to project municipalities based on
performance with respect to indicators, QHCPs, and on population criteria.

4,910 health personnel received training (see above under Objective 1).

For municipalities that showed low compliance in a given cycle, support plans were drawn, and payments
were made upon improved performance (Task Team, May 3, 2021).



Outcomes

The number of participating municipalities attaining more than 50% compliance with their Quality Health Care
Plans increased from 0 in 2014 to 66% in 2019, attaining the target.

As noted above under Objective 1, the capitation and quality assurance mechanisms developed under the
project were sustained, institutionalized, and adopted countrywide. The government included related
expenditures in the regular budget covering all 153 municipalities in the country (ICR, p. 24 and Task Team,
May 3, 2021).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Contribute to adapting the public health system to the changing epidemiological profile.

Rationale
Theory of change. It was reasonably expected that support provided to MOH to strengthen its capacity in
preventing and responding to chronic diseases and trauma injury would contribute to the adaptation of the
public health system to the changing epidemiological profile in the country. Such support included goods,
works, training, consulting services, communications campaigns, operating costs, and the preparation of a
national chronic disease strategy.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)




Outputs and intermediate results

These included updated norms for the prevention and treatment of NCDs, trained health staff for the
prevention and control of NCDs, communications campaigns, and preparation of a National Strategy for
Chronic Diseases. Ten reference centers, including pathology laboratories, were rehabilitated and equipped
to treat cervical cancer, along with staff training. These reference centers included four national reference
centers, five regional centers, and one hospital.

The National Trauma Strategy was prepared, and 176 ambulances and orthopedic materials were made
available, expanding the existing stock. 8,810 people (5,550 men and 3,260 women) received joint
replacements and orthopedic implants during their treatment for trauma injuries.



Outcomes

The number of health centers certified for hypertension screening increased from 0 to 58 between 2014 and
2019, exceeding the target of 40 centers.

According to the ICR (p. 13), early detection of uterine cervical cancer increased from 29% in 2015 to 37% in
2019 (the ICR also suggested that improved early detection may have plausibly contributed to the reported
24% national decline in the number of deaths due to cervical cancer).

The health system’s adaptation to the changing epidemiological profile, reflected by an expanded shift to
address the NCD burden, was institutionalized. Prior to the project, the focus of the primary health care
system was on maternal & child health care, and, through the project, health centers included the
identification of risk factors for NCDs and follow-up care of patients in their regular work (Task Team, May 3,
2021).



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Secure financial support in case of public health alert or public health emergency.

Rationale
Theory of change. It was reasonably expected that making financial resources readily available would
facilitate prompt responses to urgent public health events.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



                            Outputs

                            Financial support of US$1.5 million was made available under the project to respond to two sanitary alerts for
                            the prevention and control of Dengue, Zika, and Chikungunya. Project support included the acquisition and
                            maintenance of equipment to control vector spread; output-based payments for household preventive visits to
                            vector-infested areas; development of communication strategies; training of health personnel in vector
                            prevention and control; strengthening and/or creation of entomological units and laboratories; and acquisition
                            of equipment for hospital waste management and improved skills through training.



                            Intermediate results

                            Over 10.7 million home visits were conducted to promote awareness on the prevention and control of vector
                            borne diseases in 2019, compared to 5 million visits in 2014, surpassing the target of 8.2 million visits.

                            The percentage of reference hospitals with updated and implemented waste management plans increased
                            from 11 to 83% between 2014 and 2020, attaining the target.



                            Outcomes

                            No outcome-level indicators related to this objective (to secure financial support in case of public health alert
                            or public health emergency) were set by the project. Since financial support was made available to promptly
                            respond to public health alerts, and since this flexible arrangement did actually facilitate public
                            health responses to viral outbreaks, achievement of this objective is rated substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved the planned strengthening of quality and access to health services, notably though
                            implementation and institutionalization of performance and quality mechanisms to determine capitation
                            payments. The project contributed to the adaptation of the health system to the changing epidemiological
                            profile by strengthening health system capacities to address NCDs such as hypertension and cervical cancer,
                            and to respond to trauma injuries. The project secured financial support through flexible arrangements to
                            respond to public health alerts and emergencies. The aggregation of achievements indicates that the
                            objectives were almost fully achieved, hence, overall efficacy is rated substantial.


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
A cost-benefit analysis was carried out at appraisal. The analysis considered a net investment cost of US$55.7
million and the benefits that would be generated under Components 1 (improving quality and access), and
subcomponent 2 on trauma injuries. According to the PAD (p. 56), benefits included savings in household health
costs as a result of increased coverage of health services, savings achieved by expanded laboratory services,
expanded oral health coverage, and response to trauma.

Without fully explaining the assumptions that were made, the ICR (p.56) stated that the economic analysis was
based on adjusted assumptions of strategy, interventions, and targets from assumptions used in previous
country estimates. The cost-benefit analysis considered that the project would operate in 19 SILAIS as planned
and that health services would be provided in 66 municipalities, benefiting a total of 1.2 million people. Activities
that were considered to be public goods, such as the road safety promotion and communication campaign, the
creation of a medical emergency referral system, and the strengthening of referral and intensive care units
would benefit the entire population. Using a discount rate of 10%, the ex-ante economic analysis estimated that
the project would yield a net present value (NPV) of about US$17 million and produce an internal rate of return
of 34% over a ten-year period. According to the PAD (p. 57), a sensitivity analysis indicated that the project
would be worthwhile even if it were to require an additional investment of 16.6% to achieve the same gains.

The ICR lacked an ex-post cost-benefit analysis at project closing. When economic returns are estimated at
appraisal, the ICR is expected to repeat the analysis based on information available at the time of project closing
to provide an updated projection of benefits. The ICR stated (p. 16) that “given that the operation was
implemented as originally anticipated, its actual IERR can be expected to be at least 34%, given that sizable
economic benefits would have been generated by preventive health care services and activities carried out
under Subcomponent 2.1 (NCDs) and Component 3 (vector-borne diseases)."

The Task Team re-iterated on April 29, 2021 that the economic analysis performed at appraisal still holds, as the
operation was implemented as originally envisioned. However, in response to questions by IEG, the Task
Team updated the cost benefit analysis and considered additional benefits such as savings from the early
detection of cervical cancer. This update produced an estimated NPV of US$21.5 million and an internal rate of
return of 37%.

No important issues related to implementation efficiency were reported by the ICR. The implementation
timetable and disbursement schedule closely followed what was envisioned at appraisal (ICR, p. 16). The ICR
reported savings estimated at US$3.1 million from purchases related to vaccines and orthopedic equipment.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        93.00
Appraisal                                                    34.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        93.00
ICR Estimate                                                 37.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high because the objectives reflected the expansion of the country’s health
development strategy in response to evolving health priorities; they were fully aligned with the Bank’s sector
strategies in health, nutrition, and population; and they remained aligned at project closing with the Country
Partnership Framework FY18-FY22. Efficacy is rated substantial, consistent with almost fully achieving project
objectives. Efficiency is rated substantial as the project offered good value for money and was efficiently
implemented. These findings are consistent with an overall outcome rating of satisfactory, indicative of
essentially minor shortcomings in the project's achievement of its objectives, in its efficiency, or in its relevance.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Commitment among main stakeholders remains strong for maintaining and expanding universal health care
services in a decentralized manner (ICR, p. 24). The project approach is being continued under a follow-on
operation, the Integrated Public Provision of Health Care Services Project (P164452). The capitation and
quality assurance mechanisms developed under this operation have been adopted countrywide (ICR, p. 24
and Task Team May 3, 2021). Environmental and social safeguards were mainstreamed and institutionalized
within MOH. Institutional strengthening was developed in support of MOH's transition from a traditional
budgeting system to a results-oriented approach with capitation payments for the provision of promotive,
preventive, and curative services. Training and project implementation within existing organizational
structures contributed to enhanced skills for both managers and health personnel.

However, macroeconomic and external risks remain. The ICR (p. 24) noted that the COVID-19 pandemic
has likely eroded some of the gains in expanding access. The pandemic has further hindered Nicaragua's
economy because of lower remittance inflows, reduced trade, and a paralyzed tourism industry. Gradual



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



normalization is expected once the pandemic is under control. The country remains vulnerable to recurrent
hurricanes, and Nicaragua ranked 21st in the World Risk Report 2019 (ICR, p. 24).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Preparation benefited from the experience and capacities that were built under a previous Bank-
  supported project (Improving Community and Family Health Care Services Project) and from lessons and
  good practices of projects in Nicaragua and the LAC region. Lessons were related to the advantages of
  using capitation payments and annual performance agreements, direct implementation by MOH rather
  than separate implementation units, and design flexibility allowing a rapid response to public health
  emergencies (PAD, p. 9).

  The information provided by the PAD (pp. 10-12) and the ICR indicated that implementation
  arrangements were well prepared. M&E arrangements were adequate. Technical oversight at the
  municipal level would be undertaken by the Technical Council of MOH and by the Citizen Council at the
  SILAIS level. The Project Verification Commission would verify and certify capitated payments and
  output-based disbursements in collaboration with PAHO as an independent external institution. Based on
  a moderately satisfactory assessment for financial management, financial arrangements were
  strengthened in terms of procedures and funds flow mechanisms and by the addition of a senior financial
  management specialist and a financial analyst. Other measures included updates to the Operations
  Manual and financial reporting reviews. Environmental and social safeguards were well prepared,
  including for the use of a grievance redress mechanism (PAD, pp. 15-16).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 23), supervision was regular and reporting was thorough, including field visits to
 participating municipalities. Detailed findings were recorded in Aide Memoires and periodic Implementation
 Status Reports. The ICR reported that the Bank Task Team played a highly proactive role throughout the
 operation's lifetime and provided sustained technical assistance in substantive health topics and
 operational aspects. The ICR also reported that the Task Team adequately monitored fiduciary compliance
 and environmental and social safeguards. The Task Team reportedly responded swiftly to reports that
 ambulances procured under the project were involved in anti-government demonstrations. The external
 auditor conducted an independent verification of 176 ambulances and observed that some of the vehicles
 were not properly maintained or controlled. The Task Team carried out three field missions during 2018 to
 evaluate the situation and to take the necessary corrective measures.

 According to the ICR (p. 23), close communication with the Borrower helped identify and address
 bottlenecks in a timely manner, and the Task Team provided further details on this issue on April 29, 2021.

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



 The annual performance agreements and the municipal plans were the main instruments for accountability
 and for identifying performance issues. Examples of encountered issues and areas for improvement that
 were identified and addressed included the following: (i) service hours identified as being incompatible with
 the actual demand for services and population dynamics in some communities; (ii) lack of specific items of
 equipment or supplies; (iii) identification of areas for additional training; and (iv) identification of required
 norms and guidelines. Regular communications were maintained with the Borrower, including remotely by
 videoconferencing due to civil unrest in 2018 and travel restrictions in 2020 resulting from the COVID-19
 pandemic.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated, and the indicators reflected the objectives, but with minor shortcomings,
 as PDO-level indicators for two objectives did not reflect the full extent of achievement of objectives:
 the planned measurement of ‘adapting the public health system to the changing epidemiological profile’
 was limited to a PDO-level indicator consisting of the number of health centers certified for hypertension
 screening; and the access objective was to be measured by prenatal care visits and pentavalent
 immunizations of children, that are more reflective of utilization. Access has several domains to consider on
 the supply-side, such as availability. Nevertheless, access and utilization are closely related, notably
 because utilization is a function of both supply and demand. Also, the results framework included robust
 intermediate results indicators that could capture the contribution of the operation’s activities and outputs
 toward achieving PDO-level outcomes.

 Definitions and sources of data were clearly specified, and baselines were also defined based on the latest
 reported MOH data at appraisal. M&E arrangements were well-embedded institutionally and built on
 existing systems.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was adequately implemented. Annual Performance agreements and QHCPs provided data on the
  performance of participating municipalities. SILAIS verified the evidence supporting municipal self-
  reported data through field visits to participating municipalities. MOH also collated data from its health
  directorates responsible for national health programs, and from other agencies, such as the Ministry of
  Education for the oral health program for school children. During implementation, the project also
  monitored data not initially included in the results framework; for example, MOH began to track other
  metrics on trauma injuries and joint replacements.


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



  PAHO, in its role as external certifier, made quarterly field visits to participating municipalities and SILAIS,
  verified the achievements, and produced regular progress reports. PAHO's value-added extended
  beyond verification and certification of data, as the agency provided technical assistance to participating
  municipalities, thus contributing to improving data collection processes and data reliability. MOH
  conducted regular supervision of SILAIS and municipal levels, including Annual Social Consultations,
  under which SILAIS solicited feedback, addressed complaints, and sought suggestions from the local
  community representatives and beneficiaries.

  During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic prevented field visits to municipalities and delayed certification
  activities. Final project results were therefore reported as of December 2019 as originally envisioned, and
  their final verification was pending during ICR preparation.




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were used by main stakeholders for regular project monitoring. The ICR (p. 21) stated that
  MOH, SILAIS, and the Bank team relied on M&E data to supervise project implementation, which
  contributed to the early detection and resolution of arising issues. The Task Team provided further
  details on this matter on April 29, 2021 and noted that the identification of weaknesses or
  inconsistencies in data reporting led to strengthening the Statistics Unit at MOH and SILAIS, and the
  project provided support to 66 health professionals to obtain tertiary degrees in Analysis of Health
  Statistics. Specific improvement examples included the following: (i) improved cleaning processes of
  data on births, deaths, and hospital discharge; (ii) creation of new variables; (iii) improved data
  timeliness; (iv) controls reducing human error in data entry; and (v) overall improvement in data quality.

  Certified data on municipal performance were used to determine capitation payments. When there were
  performance gaps, SILAIS worked with municipal health authorities to outline actions plans to address
  observed weaknesses. M&E implementation was supported by the development of software
  applications that contributed to the generation of timely and homogeneous data on the provision of
  health care services, and that may facilitate further dissemination of health statistics.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project complied with safeguard policies, and a satisfactory rating was recorded in the Operations
   Portal.

   Environmental safeguards. The project triggered Environmental Assessment Policy OP/BP 4.01 in view
   of pre-installment works that were required to accommodate medical and non-medical equipment, and
   because of rehabilitation activities at health facilities. The project was classified under Environmental

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



  Category B. The Environmental Management Plan was updated and embedded within the project's design
  under Component 3, and was implemented and monitored by the MOH Environmental Unit. Environmental
  management plans were applied to all infrastructure construction projects. The ICR (p. 22) reported that the
  project complied with environmental safeguard policies.

  The ICR also reported on progress made by the project in terms of waste management, water safety, and
  work safety for reducing work accidents. Solid waste management plans were implemented in 57 national,
  regional, departmental, and primary reference hospitals. Environmentally friendly technology for the
  treatment of hazardous waste was applied in 17 hospitals. In terms of water safety, water management
  plans were developed in 34 hospitals, including monitoring of water quality, rehabilitation and replacement
  of infrastructure related to the management and storage of drinking water, and enhancing laboratory
  capacity for wastewater analysis at the National Center for Diagnostics and Reference.

  Social safeguards. The project triggered safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples in view of
  the presence of indigenous people in the following project areas: territory of Alto Wangki and Bokay and 12
  municipalities. The Indigenous Populations and Afro-descendants Safeguards Action Plan was embedded
  within the project design under Component 1 and was adequately implemented. It took into account cultural
  practices of indigenous groups. The action plan supported the incorporation of traditional medicine into
  project activities, including the opening of 188 clinics by the Institute of Natural and Complementary
  Medicine and staff training. Over 150,000 patients received traditional medicine services. The ICR (p. 22)
  reported that the project complied with the triggered safeguard policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  MOH was responsible for financial management and for ensuring compliance with related requirements.
  The project benefited from existing arrangements that were in place. As was previously noted in Section
  8a, a financial management assessment at appraisal deemed financial management arrangements to be
  moderately satisfactory, and further strengthening was provided in terms of procedures and human
  resources.

  Throughout project implementation, financial management performance varied between moderately
  satisfactory and satisfactory. Interim financial reports were submitted to the Bank with some delays, and
  were deemed acceptable. An audit in 2017 included a qualified opinion that was explained by the ICR as
  due to the fact that the auditor could not conduct physical inspection of project assets, given mobility
  limitations caused by political protests. However, through the course of the 2018 audit, the auditor
  conducted selective verification of project assets (that could not be verified in the preceding year), and no
  issues were reported by the audit (ICR, p. 22).

  Procurement processes were carried out by MOH in compliance with Bank guidelines (ICR, p. 22), with
  one minor shortcoming noted below. Procurement was also undertaken in line with agreed annual plans.
  Prior review was undertaken for key activities, including two civil works contracts and several purchases of
  goods. MOH worked closely with the Bank Task Team in drafting bidding documents for important items
  such as ambulances and osteosynthesis and trauma-related materials. Ex-post reviews were clear, except
  for one expenditure related to reproduction materials amounting to 0.15% of the total project cost, as it did
  not observe eligibility requirements. The issue was resolved with a substitution of expenditure.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   With the advent of COVID-19 disease, a positive unintended impact generated by the project included the
   enhancement of MOH's distance-learning infrastructure for remote training activities, diagnostic testing
   capacity, cold chains for eventual vaccine distribution, and increased availability of pulmonary ventilators
   (ICR, p. 18).



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                       IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                     ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 24-25, and the Borrower’s comments, p. 48) offered useful lessons restated by IEG:



Results-based financial incentives, complemented by a quality assurance framework, can
induce positive behavioral changes among institutional actors. In the context of the project,
annual performance agreements and Quality Health Care Plans, along with effective M&E systems,
proved to be useful tools to promote a results-oriented culture and accountability that guided the
management of decentralized health services at the municipal level. Capitation payments linked to
municipal performance resulted in closer alignment with the Ministry of Health, including in
homogenizing standards of care and reporting.



The implementation of a project within the sector’s organizational structure–i.e., without an
added executing unit-- contributes to optimizing resources and allows the development of in-
house management capacity, as was observed under the project. The project’s reliance on


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



national-level technical and administrative directorates to provide leadership helped in fostering
commitment to strengthening both central and peripheral capacities in the sector.



A sustained sectoral engagement with the Bank can produce long-lasting development
impact and can facilitate sectoral efforts to embark on new strategic directions. This operation
was part of a sequence of four operations spanning over two decades that provided support to
decentralization and incremental strengthening of Nicaragua's public health care system. As such,
the project benefited from previous progress made in the sector, capacities that were built, and
lessons learned from preceding operations, thus setting the foundations for further improvements
and for strategic shifts to address evolving disease priorities, as was observed under the project.



In countries that are vulnerable to natural disasters that are known to contribute to
population displacement and infectious disease outbreaks, flexible financial arrangements in
project design can help the initiation of timely sectoral responses to communicable disease
threats. Pre-planning, activation, and disbursement procedures that were applied by the project
allowed prompt responses to public health threats arising from the spread of Dengue, Zika and
Chikungunya viruses.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clearly written and results-oriented. It was concise and tightly presented. The report adequately
illustrated the theory of change and its results chain reflecting project objectives that underlined the adaptation
of the health system to deal with a dual burden of disease where non-communicable diseases have evolved as
leading causes of mortality in the country. The evidence was reliable and certified by PAHO-WHO, and the
quality of the analysis was high. Both evidence and analysis supported the ICR’s narrative and conclusions.
Reporting on fiduciary compliance was meticulous, and reporting on safeguards was thorough. The ICR
provided useful lessons directly derived from project experience. The ICR was consistent, both internally and
with guidelines, except for the lack of undertaking an ex-post cost-benefit analysis.




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Strengthening the Public Health Care Sys (P152136)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
