     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022533

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P129431                                     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82700                                  30-Sep-2018                                         87,280,075.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jun-2013                                 31-Aug-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              87,280,075.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          87,280,075.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Peter Nigel Freeman         Fernando Manibog              Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO, according to the PAD (page 5) and the loan agreement (Schedule 1, page 5), was to contribute to
   the economic, social, and environmental sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
   Technological Development Zone (XETDZ).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Jan-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of three components:


   (a) Component 1: Roads and Bridges with Underground Storm-water Drainage Networks, Water Supply
   Networks, and Sewerage Networks (original cost: US$ 224.13 million, of which IBRD contributed US$
   135.71 million; actual cost: US$ 76.56 million, of which IBRD provided US$ 71.69 million). This component
   involved construction of selected urban roads along with bus stations/stops, landscaping, and associated
   sub-surface infrastructure services, including storm water drainage, water supply and sewage networks.


   (b) Component 2: Wastewater Conveyance, Treatment and Discharge (original cost: US$14.73 million, of
   which IBRD contributed US $8.91 million; actual cost: US$ 13.38 million, of which IBRD provided US$ 12.56
   million). This component involved construction of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) with a minimum
   working capacity of 25,000 m3 per day; construction of conveyance sewers and treated effluent pipes to
   and from the WWTP, as well as associated treated effluent outfalls; and provision of support for the
   operations and maintenance (O&M) of sub-surface infrastructure services.


   (c) Component 3: Institutional Development and Capacity Building (original cost: US$5 million, of which
   IBRD contributed US$ 5.00 million; actual cost: US$ 2.65 million, of which IBRD provided US$ 2.65 million).
   This component involved technical assistance (TA) and capacity building for the XETDZ Management
   Committee to coordinate and manage the implementation of the project with a focus on project
   management and implementation; development of information systems, including an intelligent investment
   promotion system, a labor market information system, and an XETDZ internal monitoring and evaluation
   (M&E) system; branding and investment promotion; development of a real time environmental monitoring
   system; and development of a collaborative platform for local economic development.

   Additional IBRD and government resources were allocated toward land acquisition and resettlement costs,
   project overheads costs, and contingencies. A front-end fee of US$ 0.38 million was applied.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$ 343,640,000. During the January 2017
   restructuring, the project area was reduced by 5.6 km2 (from 20.2 km2 to 14.6 km2), with related
   cancellation of physical investments under Component 1, that included ten roads with associated

                                                                                                 Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



   underground networks and one overpass. The project’s area and the scope of the economic sustainability
   outcome were reduced because China’s economic growth was slowing and the manufacturing sector was in
   a recession, affecting the expected volume of industrial relocations from coastal areas. The revised
   amount was US$ 185,910,000. The final amount disbursed was US$ 168,880,075.

   Financing: An IBRD loan (Ln. 82700) of US$ 150,000,000 was approved on June 20, 2013 and became
   effective on November 14, 2013. The January 2017 restructuring included a cancellation of US$ 60 million
   IBRD proceeds, reducing the loan amount from US$ 150 million to US$ 90 million. The financing plan was
   revised accordingly and the US$ 90 million was fully disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: The original anticipated borrower contribution was US$ 193,640,000. This was
   revised in the 2017 restructuring to US$ 98,630,000 and at project closing the amount disbursed was US$
   81,600,000.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 20, 2013. The loan closing date was extended by 18 months to
   March 31, 2020 to allow for completion of works, in the January 2017 restructuring, and by five additional
   months to August 31, 2020, in the May 2020 restructuring, for a total of 23 months. The project’s
   implementation schedule was adjusted accordingly.

   Restructurings: The project underwent three Level II restructurings: in January 2017, August 2018, and
   May 2020. No changes were made to the PDO. However, outcome target changes were introduced in the
   January 2017 and August 2018 restructurings. In the January 2017 restructuring, significant changes in
   scope were made: the net employment created (PDO Indicator 1) target was decreased from 32,000 to
   4,000 jobs, and the incremental value-added (PDO Indicator 3) target was decreased from RMB 2,300
   million to RMB 650 million. This was because of a significant recession in the manufacturing sector. In the
   August 2018 restructuring, reflecting a slight improvement in the economy, the net employment created
   target was increased from 4,000 to 5,700 jobs, the women as a percentage of employment created target
   (PDO indicator 2) was increased from 18 to 25 percent, and the incremental value-added target was
   increased from RMB 650 million to RMB 950 million. PDO Indicator 4 (Energy input per unit of value-added)
   was dropped, and two new PDO indicators were added: "Satisfaction of Beneficiaries" and "Ratio of Water
   Quality Compliance under Monitoring".

   Given the significant change in scope in 2017 and the reduction in the loan amount of US$ 60 million, a split
   rating was applied in accordance with Bank guidelines..




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: The Government of China recognized that Xuancheng City was a favorable location for
industrial relocation between the coastal and the interior regions along the Yangtze River. It was situated at
the nearest point to the affluent Yangtze River Delta, but in proximity to the coastal provinces of Jiangsu
and Zhejiang. The intention was to help steer the country’s economic growth to a more sustainable path by
addressing pollution, natural resource depletion and a reduction of regional economic, environmental, and
social inequalities. The approach was to shift from capital-intensive, export-oriented industries and


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



investment policies towards a more consumer-based economy, and to develop the inland regions by
proactively encouraging the transfer of some industry from the coastal areas.

Sector context: The relevant section of the Yangtze River in Anhui Province comprised nine cities,
including Xuancheng. In 2011, Anhui’s Provincial Development and Reform Commission laid out a strategy
and a detailed plan to use development zones to achieve greater growth. Some development zones had
already been established and more were under construction. XETDZ had the shortest travel distance to
Shanghai (less than three hours) and benefitted from interstate highways and a high-speed rail link. At the
time the Xuancheng Municipal Government had committed resources to improve the city’s amenities to
make it a more livable destination for high-quality labor and to attract firms from the coast. XETDZ was
initially established in 1996 but was constrained by inter alia limited infrastructure, unsustainable
environmental and energy practices, and lagging social services. There were limited tools to attract
investment as well as poor integration with the nearby core urban area.

World Bank Context: The World Bank was considered an appropriate partner owing to its knowledge
of the latest international best practices for industrial parks, and because of its support for sustainable
urbanization principles. The PDO remained relevant to the country’s development priorities and the World
Bank Group’s strategies for China in accordance with the China Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
2020–2025. The PDO was well aligned with all three engagement areas of the CPF: In engagement Area 1:
Advancing Market and Fiscal Reforms, specifically, Objective 1.1: Improving the environment for
competition and private sector development by addressing regional and social disparities in promoting
relocation of enterprises from the coastal areas, and reducing the cost of doing business through industrial
park administration support. Engagement Area 2: Promoting Greener Growth, specifically, Objective 2.1:
Facilitating transition to a lower-carbon energy path, and Objective 2.2: Reducing air, soil, water, and
marine plastic pollution, by implementing a wastewater collection network and a treatment plant, developing
a real-time environmental monitoring system (addressing both air and water pollution), and developing an
investment promotion system with strict environmental criteria in screening new enterprises for the
industrial park. Engagement Area 3: Sharing the Benefits of Growth, Objective 3.2: Strengthening the
quality of early learning and skills development programs by supporting technical training, particularly for
women in the textile and garment sector, and through building administrative capacity.

Borrower context: The National Urbanization Plan of China (2014–2020) stressed the importance of
improving infrastructure and public services in urban areas to become driving forces for local economic
development, which the project supported. The PDO was also consistent with the development strategies of
Anhui Province despite its function as a fourth-tier city. In 2014, XETDZ was chosen as a demonstration
site, both nationally and provincially, from which future zones in China and Anhui Province could learn and
emulate best practices.

The project’s area and the scope of the economic sustainability outcome were, however, reduced in the
January 2017 restructuring because China’s economic growth was slowing and the manufacturing sector
was in a recession, affecting the expected volume of relocations from coastal areas. In addition, urban
development in the country shifted from expansionary growth to efficiency maximization and structural
optimization, and XETDZ was part of this transition. Although the scope was slightly increased in a second
restructuring in 2018, when the economy partially recovered, it was clear that the relevance,
though substantial, was no longer the highest priority during this period.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                          Page 4 of 21
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To contribute to the economic sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
                Technological Development Zone.

                Rationale
                The Theory of Change was to support the outcome of economic sustainability of the project area in XETDZ,
                through investments in roads and underground infrastructure that would connect residents to their
                workplaces. In addition to the new infrastructure, information systems were to be developed to support and
                promote the zone as a center for high value and environmentally friendly firms.

                The underlying assumptions in the Theory of Change were that local governments would remain committed to
                the enterprise relocation policy; the economy would remain favorable for the relocation of enterprises from
                coastal areas and enable industrial growth; the employment in the Xuangcheng area would increase; and with
                project-funded technical support and training there would be adequate management capacity in the zone to
                implement the project on time and maintain the new assets. The economy did not remain as favorable as had
                been expected.

                Outputs (ICR page 17). Baseline 0 in all cases.

                      Net employment created: target 32,000 jobs; achieved 6,449, 20.15% of original target;
                      Incremental value added (RMB million): target 2,300; achieved 1,090, 47.39% of original target;
                      Number of firms attracted: target 220; achieved 215, 97.72% of original target.
                      Urban roads constructed (km): target 65; achieved 53.28, 82% of original target.
                      People in urban areas with improved access to water: target 80,000; achieved 18,813, 23.52% of
                       original target.
                      Roll out of intelligent information system and enhanced M&E system completed.

                Contribution to outcome:

                The original target of 32,000 new jobs was considered high, since the concept was of transitioning from firms
                with low cost factor inputs including labor to higher value jobs and greener production with links to knowledge
                centers and services. This becomes clear considering the target number of firms was 220, which would have
                meant 145 employees per firm. The actual number of firms was close to target at 215 but the number of new
                employees was only 30 per firm.




                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



The incremental value added was measured as the incremental economic outputs in terms of wages,
business gross profits (including depreciation), and government tax revenue from the firms concerned. At
RMB 1,090 million, this was just under half of the 2,300 million anticipated.

Regarding new infrastructure, 53.28 km (82%) of urban roads including an overpass were completed against
the original target of 65 km. However, only 18,813 people had improved access to water sources (23.52%)
against a target of 80,000.

The roll out of the intelligent information systems was completed. They comprised an intelligent investment
promotion system and a labor market information system, both implemented in 2015. There was a screening
process to attract and select higher value, environmentally friendly firms suitable for relocation according to
selection criteria. However, there were no indicators or targets to measure progress. Instead there was a
rough comparison of firms in the current phase with firms in the previous phase and this evidence had
attribution deficiencies although it did show a trend towards the kind of firms sought. This said, the concept of
moving towards a greener high-value zone was promoted well and helped Xuangcheng become one of only
10 out of 130 zones classified as a "smart zone" with advanced use of ICT and modern management
processes.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To contribute to the economic sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
Technological Development Zone (the PDO was unchanged but the 2017 restructuring significantly reduced
the scope and the outcome targets).

Revised Rationale
     Net employment created: revised target 4,000 jobs (down from 32,000) re-assessed because of the
       recession in manufacturing; actual 6,449.
      Incremental value added (RMB million): target reduced to 650 million (down from 2,300); actual 1,090.
      Number of firms attracted: target 220; reduced to 165; actual 215.
      Roads constructed (km): target 65; reduced to 50; actual 53.28.
      People in urban areas with improved access to water: target of 80,000 reduced to 17,000; actual
       18,813.
      Roll out of systems completed.

The recession was anticipated to be worse than it was and the incremental value added was reduced too
drastically. Other reductions were more realistic including jobs likely to be created and infrastructure to be
provided. The project area was reduced by 5.6 sq. km (from 20,2 to 14.6) with related cancellation of some
physical investments.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To contribute to the economic sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
Technological Development Zone (the PDO was unchanged but the 2018 slightly increased the outcome
targets).

Revised Rationale
     Net employment created: revised target 5,700 jobs (up from 4,000 in 2017) slight improvement in
         manufacturing outlook; actual 6,449, exceeding revised target by 100 firms.
        Incremental value added (RMB million): target increased to 950 (up from 650 in 2017); actual 1,090,
         exceeding revised target by RMB 100 million.
        Number of firms attracted: target 220; increased to 200 (up from 165 in 2017); actual 215, exceeding
         revised target by 15 firms.
        Roads constructed (km): target 65; unchanged at 50; actual 53.28, exceeding target by 3.2 km.
        People in urban areas with improved access to water: increased to 18,000 (up from 17,000 in 2017);
         actual 18,813, exceeding revised target by 813 people.
        Roll out of systems completed.

The results framework was adjusted to fit the results that appeared likely to emerge.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to the social sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and Technological
Development Zone.

Rationale
The Theory of Change was to support the objective of social sustainability, through the support of the
development of a labor market information system that would measure the satisfaction of beneficiaries with
the socio-economic characteristics of Xuangcheng. This would include the extent of training opportunities
including zone management and the opportunities for female employment. The intention was to
demonstrate a high degree of social inclusion in the zone.

Outputs (ICR page 20)

      Women as % of net new employment: original target 18%; achieved 144% of original target.
      Satisfaction of beneficiaries: no results. Satisfaction surveys were only introduced in 2018.
      XETDZ staffs trained: original target 95; achieved 412% of original target.
                                                                                                 Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)




      Women as % staffs trained: original target 20%; achieved 315% of original target.

Contribution to outcome:

Insufficient thought was given to these indicators at appraisal and serious attention was not given to this
aspect in early implementation. The beneficiary satisfaction surveys were not introduced until the
2018 restructuring and the first survey only took place in December 2018. The targets for the other indicators
were set far too low. For example, the average women participation rate in China in 2019 (World Bank data)
was 61%, so a target of 18% was very unrealistic. The targets for training were also clearly not well
researched before the project commenced.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To contribute to the social sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and Technological
Development Zone (the PDO was unchanged but the 2018 restructuring revise the targets upwards and
introduced beneficiary surveys).

Revised Rationale
     Women as % of net new employment: original target 18%; new target 25%; achieved 26% exceeding
       revised target
      Satisfaction of beneficiaries: no original target; new target set 70%; achieved 74% exceeding target
      XETDZ staffs trained: original target 95; revised to 110; actual 391 far exceeding revised target
      Women as % staffs trained: original target 20%; revised to 30%; achieved 63% far exceeding revised
       target

As mentioned above the targets for female employment and training were set unrealistically low. However,
the labor information system did include specific activities to attract women to the zone such as job fairs.
There were four beneficiary surveys but the ICR reports in a footnote (page 21) that it is unclear how the
sampling was done and therefore the representativeness of the whole zonal population was in question.
Nevertheless, there were some useful insights.

The project contributed to the improvement of the living standard of about 6,000 villagers in the project area
by investing in improved basic infrastructure in the Zone and improving villagers’ access to transport in urban
areas by paving connecting roads. These investments improved the quality and reliability of the water and
sewerage services to the villages. At project closing, schools, access roads, markets, and other infrastructure
and public services, most of which were not available in the beneficiaries’ original locations, were all in place
at the permanent resettlement site; some of these were financed by the project.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



The project also had a gender dimension aimed at supporting career development for women. Vocational
training sessions dedicated to females were held with 200 participants. It encompassed technical skills but
also professional ethics and occupational health and safety issues.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To contribute to the environmental sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
Technological Development Zone.

Rationale
To support the objective of environmental sustainability, the project was to invest in a wastewater treatment
plant (WWTP), a sewer network, and related O&M equipment; clean-up and de-silting of a canal; and a real-
time environmental monitoring system for air, land, and water pollution; urban noise; and related potential
emergency situations. TA and training were to enhance the client’s management capacity, including for
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and a collaborative arrangement for local economic development.

Outputs (ICR page 22)

      Ratio of water quality compliance: originally no target
      People provided with access to improved sanitation; original target 80,000; achieved 24% of original
       target
      Volume of water treated to Class 1A; original target 17,500 cu m; achieved 51.4% original target
      Volume of biological oxygen demand pollution load removed by treatment plant: original target 1,213
       tons/yr; achieved 2.9% of original target
      Roll out of real time environmental monitoring system.

Contribution to outcome:

Originally there was a PDO indicator to measure energy input per unit of value added but this was dropped in
2018 due to a very low attribution level from the firms selected to invest in the zone.

The environmental monitoring system was an advanced ICT-based real time monitoring and early warning
system for air, land and water pollution, urban noise, and related potential emergency situations with both
mobile and other monitoring points including in the enterprises themselves. It was completed and operational
in 2018.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)




OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To contribute to the environmental sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
Technological Development Zone (the PDO was unchanged but the 2017 restructuring revised the project
scope and the outcome targets were made more realistic).

Revised Rationale
     People provided with access to improved sanitation; original target 80,000; target revised to 17,000;
         actual 18,813; revised target achieved.
      Volume of water treated to Class 1A; original target 17,500 cu m unchanged; actual 9,000 cu m.;
       completion rate against original target 51.4%.
      Roll out of real time environmental monitoring system.
      Volume of biological oxygen demand (BOD) pollution load removed by treatment plant: original target
       1,213 tons/yr; revised target 520 tons/yr; actual 36 tons/yr; target not met.

The removed BOD pollution was much lower than anticipated because the volume of wastewater was well
under expectations and most firms applied higher than expected standards releasing lower loads of pollution.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To contribute to the environmental sustainability of the project area in the Xuancheng Economic and
Technological Development Zone (the PDO was unchanged but the 2018 restructuring further revised the
outcome targets established in 2017 to make them more realistic and added a new indicator).

Revised Rationale
     Ratio of water quality compliance: originally no target; after 2018 restructuring 75%; actual 86%; target
         exceeded.
        People provided with access to improved sanitation; original target 80,000; target revised to 18,000
         (up from 17,000 in 2017); actual 18,813; revised target achieved by 813 cu m.
        Volume of water treated to Class 1A; original target 17,500 cu m; revised target 3,000 cu m; actual
         9,000; revised target exceeded.
        Roll out of real time environmental monitoring system.
        Volume of biological oxygen demand (BOD) pollution load removed by treatment plant: original target
         1,213 tons/yr; revised target 153 tons/yr (down from 520 tons/yr in 2017); actual 36 tons/yr;
         completion against revised target 24%. While less than expected pollution was a positive trend,
         the target was not met.

The removed BOD pollution was much lower than anticipated because the volume of wastewater was well
under expectations and most firms applied higher than expected standards releasing lower loads of pollution.

                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



                              Since the zone applied high environmental standards at entry discouraging such pollution, this should have
                              been taken into account when designing the indicator. The wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) treated 9,000
                              cu m of wastewater a day, which was well below its capacity of 25,000 cu m a day.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated before and after the January 2017 restructuring, which reduced the project scope and made
                            the most substantial changes to the results framework. Efficacy is rated Modest before the January 2017
                            restructuring.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated Substantial after the January 2017 restructuring for all three objectives: economic, social and
                            environmental. The further smaller restructuring in 2018 did not change these ratings.

                            The promotion of the zone as environmentally friendly and a good place to live attracted industries such as
                            auto parts, high-end equipment manufacturing, pharmaceuticals and food processing. Firms that used heavy
                            metals were not accepted and firms specializing in chemicals, fertilizers and cement products were also
                            rejected.

                            .



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the project’s economic internal rate of return (EIRR) under the base-case scenario was estimated
   at 10.4 percent when considering only employment and wages as project benefits. It increased to 32.7 percent



                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



when using the total value added as the benefit. As it was difficult to quantify the benefits of improved capacity
and training activities funded under Component 3, they were excluded from the analysis.

Using a similar methodology and assumptions, at project completion, the EIRR was 6.8 percent when only
accounting for employment and wages and 14.7 percent when using total value added as the benefit. This was
lower than the appraisal estimates, primarily due to the longer development period and less commercial
development than anticipated. Targets were reduced but the costs remained the same. However, the estimated
EIRR at completion still exceeded the prevailing opportunity cost of capital of 10 percent, and thus, the Phase 2
expansion of XETDZ was considered economically viable. The economic return is expected to be considerably
higher once the Phase 2 of XETDZ evolves further. A cost-benefit analysis carried out at completion
indicated that the infrastructure investment would yield an estimated 23.1 percent EIRR over the 15-year build-
out period. Thus, the project investment was economically viable.

A financial analysis carried out at closing found that wastewater service charges collected from enterprises and
residents more than covered the O&M costs of the WWTP and the related sewerage network, and any shortfall
could be bridged by the general revenues of the Zone.

Administrative and Operational issues

Of 22 contracts financed by the project (11 works contracts, 5 goods contracts, and 6 TA contracts), only a few
presented cost overruns while others were executed at costs lower than planned due to successful bids. These
and lower-than-planned land acquisition and resettlement costs resulted in savings of US$ 4.6 million by mid-
2018. This amount was then used to fund additional water quality monitoring equipment, which enhanced the
project’s environmental benefits and sustainability (but also required additional time). The project procurement
tenders benefitted from a high number of bids. Counterpart funds were always available on time.

The total project extensions (23 months) allowed the project to effectively use contract savings; increase the
number of enterprises located in the project area, which improved the overall efficiency of the Zone
Administration without adding staff. Full benefits of tools and training materialized, particularly the intelligent
business promotion system, the labor market information system, and the branding and investment promotion
strategy. All are extensively used by the Zone Administration staff.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        97.90
 Appraisal                                                   32.70
                                                                                         Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



                                                                                    97.10
ICR Estimate                                              14.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance was rated Substantial. Efficacy was rated Modest against the original targets and Substantial,
following the revision of targets during the 2017 restructuring, which reduced the project scope
significantly. The 2018 restructuring had a much smaller impact. Efficiency was also rated Substantial. Overall
outcome was rated Satisfactory, as per below split-rating methodology:

Calculation of Outcome Rating

Factor                                                     Before Restructuring        After Restructuring
Relevance of Objective                                     Substantial
Efficacy (PDO)                                             Modest                      Substantial
Outcome 1: Contribute to economic sustainability of the
                                                           Modest                      Substantial
Project area in XETDZ
Outcome 2: Contribute to social sustainability of the
                                                           Modest                      Substantial
Project Area in XETDZ
Outcome 3: Contribute to environmental sustainability of
the
                                                           Modest                      Substantial
Project Area in XETDZ
Efficiency                                                 Substantial
Outcome ratings                                            Moderately Unsatisfactory Satisfactory

Numerical value of the outcome ratings*                    3                           5

Disbursement (US$, millions)                               16.08                       71.20
Share of disbursement                                      0.18 (or 18%)               0.82 (or 82%)
Weighted value of the outcome rating                       0.55                        4.08
                                                           Satisfactory
Final outcome rating
                                                           (0.55 + 4.08 = 4.63, rounded to 5)
a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



Adequacy of Staffing:

The project strengthened the economic, social, and environmental sustainability elements in the project area.
The institutional continuity of the development outcome was secured owing to enhanced staffing of the Zone
Administration (150 staff plus 50 staff in a subsidiary company taking care of asset maintenance, compared
to significantly less staff at appraisal) and a continuously improving performance of the Zone Administration
as evidenced by the effectiveness of the Zone’s branding, screening of enterprises, attraction of labor,
adequate project and construction management, and the use of third-party entities to help monitor various
performance elements. The risk of inadequate staffing was low.

Changing Market Conditions:

The main risk to the project outcomes in the future remains changing market conditions: i.e.: (a) a significant
downturn in the macroeconomic environment in China, creating challenging business environments for the
enterprises in the project area, and/or (b) increased competition from other zones, limiting demand for the
remaining space in the project area. The project introduced mitigation factors for the first risk, by
introducing a diverse set of industries to the project area (ranging from high-value manufacturing to
pharmaceuticals/biomedical and service industries), and established a permanent investment promotion
team to attract enterprises to the Zone. Overall, the risk is considered moderate

Enterprise Retention:

The Zone Administration has an investment service unit with a mission to retain enterprises. A thorough
enterprise screening process is applied and includes an assessment of projected output scenarios for the
accepted enterprises. This helps to maintain the quality of the Zone incumbents. The risk of increased
competition is mitigated by the established good reputation of XETDZ as a nationally recognized Zone; its
unique branding as a well-located and environment-friendly Zone, and, the already good occupancy rate of
more than 50 percent of the project area at project closing. The risk of not retaining enterprises is therefore
low. A third phase of 61 km2 in XETDZ is planned for future development by the municipality (timing to
be determined) and the remaining 97 km2 of the total area are to be retained as a green space.

Institutional Continuity:

Institutional continuity is expected to be maintained. The personnel of the PMO were regular staff in the Zone
Administration (heads of departments) who will continue to use their enhanced skills and experience in the
future. The same applies to the XETDZ management committee, which was chaired by the deputy mayor,
and supported by Kaishen Construction Investment Group, the construction arm of the Zone Administration,
which was the project implementation unit responsible for managing tenders and construction supervision
under the PMO. This means that the development knowledge and related institutional memory will be
retained after the project and the risk is considered low.

Financial Sustainability:

The long-term financial sustainability of the Zone will require sufficient revenues and budgetary support for
the Zone Administration. Both the XMG and the Zone Administration have developed annual and long-term
plans for both investment promotion and the continued attraction of talented staff. The risk that O&M plans
will not be implemented and project investments will not be maintained, is considered to be low. The WWTPs
are managed by an experienced water and wastewater company under contract, and its O&M is supported
by adequate wastewater tariffs which are revised periodically by the relevant authorities for financial

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



sustainability. The WWTP site has ample space for future expansion as needed. The enhanced internal M&E
system is an important part of the overall M&E platform for the Zone’s continued development. In recent
years, XETDZ organized interested enterprises in the Zone to participate in three job fairs across the country
to attract workers.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project preparation support included an assessment of the experience from XETDZ (Phase 1), an
  analysis of similar investments in China, and a review of relevant international best practice to ensure an
  appropriate long-term, strategic approach for Phase 2. The design and operational logic of the project
  was relatively straightforward. In addition to high construction and material standards, the road
  investment designs included water drains, sewer pipelines, non-motorized lanes, sidewalks, greening,
  and lighting facilities to enhance the livability in the area. This was in contrast to many similar
  domestically funded projects in China at the time, which tended to focus only on road works without these
  added elements. Building a high-standard development zone for a fourth-tier city in China (such as
  Xuancheng) was uncommon in China.

  Most risks were identified and the appropriate mitigation measures were embedded in the design.
  Exceptions were the significant downturn in the macroeconomic environment during the early stages of
  the project and the challenges faced by the enterprises in the project area to find sufficient workers
  toward the end of the project implementation. All risk mitigation measures defined at appraisal were
  carried out including significant training by the World Bank on fiduciary and safeguards matters, where
  capacity gaps were evident due to the non-familiarity with Bank procedures.

  Minor shortcomings at entry were the overly broad PDO (seldom used nowadays), which warranted
  additional outcome indicators at restructuring to facilitate evaluation of achievements; the energy
  efficiency outcome indicator ‘energy input per unit of incremental value added’ was also said to be not
  directly relevant to the supported investments in the Zone. In addition, the time needed for provincial
  approval of the relocation of an underground gas pipeline to allow road construction to proceed was
  underestimated.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Appropriate supervision was carried out based on at least two missions each year. Although the World
 Bank replaced four project managers during the implementation period, they ensured that the work transfer
 was smooth and so this did not affect the efficiency of project implementation according to the Borrower's
 report. The reporting in the Implementation Status and Results Reports was thorough, candid,
 and realistically rated. The World Bank team consisted almost entirely of locally based staff. They

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



 were proactive in identifying issues and resolving them through dialogue with the Project Management
 Office (PMO). Periodically, the World Bank also provided training to relevant staff on financial management
 topics.

 Civil works contractors had to cope with significant unexpected price increases of materials during most of
 the project implementation due to supply shortages. This negatively affected the timely completion of
 several contracts, resulting in some implementation delays. The issue was finally resolved in 2018–2019
 following a dialogue between various contractors, the Zone Administration and the World Bank. This
 resulted in some cases of contract variation orders, particularly in the case of contracts of less than 18
 months in duration, in which there was no price adjustment clause. To mitigate this risk, a price adjustment
 clause could in future be considered for civil works contracts of shorter duration.

 After the midterm review (MTR) in January 2018, the PMO was reinforced by additional full-time and part-
 time staff, with designated staff in charge of procurement, financial management, construction
 management, and environmental/social safeguards. This improved project management, accelerated
 project progress, and enhanced results. The MTR reviewed the project status and drafted a proposal for an
 extension of the project closing date. The COVID-19 pandemic outbreak in early 2020 also affected the
 implementation of several civil works and goods contract, including several roads projects, because of
 related provincial restrictions on movement. A second closing date extension compensated for these
 delays.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was pitched at a high outcome level rarely seen nowadays due to inherent measurement
 difficulties. While the changes in employment and number of firms relocating to Xuangcheng could have
 been influenced by the measures cited, the links between causality and results were weak. The list of
 outputs should have been supplemented by a thorough discussion of how they helped achieve the high
 level outcomes. Moreover, some of the original targets such as net employment created were clearly
 inaccurate. The results framework for objective two (social sustainability) do not appear to have had
 sufficient attention as the targets were grossly underestimated. Under objective three, the target for
 pollution load removed was also way too high.



b. M&E Implementation
  The results framework was strengthened during the January 2017 and August 2018 restructurings.
  However, the dropping of the indicator 'Energy input per unit of value added' is surprising given China's

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



  strong focus on improving energy efficiency. A replacement PDO indicator was assigned to the
  environmental sustainability outcome, and a PDO-level beneficiary satisfaction indicator was added to
  measure satisfaction of beneficiaries with social and economic benefits emanating from the project,
  although this should have been in place from the outset. A survey was conducted on four occasions
  between late 2018 and mid-2020, to inform the Zone Administration of the beneficiaries’ satisfaction level.
  However, it is noted that the sample size used in the surveys may have been insufficient for robust
  statistical analyses. Therefore, the findings, particularly among enterprises and vendors, should be
  viewed as indicative only.

  The systems for data collection and analysis were embedded in the execution arrangements of the
  respective units of the Zone Administration organization. The PMO was composed of seconded part-time
  staff from various units of the Zone Administration. They compiled the collected information. Semiannual
  progress reports were produced by the PMO and submitted to the World Bank on time. They included
  information on the results framework progress and were complemented by monitoring reports from
  external (third-party) agencies on the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and
  the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The enhanced XETDZ internal M&E system was systematically used to gather additional data to monitor
  project outcomes and draw lessons and provide evidence of project achievements. The labor market
  system recorded the visits and registrations of job seekers and these data were used to help enterprises
  in the Zone meet their employment needs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Assessment (EA) Category A - full assessment due to an
   expected large-scale land use change from agriculture to urban land, and the construction of the
   WWTP. The safeguards policies triggered by the project were Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP4.11. Adequate mechanisms were put in place and applied effectively for
   fiduciary and safeguards compliance, and the project complied with the safeguard policies. A Strategic
   Environmental Impact Assessment was prepared and disclosed in Xuancheng and by the World Bank in
   April 2013. Particular attention was paid to preventing adverse impacts of physical investments in scenic
   areas in and around the project area (Mount Jingting) and the WWTP and the effluent outfall to a nearby
   waterway. The environmental assessment instruments and the related mitigation measures were
   implemented as planned to address dust, noise, construction wastewater, and waste. An external
   environmental consultant provided independent environmental monitoring during implementation and was
   later hired by XETDZ to provide similar services after the project closed. Based on the implementation of




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



  the real-time environmental monitoring system, additional system enhancements were made towards the
  end of the project.

  Two important issues were dealt with during project implementation: A fatal accident occurred at a road
  construction site (a crane operator died when the crane overturned). XETDZ took corrective measures after
  a cause analysis was undertaken. The PMO then strengthened its safety processes and instructed the PMO
  consultants and environmental consultants to carry out special construction inspections and monthly
  personnel training in addition to the safety measures already in place.

  The wastewater outfall had to be redesigned after feedback from stakeholders about pollution concerns. In
  addition, identified infiltration of storm water in the sewer network was investigated and pipeline connections
  were repaired where needed. According to the Mid-term Review (page 3), there was a prolonged delay in
  construction due to the resolution of this issue as well as the need to relocate a natural gas pipeline.
  Proactive engagement with affected villagers had not taken place at an earlier stage in project design.

  The client prepared and disclosed in a timely manner an adequate RAP on April 3, 2013. Public information
  and resettlement compensation were provided to the public and affected persons. External social
  monitoring was regularly conducted by a third-party organization and a Grievance Redress Mechanism for
  the project was established by the PMO as a multilevel platform. Affected individuals were able to file
  complaints through various channels, such as information boards in the villages, at the land acquisition
  office, in sub-district offices, and at the XETDZ resettlement office. The responsible persons gave prompt
  feedback. If a complainant was not satisfied with this feedback, he/she could make further
  representations through channels such as the mayor’s hotline, letters, or through visits to the offices. The
  complaints were few. The most important was on the technical design of the effluent outfall for the WWTP
  mentioned above, which was subsequently revised and significantly improved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project complied with all applicable procurement policies and procedures and there was sufficient
  procurement staffing throughout project implementation. The Procurement Plan was regularly updated
  throughout implementation and no mis-procurement occurred. Minor issues and delays occurred early in
  the project (2014–2015) due to the client’s inexperience with World Bank policies and procedures.
  Although there had been an earlier project there had also been substantial staff changes. These issues
  were rectified by the client. Contract implementation delays occurred primarily in 2018–2019 due to low
  bids (some contractors’ real costs were much higher and this triggered requests for contract variation
  orders.

  Financial Management

  The project complied with all applicable financial management (FM) policies and procedures. Overall, the
  project’s FM system performed satisfactorily throughout implementation, albeit sometimes with delayed
  submissions of the interim unaudited financial reports, although always of an acceptable quality. These
  delays were partly due to the limited experience of the client with World Bank FM policies and procedures
  because new staff needed training. Slow disbursements, particularly during the first 3–4 years of

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



   implementation, were due to project implementation delays. Implementation and related disbursements
   gradually accelerated toward the end of the project. All audit reports were unqualified and submitted on a
   timely basis to the World Bank. Comments made by the auditors were addressed promptly.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The investments in sewerage collection and treatment likely resulted in positive health impacts to the
   residents, although no study was carried out on this.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Satisfactory
                                                                                    The results framework was
Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Modest
                                                                                    weak.
Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

Key lessons adapted from the ICR are as follows:

Enterprise selection criteria for industrial zones should align closely with the objectives
of the zones. Flexible entry criteria to a zone can cause short term gains such as tax revenues, but
long-term disadvantages including environmental degradation, lack of economic sustainability
and firms leaving, as occurred in Phase 1 of XETDZ. The Zone Administration’s consistent
application of a high- screening process secured enterprises that were both environment friendly but
have stayed and grown.

A price adjustment clause to all contracts can ensure timely delivery and performance of
contractors in cases where there are significant changes in the commercial environment. The
project experienced significant price increases of material for contractors, which caused time-
consuming reviews by the PMO and reduced the motivation of contractors to complete some works,
resulting in implementation delays. This was particularly the case in contracts of less than 18 months
in duration, for which there was no price adjustment clause. To mitigate this risk, a price adjustment
clause should also be considered for civil works contracts of less than 18 months.



                                                                                                      Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)



Plan infrastructure facilities for the long term but build in phases to avoid undue over-
capacity. The WWTP and its site were planned for a total capacity of 50,000 tons per day but only
25,000 tons per day capacity was built initially taking into account demand projections. This practice
allows for future expansion, if and when required.

Site visits and demonstrations of results can help build stakeholder confidence and
acceptance of interventions. To address villagers’ concerns about the WWTP’s effluent outfall, the
PMO arranged study tours to WWTPs with similar site characteristics where effluent discharge
approaches were demonstrated. This engagement, combined with an adjustment of the design, led
to adapted and fully accepted designs, which built trust between the villagers and the Zone
Administration. Such experiential activities should be included in stakeholder dialogue and
consultations during early project preparation for buy-in up front to avoid issues during
implementation and consequent delays.

Adjust the size of industrial parks to the anticipated effective demand. Special economic zones
and industrial parks are popular in developing countries as vehicles for attracting investments and
promoting economic development. However, if they fail to achieve competitive advantage they end
up consuming land, and sometimes public resources such as tax incentives, without
adequate economic, social, or environmental outcomes. The size of the XETDZ Phase 2 area was
reduced based on a revised demand projection to achieve better outcomes and improved
development efficiency.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written with ample evidence to support its findings and ratings. It was candid about the flaws
in the results framework and put forward a sound Theory of Change. It could have been more concise as it was
well over the 15 page recommendation in the OPCS ICR guidance. The dropping of the energy input per unit of
value added appears surprising in the light of the Chinese policies that place great emphasis on using less
energy. On the other hand there were some sound lessons, which will be useful in similar projects.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Anhui Xuancheng Infr. for Indust. Reloca (P129431)




                                                                                  Page 21 of 21
