     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022544

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P133352                                        HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev.

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                          Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9500,TF-17021                             28-Feb-2020                                         21,801,162.98

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 19-May-2014                                    31-Aug-2020

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                     8,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                34,752,330.00                                     8,000,000.00

 Actual                                            22,538,187.72                                     6,337,627.50




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                      ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Vibecke Dixon                    Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) were:

   " To support the development of the Center Artibonite Loop (CAL) region, primarily by enhancing all-
   weather connectivity and logistics for producers, and the region's resilience to climate change ".



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



   For the purposes of this evaluation, the PDO is parsed into two objectives: (1). To support the development of
   the CAL region, primarily by enhancing all-weather connectivity and logistics for producers. (2). To support the
   development of the CAL region, by enhancing the region's resilience to climate change.

   Split rating of objectives. Given that the project's scope ambition was decreased through a downward
   revision of targets through the first restructuring of the project (discussed in Section 2e), this review is based
   on a split rating of objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were five components (PAD, pages 6 - 8).

   1. Enhancing Logistics, Transport Connectivity and Climate Resilience. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$37.0 million. The revised estimate following the project restructuring (discussed in section
   2e) was US$22.0 million. The actual cost was US$15.9 million. This component planned to finance activities
   aimed at linking the Central Airbonite Loop (CAL) region to economic growth poles outside the
   region. Activities in this component:

   (a) Rehabilitation of vulnerable road sections, bridges, bridge-crossings and critical spots along three major
   connecting roads, rehabilitation of primary, secondary and tertiary roads (the last to be selected based
   on participatory decision-making), and basic infrastructure along the roads: (b) Rehabilitation of selected
   feeder roads and rural pathways and small logistical facilities (such as, collection points for agricultural
   production): (c) Strengthening road maintenance capacity and developing local mechanisms
   for regional road maintenance and training the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation, Energy and
   Communications (MTPTC) staff, rehabilitation of road maintenance centers in Hinche and Mirebalais,
   construction of a road maintenance center in Saint Michel, developing road maintenance micro-enterprises
   and community-based organizations and their capacity building: and (d) developing technical guidelines
   and training programs for incorporating climate resilience in road infrastructure design.

   2. Improving selected markets and supporting the development of regional knowledge and planning
   tools. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$ 16.0 million. The revised estimate was US$5.5 million. The
   actual cost was US$4.3 million. Activities in this component:

   (a) Rehabilitating selected urban markets and associated logistical facilities (such as, access roads and
   water and sanitation systems), and improving their climate resilience capacities: and (b)
   rehabilitating selected rural markets.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



  3. Supporting the development of regional knowledge, planning capacity and local participation. The
  estimated cost at appraisal was US$6.0 million. This component was merged with component two following
  the restructuring of February 2020. This component aimed as supporting the Government, municipalities
  and local stakeholders in developing methodologies for territorial and urban development. Activities in this
  component:

  (a) Developing regional knowledge on climate resilience through a vulnerability assessment of the road
  network, developing information systems, technical assistance to the Inter-Ministerial Committee for
  Territorial Development (CIAT), and developing a dashboard tool: and (ii) Developing regional planning
  capacity, supporting local participatory decision-making mechanism for identifying priorities, and
  strengthening the capacities of the existing Conseil Technique Departmental (CTDs), municipalities, and
  the "Conseils d' Administration (CASEC's) of "Sections Communales" (the smallest administrative division in
  Haiti).

  3. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.0
  million. The CERC was not triggered during the project. There is no actual cost for this component. This
  component, planned as a provisional component, aimed at designing rapid response mechanism in the
  event of an eligible emergency and included triggers for using funds for this component.

  4. Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.0
  million. The revised estimate following the restructuring of February 2020 was US$4.5 million. The actual
  cost was US$4.0 million. This component planned to provide support to the Project Implementation Unit
  (PIU).

  Reduction in project scope. The project scope was reduced and key outcome targets were either reduced
  or dropped, with the first restructuring of the project on January 21, 2018. The changes included:

        The target for the share of rural population with access to an all-weather access road was reduced
         from 60% to 45%.
        The target for the number of direct project beneficiaries was reduced from 190,000 to 100,000.
        The indicator associated with the share of roads classified as vulnerable to natural events and
         climate change impacts was dropped. The ICR ( paragraph 26) notes that this indicator was
         captured by a revised intermediate indicator " change in share of roads classified as vulnerable to
         natural events and climate change". This revised intermediate indicator was however dropped
         through a subsequent restructuring due to the complexity of data collection compared to the
         implementing agency's capacity, the survey methodology, and the scattered scope of the
         intervention areas.
        The indicator associated with the increase in the volume of transactions in improved markets was
         dropped.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$58.0 million. The revised estimate was US$34.7
  million due to the reduction in project scope. The actual cost was US$24.2 million. The actual costs were
  thus only 42% of the appraisal estimate.



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



   Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA Grant of US$50.0 million, and a Strategic Climate
   Fund Grant of US$8.0 million. US$26.0 of the grant was cancelled and transferred to another project. With
   this, the revised grant estimate was US$32 million. The amount disbursed at closure was US$24.2
   million. US$6.3 of the Strategic Climate Fund Grant was disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no borrower
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project approved on May 19, 2014, became effective on October 6, 2014, and was to close on
   February 28, 2020. The project closed six months behind schedule on August 31, 2020.

   Other changes. The project was restructured twice.

   The following main changes were made with the first restructuring on January 27, 2018, following the Mid-
   Term Review (MTR).

         The targets for key outcome indicators were reduced and some outcome indicators were dropped
          (discussed in section 2d).
         Components two and three activities were merged into a single component.
         The implementation arrangements were changed, with the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF)
          responsible for component two activities, and the Central Implementation Unit of the Ministry of
          Public Works, Transportation and Communication (UCE - MPTC) responsible for component one
          activities.
         The disbursement arrangements were changed and funding was reallocated between components.
         The closing date was extended by six months from February 28, 2020, to August 31, 2020.

   The main changes made through the second project restructuring on February 25, 2020.

         There was a reallocation in disbursement arrangements.
         US$26.0 million of the Bank project (representing about half of the grant) was cancelled, and
          transferred to the Bank's recently approved Rural Accessibility and Resilience Project, as the project
          activities could not be realistically completed before the scheduled closing date of August 31, 2020.

   Split rating. Given the substantial reduction of targets during implementation, this review is based on a split
   rating of objectives, when 88.5% of the grant (US$24,2 million) was disbursed before the first
   restructuring, and the balance 11.5% after restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Classified by the Bank as a Fragile and Conflict-Affected State (FCS), Haiti, with a Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) of US$771 in 2012, was the poorest country in the Americas. In the years before
appraisal Haiti was recovering from the devastating earthquake of 2010. Haiti's economic structure is highly
concentrated around Port au Prince (PaP), with provinces showing high poverty rates, ranging from 56% in

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



               the Artibonite department compared to 38% in the Western department. The earthquake also highlighted
               Haiti's vulnerability to natural disasters, with 96% of the population living high risk areas prone to natural
               disasters. The objective of decentralizing the economy by investing in regions outside the capital such as in
               Central Artibonite Loop (CAL) region with agricultural potential, was important to the Government strategy.

               Alignment with Government strategy. The Government's 2010 Strategic Plan for the Development of
               Haiti (PSDH) strategy set territorial, economic, and institutional rebuilding as the key framework in the
               coming years. Following this, the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Territorial Development (CIAT) through its
               Executive Secretariat (CIATes) developed the long term vision, Haiti Tomorrow: The Central Artibonite
               Loop, Territorial Goals and Strategies for Reconstruction Report in 2011 after the earthquake. This vision
               sought to rebalance spatial and territorial development in all departments, and with regard to the CAL
               region as a strategic region to unlock its potential and: (i) contribute to economic growth, job creation and
               host growth poles; (ii) improve food security; (iii) absorb demographic growth; and (iv) serve as an attractive
               region for private and public sector investments.

               Alignment with Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, they
               were consistent with the Interim Strategy Note (ISN) issued on 2012. The ISN articulated the need
               for implementing sustainable post-earthquake reconstruction and shifting from emergency response to
               economic development. The PDOs were specially relevant to objectives one (reducing vulnerability and
               increasing resilience), and three (revitalizing the economy, which included regional development). The PDO
               remained consistent with the Bank's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2021,
               especially with the Area of Focus One - inclusive growth and contributing to employment opportunities - and
               Area of Focus Three- Resilience through improving disaster prevention and strengthening climate
               resilience.

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank has been supporting the transport sector in Haiti since 2006, with focus
               on critical spot interventions, and strengthening road maintenance to improve resiliency. Alongside this, the
               Bank has been supporting the Government to develop long-term Disaster-Risk Management (DRM)
               plans since 2005, and more recently, as part of the Climate Funds Investment Pilot Program for climate
               resilience, with support from the Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).

               The degree to which the PDO was pitched was however rather modest. The PDO aimed at "enhancing all-
               weather connectivity and logistics for producers", is at best, an intermediate outcome. The design of this
               project, which entailed a multisector and regional approach, required close coordination between several
               ministries and departments. The challenges associated with the complex design led to significant reduction
               in project scope, following the recommendations of the Mid-Term Review (MTR). On balance, the relevance
               of objective is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To support the development of the CAL region, primarily by enhancing all-weather connectivity and logistics
for producers.

Rationale
Theory of change. The results framework was logical, and the causal links between project
activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. Rehabilitating roads
to all weather and climate resilient standards, developing a regional road maintenance strategy, training staff
on maintenance and best transport sector practices, creating and training Community- Based Organizations
(CBOs), and rehabilitating road maintenance centers, were likely to enhance all-weather connectivity in the
CAL region. Activities such as, training local officials and operators in market management, disseminating
knowledge to inform investments and territorial urban plans were likely to enhance the logistics capacity. The
combination of these activities were aimed at the long term development outcome of reducing vulnerability
and increasing resiliency, and thereby in revitalizing the CAL region.

Outputs (ICR, pages 48 -50)

      64 spot interventions were made to enhance all-weather and climate resilient connectivity at closure,
         exceeding the original target of 44.
        30 kilometers (km) of rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, well short of
         the original target of 80 km.
        55.87 percent of non rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, well short of the
         original target of 100 km.
        284 people were trained within selected communities on basic rural road maintenance, well short of
         the original target of 500. The project envisioned that 35% women would be trained. The ICR provides
         no information on the percent of women who were trained.
        Two urban plans were developed in consultation with stakeholders, short of the original target of four.

The Regional Road Maintenance Strategy of the CAL was adopted by the Government as targeted.

These activities were not completed as targeted.

      No road maintenance centers were built or rehabilitated, as compared to the original target of two.
      The activity associated with vulnerability of the road network was not completed.
      The technical guidelines for incorporating climate resilience in the design of road infrastructure
       were not completed.
      Activities pertaining to the constructing four bridges, some spot improvements on selected road
       sections, constructing a culvert, maintenance and repair of 40 km of rural roads, training of 200 people
       within selected communities on road maintenance, construction/rehabilitation of five markets,
       developing a regional dashboard tool for capturing key development indicators and elaboration of
       climate informed urban plans for Saint-Michael and Saint-Raphael, were not completed.

Outcomes



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



The project activities were expected to increase the share of population with access to all-weather roads and
support the development of the CAL region by enhancing logistics for producers and the region's resilience to
natural events and climate change effects.

Enhancing all weather connectivity for producers (ICR, pages 46 -47) .

      44% of rural population in the CAL region had access to an all-season road at closure (39 percent at
       the baseline), and short of the original target of 60%.
      520,300 people in rural areas had access to all season roads at closure ( 374,400 at the baseline),
       and short of the target of 576,000.
      97.5% of the population in the project area were satisfied with the quality of the infrastructure financed
       by the project, exceeding the target of 75%.

Enhancing logistics for producers (ICR, paragraph 49).

      A survey was conducted in four markets completed under the project (131 market users were
       interviewed). The respondents included transporters, producers, merchants and consumers. The
       survey indicated that that 96% of the respondents noted that the improvements had a positive impact
       on their activities. Road improvements boosted the reliability and speed of supply, with 84% of the
       respondents noting that supply reliability had been enhanced, and 90% of the respondents noting
       reductions in delivery time. The overall number of estimated beneficiaries is lower than originally
       planned, due to the reduced scope of the road improvement works.

Given that the outcomes were short of the original targets, efficacy is rated as modest before the first project
restructuring.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Although the PDO was unchanged, the end targets were substantially revised downwards.

Revised Rationale
Outputs

      64 spot interventions were made to enhance all-weather and climate resilient connectivity at closure,
       exceeding the revised target of 44.
      30 kilometers (km) of rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, short of
       the revised target of 40 km.
      55.87 percent of non rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, marginally short of
       the revised target of 60 percent.
      284 people were trained within selected communities on basic rural road maintenance, marginally
       short of the revised target of 300.

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)




      Two urban plans were developed in consultation with stakeholders, short of the revised target of four.

The Regional Road Maintenance Strategy of the CAL was adopted by the Government as targeted.

The activities not completed are discussed above.

Outcomes

Enhancing all weather connectivity for producers (ICR, pages 46 -47) .

      44% of rural population in the CAL region had access to an all-season road at project closure (as
       compared to 39% at the baseline), marginally short of the revised target of 45%,
      520,300 people in rural areas had access to all season road when the project closed (as compared to
       374,400 at the baseline), exceeding the revised target of 432,000.
      97.5% of the population in the project area were satisfied with the quality of infrastructure under
       the project, exceeding the target of 75%.

Enhancing logistics for producers (ICR, paragraph 49).

      A survey was conducted in four markets affected by the roads completed under the project (131
       market users were interviewed). The survey indicated that 96% of the respondents noted that the road
       improvements had a positive impact on their activities. Road improvements boosted the reliability and
       speed of supply, with 84% of the respondents noting improvements in supply reliability, and 90%
       noting reductions in delivery time. The ICR estimated that the rehabilitation of 48% of initially targeted
       roads (85.8 out of 180 km) improved logistics for 123,500 people, exceeding the target of 100,000.

Given that the revised targets were realized in most cases, efficacy is rated substantial after restructuring.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the development of the CAL region, by enhancing the region's resilience to climate change.

Rationale
Theory of change. The links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear.
Activities described above of rehabilitating urban and rural roads with improved climate resilience capacity,
were aimed at enhancing the region's resilience to climate change. The Contingent Emergency Response
Component (CERC) was built into the project design to help respond to an eligible emergency, if needed. The
CERC was not triggered during the project implementation.

Outputs



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



As indicated above,

      30 kilometers (km) of rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, well short of
       the original target of 80 km.
      55.87 percent of non rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, well short of the
       original target of 100 km.

Outcome

      A basic vulnerability assessment carried out to inform the contribution of the project to enhancing the
       region's resilience to climate change, indicated that the share of roads classified as vulnerable to
       natural events and climate change impacts reduced by 16% short of the original target of 20% (this
       indicator was dropped during project implementation but reintroduced by the ICR for the purpose of
       measurement).



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective

Although the PDO was unchanged, targets were revised downwards, with the first restructuring of the project.

Revised Rationale
Outputs

      30 kilometers (km) of rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, short of
       the revised target of 40 km.
      55.87 percent of non rural roads were rehabilitated to climate resilience standards, marginally short of
       the revised target of 60 percent.
      As elaborated by the ICR (para 53), the Natural Hazards Analysis study produced under the project
       informed the elaboration of urban plans for the cities of Titanyen and Hinche through the assessment
       and mapping of flood, landslide, drought, and seismic risks for both urban centers. The Technical
       Guide for Market Construction allowed the promotion of technical norms that fed into the climate-
       resilient design of markets.

Outcome

      A basic vulnerability assessment carried out to inform the contribution of the project to enhancing the
       region's resilience to climate change indicated that the share of roads classified as vulnerable to
       natural events and climate change impacts reduced by 16%, as per the share of roads improved
       under the project in the CAL region.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy is rated modest before restructuring, in view of the low achievement pertaining to the original targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The overall revised efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted for activities associated with rehabilitation of three
   project roads, using the Roads Economic Decision (RED) model. This activity accounted for 33% of the
   appraised cost and and 38% of the actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from reduction in
   vehicle operating costs and travel time savings. The other benefits arising from increased agricultural
   production as a result of the road investments were not factored in the economic analysis. The ex post
   Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 15%, at a 10% discount rate, as compared to the ex ante EIRR of
   10%. The ex post EIRR was higher due to the higher than expected traffic flows in the project intervened areas.

   Administrative and operational shortcomings. There were significant delays initially, due to
   inadequate coordination between implementing agencies, with disbursements at just 10% (US$5.6 million) at
   the time of the MTR. The road rehabilitation costs with the actual cost of two road sections (Petite Riverie and
   Bas de Sault) were higher than the appraisal estimate (ICR, paragraph 60). Given the reduction in total
   estimated cost from US$58.0 million to US$32.0 million, actual administration cost doubled from 7% to 14%
   (ICR, paragraph 63). Regarding the quality of works, assessments by the firms BURACO and GEMODESA
   indicated that works on road sections Hinche- Maissade, Saint-Michael and Saint-Raphael,
   were below expected standards (ICR, paragraph 83). There were delays during implementation for factors, such
   as critical staff departures of the UTE Executive Director, the M&E specialist, and frequent turnover at the
   government level. These were exacerbated by exogenous factors, such as the violent riots from July 2018 to

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



September 2018. These factors contributed to non-completion of many activities. At closure, about half of the
Bank grant was cancelled from the project.

In sum, efficiency is rated modest, in view of the administrative and operational shortcomings during
implementation.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    33.00
 Appraisal                                                 10.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    38.00
 ICR Estimate                                              15.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO is rated substantial. Efficacy of the two objectives - to support the development of the
Center Artibonite Loop region, primarily by enhancing all-weather connectivity and logistics for producers and
strengthening the government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible
emergency, was modest before restructuring and substantial after restructuring. Efficiency is rated modest, in
view of the administrative and operational shortcomings.

Taking these ratings into account, the project outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory before restructuring
(when 88% of the grant was disbursed), and moderately satisfactory after restructuring, when the balance was
disbursed. Weighing by the shares of disbursement before and after restructuring, the overall
outcome is moderately unsatisfactory (0.88 * 3+ 0.11*4 = 3.08).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



Government commitment. The road investments completed under this project requires adequate resources
for road maintenance. Given Haiti's historical track record on road maintenance (ICR, paragraph 116), there
is substantial risk to development outcome that the roads may not be adequately maintained.

Exposure to natural disasters. The ICR (paragraph 117) notes that security risk in Haiti can seriously affect
the logistics in the region. The infrastructure risk to infrastructure in the CAL region is also substantial, given
that Haiti remains prone to disaster risk (such as, due to hurricane, earthquake, or landslides).

Technical risk. There is technical risk to the activities completed under this project, given that the firms
BURACO and GEMODESA indicated that works on road sections Hinche- Maissade, Saint-Michael and
Saint-Raphael, were below the expected standards.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The analytical underpinnings of this project drew on the recommendations of the Bank's 2011 World
  Development Report (WDR) on Conflict, Security and Development. This report highlighted transport
  connectivity as key to regional integration and development. The project's concept was based on a
  comprehensive strategic study (Haiti tomorrow - the Center-Artibonite Loop: Territorial Goals and
  Strategies for Reconstruction, 2010). This project was prepared based on the experience of prior Bank-
  financed projects worldwide with all weather-access to rural areas, regional inequities and promoting
  balanced development. Lessons incorporated at design included participatory planning for responding to
  community needs and empowering them for selecting the roads to be rehabilitated, using appropriate
  design standards for road investments in areas vulnerable to adverse natural events and climate change,
  and strengthening the road maintenance system (PAD, paragraph 35). The implementation
  arrangements were appropriate, with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) based in the office of the
  Ministry of Economy and Finance (the implementing agency). Several risks were identified at appraisal,
  including high stakeholder risks and substantial risks with capacity and governance and the volatile
  security context. Even with mitigation measures, overall project risk was rated High at appraisal, given
  the multi-sectoral design and weak capacity in Haiti for activities, such as climate change adaptation
  (PAD, paragraph 44). The arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary compliance were appropriate
  (discussed in section 10b).

  There were minor shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, as discussed in Section three, the original
  design, which required close coordination between several institutions, was overly ambitious, given
  Haiti's fragile condition and political environment. The project performance continued to deteriorate in the
  initial years due to persistent challenges stemming from complexity of design and lack of institutional
  coordination at different levels. According to the clarifications provided by the team, this was exacerbated
  by unforeseen external events, which were beyond the control of the project (such as, unexpected
  political crisis (an internal crisis within the Government) which caused a generalized paralysis and natural
  disaster (Hurricane Matthew - a Category 4 hurricane on October 4, 2016). This necessitated reduction in
  project scope following the MTR. and two, there were M&E shortcomings (discussed in section 9).




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



  Given the difficult circumstances in the country context and the adverse economic shocks that could not
  be foreseen at appraisal, Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry is rated as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRRs) were filed over a project lifetime of seven years,
 implying on average twice a year supervision missions. The support provided by a dedicated full-time
 safeguards specialist based in Hinche throughout implementation, aided in safeguards and fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10b). Following the first project restructuring, the supervision team
 arranged for installing Dedicated Project Management (MDOD) and this aided in facilitating
 implementation, and allowing the implementing agencies to focus on their core competencies. The ICR
 (paragraph 85) notes that the COVID - 19 pandemic significantly affected implementation progress in the
 final year of the project. Mitigation measures were put in place in response to the pandemic to ensure the
 safety of workers and facilitate the execution of activities. These measures, included providing the Project
 Implementation Units (PIUs) to facilitate home-based working arrangements, recruiting consultants to
 supplement the PIUs supervision capacity on the field, and reorganizing worksites to promote social
 distancing (ICR, paragraph 85). The supervision team proactively streamlined the process of transferring
 the remaining project activities and funds to the Bank approved ongoing project.

 There were minor shortcomings in supervision. The actual administrative cost of implementing the project
 was almost double than estimated at appraisal. There were shortcomings associated with the M&E
 implementation (discussed in section 10b).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear. The theory of change documenting how the key activities and outputs
 were related to outcomes was sound. However there were shortcomings with M&E design, with the original
 indicators only partially capturing the project outcomes. The indicator associated with the share of
 population with access to all-weather road was appropriate for monitoring project performance.

 A significant shortcoming of M&E design was the absence of indicators for monitoring the project's
 contribution to "enhancing logistics for producers" and "enhancing the region's resilience to climate

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



 change". These were addressed during the restructuring of the project. However, the PDO aimed
 at "enhancing all-weather connectivity and logistics for producers", is at best, an intermediate
 outcome. There were no indicators aimed at monitoring activities associated with the institutional
 strengthening dimension of the project. The M&E framework was ambitious in the number and nature of
 outputs, but also in the procedures designed for monitoring indicators involving partners at different levels.
 While this framework was intended to increase collaboration, it proved to be difficult, in a context of weak
 institutional capacity.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E arrangements were simplified, with the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Energy
  and Communications (MTPTC) responsible for monitoring most of the project activities. Following the
  restructuring of the project, proxy indicators were incorporated for monitoring activities associated with
  "enhancing logistics for projects" (through a survey) and for activities associated with "enhancing the
  region's resilience to climate change". The supervision team also aided in strengthening the Project
  Implementation Unit to ensure regularity and consistency in reporting results and through recruiting a
  M&E specialist. However, several of the indicators requiring a gender breakdown of results were not
  prepared at the disaggregated level. This precluded gender analysis of these indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E framework was utilized for tracking of progress towards achievement of the PDO's. The ICR
  (paragraph 99) states that there is no evidence that M&E framework was used for decision-making
  purposes.

  In sum, M&E is rated as modest, in view of shortcomings at design and implementation,



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project under the World Bank safeguard policies. Three
   safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats
   (OP/BP 4.04); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, pages iii and iv).

   The possible negative environmental impacts relating to the construction phase of the project included
   waste disposal, water contamination and erosion (PAD, paragraph 58). Some temporary or permanent
   involuntary resettlement was expected from activities associated with rehabilitation on roads (PAD,
   paragraph 52). The safeguards policy associated with natural habitats was triggered, as several works were




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



  in the watershed area, and many works (roads and bridges) crossed small streams that could be important
  for aquatic habitats (PAD, paragraph 60).

  The PAD (paragraph 5) notes that given Haiti's classification by the Bank as a Fragile and Conflict-
  Afflicted State (FCA), this project was processed invoking the special considerations of OP 10.00.
  Hence, on an exceptional basis, the environmental and social safeguards instruments were deferred to
  implementation. A time-bound safeguards action plan was developed at appraisal, and the Environmental
  and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were to be
  completed by project effectiveness. The ESMF was to cover issues with safeguards on natural habitats.

  Environmental safeguards and safeguards on natural habitats. The ICR (paragraph 102) notes
  that safeguards performance was satisfactory during implementation. The ICR (paragraph 104) notes that
  safeguards management was subject to several challenges due to factors such as multiple worksites
  spatially distributed over a wide area, exogenous operational challenges arising from political instability,
  insecurity, climate vulnerability, a pandemic, and weak safeguard capacity of project stakeholders. The
  project relied on measures such as, proactive Bank supervision, a Grievance Redress Mechanism on local
  focal points and training stakeholders to ensure compliance. The ICR does not mention of any issues with
  natural habitats.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The ICR (paragraph 103) notes that in July 2018, there were temporary issues
  regarding five Project Affected Persons (PAPs) from activities related to spot improvements on the Hinche-
  Maissade road section. These incidents were brought to the social safeguards team's attention six months
  after they occurred. At the time, only two of the five PAPs had received compensation while the road works
  had already started. This situation was resolved six months later. Other than this, there were no social
  safeguards issues during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. A financial management assessment of the implementing agency - the Unite
  Technique d' Execution (UTE) in the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) - was conducted at
  appraisal. Although UTE implemented multilateral-financed projects and their financial management
  arrangements were deemed to be satisfactory, this was the first Bank project to be implemented by UTE.
  Overall, the financial risk was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 37).

  The ICR (paragraph 105) notes that financial management was rated as moderately satisfactory during
  implementation. There were however delays in submission of financial statements. The team clarified that
  the audits were unqualified.

  Procurement. A procurement assessment of UTE was conducted at appraisal. Although UTE had
  sufficient experience in executing multilateral projects funded by other donors in the past, overall public
  procurement system in Haiti was weak and hence overall procurement risk was rated as substantial at
  appraisal (PAD, page 39).

  The ICR (paragraph 106) notes that procurement performance was moderately satisfactory
  during implementation. The delays in the procurement process were rectified with Bank support. The


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)



   ICR notes that procurement was facilitated by the adoption of 2016 Bank procurement regulations helped
   in streamlining the procurement process.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately          Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest              Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. In fragile and conflict affected countries, a simple project design tailored to
the implementation capacities may be helpful in ensuring project implementation and results.
This multisector project with multiple entities proved challenging in Haiti's operational context.

2. Transferring contracts between Bank-financed operations should be used as a last-resort
solution. The grant for this project was partially cancelled from this project and transferred to
another project. Given that transferring contracts between projects requires a significant amount of
time and resources, such a course of action, should only be adopted as a last-resort solution
(especially when multiple contracts need to be transferred).

3. In capacity-constrained environments, recourse to Delegated Project Management (MDOD)
may facilitate implementation and allow implementing agencies to focus on their core
competencies. The recruitment of MDOD to implement road works and other market works proved
to be instrumental in speeding up implementation following the project restructuring in this project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HT - Ctr & Artibonite Reg Dev. (P133352)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and candidly discusses the issues associated with having multiple agencies, especially in
countries with fragile and conflict-related settings. The theory of change is clear in the ICR, and provides a clear
exposition of the links between project activities, outputs and outcomes. The ICR candidly acknowledges the
shortcomings in M&E design and discusses the issues associated with transferring contracts between Bank-
financed projects. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
and the lessons were sufficiently linked to the narrative in the ICR. The ICR is internally consistent, as reflected
in the integration of the various parts of the report.

The main text of the ICR at 40 pages is more than twice the recommended length of 15 pages of the main text.
The ICR would have benefitted with better editing and eschewing repetitions throughout the text. The ICR could
have included a copy of the English translation of the borrower's ICR provided in Annex 9.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
