     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022534

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P145610                                        PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                           Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85170                                     31-Dec-2021                                         70,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Sep-2015                                    05-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                                70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                            70,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                      ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur               Peter Nigel Freeman              Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to provide a major east-west axis (Ate-Lima-Callao) of the Lima-Callao
   Metropolitan Region with a modern and integrated mass transit system that will improve accessibility to jobs
   and services in the area of influence of the Lima Metro Line 2 and the Gambetta Branch of Line 4 (Loan
   Agreement page 6 and PAD para 14).




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



   The Project will be implemented in phases and once completed the area of influence will include 13 districts
   (9 in the Metropolitan Region of Lima and 4 in the Province of Callao).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of a single component “Support for the Construction of the Lima Metro Line 2”
   (appraisal cost US$5,836 million, including US$300 million IBRD financing. Actual IBRD financing was
   US$70 million. Actual cost was US$2,352 million). This component included the following activities:

   (i) construction of 35 stations with, at a minimum, physical integration to the existing Metro Line 1 and
   Metropolitano BRT;

   (ii) construction of an approximately 27.3 km of tunnel along the Line 2 corridor with one rail yard;

   (iii) construction of an approximately 7.7 km segment of the future Line 4 branch with one rail yard; and

   (iv) the provision and installation of the necessary rolling stock, electrical, control, telecommunications, and
   fare systems for operation of the Metro Line 2.

   The Project would be entirely underground with approximately 32 shafts for ventilation and emergencies,
   one additional emergency shaft, two rail yards, and electromechanical, structural and rail facilities.

   The Project was to be implemented in three phases: phase 1A, phase 1B, and 2. The initial segment to be
   implemented (phase 1A) included about 5.2 km of the metro line, 5 stations, a rail yard and test tracks in
   the eastern part of the Lima Metropolitan Region (LMR) (future Santa Anita station). Phase 1B would add
   approximately 11 km of line and 11 stations from the eastern most districts of LMR (Ate-Vitarte) and
   towards the center of Lima, while Phase 2 included 19 stations and 19 km from Lima to Callao (ICR para
   16).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$2,352 million, significantly lower than the appraisal cost
   estimate of US$5,836 million (the cost data were as indicated in the ICR, page 43). This was because
   the project experienced implementation delays due to a longer than expected learning period of the new
   professionals hired in the implementing agencies, the changes in the modality and scope of the contracts,
   and dispute between the government and the concessionaire. At the closing date, the project
   implementation stood at 40%. The construction continued, however, after the World Bank project closed.

   Financing. The actual IBRD amount was US$70 million compared to the appraisal amount of US$300
   million. US$230 million was cancelled on June 5, 2020. The letter from the Minister of Economy and

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



   Finance stated that the loan was no longer needed to finance the project (ICR para 21). This was due
   to significant project implementation delays and an addendum to the concession contract that modified the
   payment mechanism to prioritize the use of private financing already mobilized. With the cancellation of the
   IBRD loan, the Borrower would save on continuing to pay for commitment charges (ICR para 23).

   Other sources of financing:

       1. Development Bank of Latin America (CAF) - actual US$137.1 million, appraisal US$150 million.
       2. Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) - actual US$162.5 million, appraisal US$300 million.
       3. KfW Development Bank – actual US$200 million, appraisal US$ 200 million.
       4. Other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) - actual US$200.0 million (from the French
          Development Agency (AFD)), appraisal US$950 million (at appraisal this remaining amount was
          planned from future loans) [as per Task Team email, June 17, 2021] .
       5. Private Commercial Sources - actual US$356.8 million, appraisal US$1651 million.

   Borrower Contribution. The actual Borrower contribution was US$824.3 million, significantly lower than
   the appraisal commitment of US$2,285 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on September 15, 2015 and became effective on November 3, 2016. It
   closed on June 5, 2020, eighteen months before the original closing date of December 31 2021. The
   rationale for early closing of the loan was that the Bank funds were not needed since August 2017. On May
   29, 2020 the World Bank received a letter from the Minister of Economy and Finance confirming its
   agreement to accelerate the project’s closing date. The revised closing date was set for June 5, 2020. This
   was due to significant project implementation delays and an addendum to the concession contract that
   modified the payment mechanism to prioritize the use of private financing already mobilized, therefore the
   Bank's financing was not needed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context. At appraisal in 2015, the Lima Metropolitan Region (LMR), which comprised of the Metropolitan
Municipality of Lima and the Constitutional Province of Callao, constituted 29% of Peru’s population (over 9
million inhabitants). The urban population had been growing at about 1.6% annually. LMR had large
concentrations of low-income groups, 1.3 million people were classified as poor and an additional 1.7
million considered vulnerable.

Sectoral Context. Spatial development patterns and inadequate transport services were hampering
the productivity of Peru’s urban agglomerations, particularly constraining the poor. In the LMR, the
combination of a dispersed pattern of urbanization and the lack of high-quality public transport services on
an integrated network was reinforcing social-spatial inequalities by limiting access to urban centers where a
majority of formal jobs, education, health and other services are available. Low-income households live
predominantly in the urban periphery with poor quality access to these centers and, consequently, have to
make a considerable effort in terms of travel times or travel expenses to reach these destinations or do not
make the trip at all. The public transport network was very limited with one Bus Rapid Transit corridor (the


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



               Metropolitano BRT) and an elevated rail line (Metro Line 1 or Tren Eléctrico), which carried about 1 million
               trips per day but account for only 9% of all public transport trips in the LMR.

               Alignment with the Country Strategy. The Government of Peru approved a Metro Network Plan for
               Greater Lima and Callao in December 2010 to expand mass transit provision. It included Metro Line 1 and
               five new metro lines totaling 168 km. The project was aligned with this plan. In March 2012, the Ministry of
               Transport and Communication (MTC), announced that Metro Line 2 would be implemented through a
               Design-Finance-Build-Operate-Transfer (DFBOT) concession contract. The GoP awarded a 35-year
               concession in March 2014 to a private consortium, and the concession contract was signed by MTC in April
               2014, more than a year before the approval of this project. The Government was seeking the Bank’s “seal
               of approval”, which would add credibility for various financiers but was less supportive of the softer aspects
               of the project that might impact the completion timeline.

               Alignment with the Bank Strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the four objectives of the
               Peru Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY12-FY16: (i) increased access and quality of
               social services; (ii) connecting the poor to services and markets; (iii) sustainable growth and
               productivity; and (iv) improved public sector performance for greater inclusion.

               The team informed IEG that although the concession contract had been awarded, the Bank deemed the
               Metro Line 2 project a unique opportunity to engage with the Government of Peru on much-needed urban
               mobility improvements, and in complementary areas such as physical, tariff and operational integration with
               other public transport services.

               Development Problem. The development of Metro Line 2, which is well integrated with other mass transit
               would provide climate-friendly mass transport option. It would provide access to the poor (in peripheral
               areas) in the LMR to socio-economic opportunities (e.g., jobs, markets, hospitals, schools, cultural venues,
               etc.) that otherwise could not be reached within acceptable travel times or travel budgets. Therefore,
               the provision of more efficient and safe urban transport options represents an important step in promoting
               more inclusive and sustainable growth. The objective is pitched at the right level to address the
               development problem. However, the late entry of the Bank through this project when the Design-Finance-
               Build-Operate-Transfer (DFBOT) concession already awarded constrained the value that the Bank could
               add to the project. Overall, the relevance of objective is substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective



                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



                            To provide a major east-west axis (Ate-Lima-Callao) of the Lima-Callao Metropolitan Region with a modern
                            and integrated mass transit system that will improve accessibility to jobs and services in the area of influence
                            of the Lima Metro Line 2 and the Gambetta Branch of Line 4

                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change (ToC). The development of Metro Line 2, which is well integrated with other mass transit
                            would provide access to the poor (in peripheral areas) in the LMR to socio-economic opportunities (e.g. jobs,
                            markets, hospitals, schools, cultural venues, etc.) that otherwise could not be reached within acceptable
                            travel times or travel budgets.

                            Outputs

                            At project cancellation, only 32% of the physical works were completed. This included:

                                  7 out of the 35 stations were constructed;

                                  7 km of rail infrastructure out of 35 km was completed;

                                  One depot out of two was 95 percent completed;

                                  192 rolling stock were provided out of the 252 targeted; and

                                  A Multimodal Integration and Accessibility Plan for Metro Line 2 was delivered.

                            For Metro line 2 to become operational, several works had still to be completed: 28 additional stations, 28
                            kilometers of rail infrastructure, and the installation of the necessary electrical, control, telecommunications,
                            and fare systems. In addition, 60 rolling stock were required.

                            The team mentioned that since loan closure 40% of the project has been completed. Following delays
                            because of COVID-19, the project may not be finished before 2024, and only then if the ongoing dispute
                            between the government and the concessionaire is sorted out.

                            Outcomes

                            Due to limited progress in the completion of the physical works, none of the outcome indicators for mobility,
                            accessibility, ridership, and integration were achieved. The achievement of this objective is negligible.




                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Due to limited progress in the completion of the physical works, none of the outcome indicators for mobility,
  accessibility, ridership, and integration were achieved. The efficacy is negligible.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                 Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) was estimated at 8.9% and a net present value (NPV) of
US$459 million with a discount rate of 6%. The analysis assumed a 30-year horizon using a demand
assumption of 360,000 passengers per day in the first year of full operation and a 3.5 percent ridership average
annual rate of growth (PAD para 32). PAD Annex 6 lists the benefits: (i) change in consumer surplus for
passengers in the area of influence of the Project (travel time savings, savings in fares due to fare integration);
and (ii) changes in the operating costs of urban transport (the migration of passengers from current bus and
microbus services to the new metro service and associated reduction in bus vehicle-km on the roads of LMR);
and (iii) reduction in accidents due to reductions in road vehicle-km; reduction in greenhouse gases; and
congestion benefits).

At completion, the PAD methodology was used to calculate the ERR. The capital investment costs were
updated to reflect actual and projected expenditures on civil works, rolling stock, expropriations, utilities, and
contingencies. The methodology for calculating the potential project benefits was not changed but the stream
of expected benefits was reduced for years 2021 to 2025 by prorating partial level of operations (ICR Annex 4).
The ex-post ERR was 7.3% using a 6% discount rate. Since project closure further delays have likely worsened
the ERR.

Administrative efficiency. The project experienced implementation delays due to a longer than expected
learning period of the new professionals hired in the implementing agencies, the changes in the modality and
scope of the contracts, dispute between the government and the concessionaire, and more recently the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic. Metro Line 2 is not fully operational and the team mentioned that the project is
unlikely to be finished before 2024 and only then provided if the dispute between the government and the
concessionaire can be resolved.

Overall, efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 8.90
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              7.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and the Bank strategy is substantial. Due to the limited progress
in the completion of physical works, none of the outcome indicators for mobility, accessibility, ridership, and
integration were achieved. The efficacy is negligible. Efficiency is rated as modest. Taking these ratings into
account, overall outcome is rated as unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk. The Government is fully committed to the completion of Metro Line 2. The ICR reports (para
79) that the Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC), in its letter requesting the cancellation of the
loan, reiterated its commitment to completing the Metro Line 2 as part of the Metro Network Plan and its
urban transport strategy. The team mentioned that the government is maintaining dialogue with the Bank on
the preparation of Metro lines 3 and 4. The political risk is assessed as relatively low.

Technical Risk. The Concessionaire has the experience and qualifications to build the Metro Line. In 2017
the dispute was referred to the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes. However, the
dispute between the concessionaire and the government is still ongoing. The technical risk is assessed as
substantial.

Financial Risk. The financial risk is low as the main financiers of the project continue to be the Government
of Peru, other IFIs and the Concessionaire. So far, the project has not experienced a shortfall of funding. The
financial risk is assessed as low.

The overall risk is considered modest because the project’s development outcomes remain achievable
despite implementation delays that may push project opening beyond 2024.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The concession contract was awarded on March 28, 2014 (was signed on April 28, 2014) and the Loans
  with IDB and CAF were approved soon after. The project preparation on the Bank side started in August
  2014 and the project was approved in September 2015. During the preparation, the Bank reviewed
  economic, financial, environmental, technical and procurement aspects. The mitigation measures
  identified through these reviews were largely ex-post since the Concession Agreement had already been
  structured, approved and awarded. Consequently, there was effectively no opportunity for the Bank to
  influence the early stages of the Metro Line 2 project development.

  The ICR points out (para 12) that although the concession contract had been awarded, the Bank deemed
  the Metro Line 2 project a unique opportunity to engage with the Government of Peru on much-needed
  urban mobility improvements, and in complementary areas such as physical, tariff and operational
  integration with other public transport services.

  During preparation, the Bank noted key gaps in the institutional capacity of the Government of Peru to
  manage the implementation of such a large and complex project. In the loan agreement, the Bank
  instituted a "tripartite framework agreement" between the national level agencies (MTC and AATE) and
  the Municipalities of Lima and Callao to facilitate the implementation of the project. The Bank coordinated
  technical assistance activities with other IFIs and partners to fund institutional capacity building. To
  mitigate institutional weaknesses, the project included six legal covenants for the agencies involved in the
  planning, implementation, and supervision of the future Lima Metro Network. Despite this, the Bank failed
  to recognize the weaknesses in the institutional arrangements for project execution: (a) there were no
  senior personnel dedicated to managing the expected large volume of social and environmental matters;
  (b) the government entities and the independent supervision firm did not have the ability to provide early
  technical mediation before contractual disputes with the Concessionaire arose; (c) the Bank also did not
  have adequate dispute resolution mechanism due to the unique circumstances of the project’s
  preparation and arrangement (ICR para 73).

  When the concession contract was awarded, the Government had already classified the Project as
  Category B, and therefore, approved only a semi-detailed Environmental Impact Study with the
  Concession Agreement. The Project’s semi-detailed Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was
  approved by the General Directorate of Socio Environmental Affairs of the MTC on November 2013 and a
  supplemental EIA (EIA-S) was finalized in October 2014 (ICR para 54). However, the Bank appropriately
  considered the project as Category A. There were shortcomings in safeguards (see section10a) and lack
  of appropriate plan for Environmental and Social Safeguards monitoring. There was also a history of
  problems due to insufficient attention to safeguards in Lima – an earlier bus rapid transit project (Lima
  Transport Project) triggered an Inspection Report due to complaints from affected citizens about lack of
  consultation.

  Overall, the quality at entry was moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)




b. Quality of supervision
 A field-based "private sector and contract management specialist" provided hands-on support during
 implementation. The field-based staff coordinated with different stakeholders and other IFIs, beyond
 regular supervision missions. Despite this, the project suffered from several technical, contractual, social,
 and environmental issues during implementation. This was due to weak management and supervision of
 the Concession Agreement. There were shortcomings in the hiring of the independent supervision firm (a
 consortium of Korean and Peruvian firms) by OSITRAN to support oversight of the concession that delayed
 implementation (ICR para 53). The supervision firm was contractually required to review the Definitive
 Engineering Design Studies (EDIs) and the completed works according to the requirements in the
 Concession Agreement, but it did not provide meaningful input to work processes or technical mediation of
 discrepancies as was originally intended. There was high staff turnover in the implementing agencies.
 Conflicting interpretations of the Concession Agreement caused lengthy delays. The Concessionaire and
 the Government of Peru commenced international arbitration proceedings at the International Centre for
 Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) in 2017, which are still ongoing. The team mentioned that this
 dispute has still not been resolved.

 The Bank initiated a mid-term review in a timely manner; however, it was not concluded until August 2019
 and its recommendations were not taken up by the Government of Peru. The project did not comply with
 the Bank's safeguards policies.

 Overall, the Bank's quality of supervision is moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design included adequate basic indicators to measure mobility, accessibility, and ridership.
 However, the integration indicator could have included an intermediate indicator such as establishment of
 an integrated single fare ticket between the metro lines and the BRT as well as completed plans for the
 physical integration of the BRT, Metro Line 1, Metro Line 2, and feeder bus routes.

 Most of the intermediate outcome indicators did not track real progress because the methodology involved
 data collection only after the Metro Line 2 started its operations. Also, methodology of the indicators was
 unclear.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



 With such a high risk construction project, the results framework should have included output indicators
 that measured incremental progress on the ground, as well as compliance with environmental and social
 safeguards.




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E data was planned to be collected by two agencies: Autonomous Authority of Electric Mass Transit
  System of Lima and Callao (AATE - executive agency for the entire project) and Supervising Body of
  Transport Infrastructure Public Investment (OSITRAN - which was the direct supervisor for the
  construction works of the Concessionaire). Data collection by AATE and OSITRAN was weak as most
  outcome indicators could only be collected after the Metro Line 2 started its operations.




c. M&E Utilization
  As discussed above, M&E utilization was negligible because AATE did not systematically collect
  the M&E data and the reports were usually submitted late (ICR para 69).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental category 'A' due to the potential impacts associated with large
   scale construction and the relatively large geographic footprint in an urban environment (PAD para 46). The
   following four safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Pest
   Management (OP 4.09); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12).

   Pest Management (OP 4.09) was triggered since the project would require the limited use of pesticides for
   pest control (e.g. rodents, etc.) in the tunnels.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) was triggered because the 35 km underground alignment would
   require land acquisition to build stations and ventilation shafts. Line 2 would affect 338 lots and Line 4
   Branch would affect 38 lots, for a total of 376 lots (PAD para 43). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
   called the PACRI (Plan de Compensación y Reasentamiento Involuntario) was prepared and disclosed as
   part of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the Project.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



  OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources was triggered given the potential during construction of
  encountering cultural and potential archeological sites along the alignment.

  The project was not compliant with all Bank safeguards policies. This was because of shortcomings
  during preparation: (a) there was no clear description of the responsibilities and procedures for the
  implementation of the safeguards policies; (b) the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was prepared
  based solely on the national legislation and the management plans were developed to comply with the
  national and local requirements only. On the other hand, the Supplemental EIA included some additional
  social requirements from the Bank, such as the RAP; and (c) the mitigation measures were generic
  because the project was not fully designed at the time of preparation.

  The ICR reports (para 64) that the Concession Agreement included a clause (Section 13.3, under Social
  Environmental Requirements of the Concessionaire) requiring the Concessionaire to comply with the
  safeguards requirements of multilateral development banks financing the project. However, the Agreement
  was never amended to include compliance with the environmental and social safeguard obligations set out
  in the Loan Agreement of the project. This placed the Government of Peru in a weak position when seeking
  to persuade the Concessionaire to comply with the project’s safeguards requirements.

  Regarding Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Autonomous Authority of Electric Mass Transit System
  of Lima and Callao (AATE) had limited capacity initially to implement the processes for land acquisition. It
  did not have procedures to verify property valuations in line with the full replacement cost required by OP
  4.12 and reflected in the project RAP. The national regulation requires cash compensation payments for
  land acquisition at commercial values (and includes depreciation of the assets) instead of the full
  replacement cost required by the Bank’s OP 4.12. Moreover, there was no grievance redress mechanism –
  a matter that was raised by the project team with the Government on four occasions to no avail.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR (para 68) reports that the project's financial management was
  satisfactory. A fiduciary fund at Citibank was established to ensure systematic budgeting, accounting, and
  flow of funds from different financiers. The quality of Interim Financial reports was considered satisfactory
  by the Bank. The last disbursement occurred in August 2017 and the independent audit for 2018 was
  unqualified.

  Procurement. Since the concession was awarded prior to the approval of this project, no additional
  procurement was expected during implementation. The Bank conducted an ex-post review of the
  procurement process of the Concessionaire and determined that it was conducted in accordance with
  the with the Bank’s procurement policies for Public-Private Partnership Agreements (ICR para
  70). Furthermore, regarding the economic displacement, there was lack of clarity on who was responsible
  for the management and mitigation of some economic displacement impacts outside of the concession
  area but caused by the project. The Concessionaire considered it was the responsibility of the Government
  of Peru, whereas the Government of Peru considered it was the Concessionaire’s responsibility.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project team mentioned several positive aspects that are indirect to the project but are important, such
   as the positive relationship between the Bank and the new urban transport authority and other local players
   [the Autonomous Authority of Electric Mass Transit System of Lima and Callao (AATE) has become Urban
   Transport Authority (ATU)]. The Bank’s BRT project in Lima (which is under preparation) will enable Bank
   to continue dialogue in the urban transport sector. The government is seeking Bank's advice on the
   preparation of Metro Lines 3 and 4, especially regarding compensation for street vendors.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Following lessons are adapted from the ICR:

      Entering a project that has already been structured, procured, and awarded can
         significantly constrain the Bank’s ability to influence the initial design and risk
         mitigation measures to support implementation. In the case of Metro Line 2, the project
         design was approved by the Government of Peru and the Concession Agreement was
         awarded, and other IFIs had approved loans prior to the Bank concluding its appraisal. As a
         result, the Bank’s ability to influence key project design decisions was severely limited and
         the primary risk mitigation measures remaining were legal covenants and loan conditions.
         This impacted key areas of project implementation from the development of final engineering
         designs to the implementation of the Bank’s safeguard policies.

      Complex projects that involve private concessions or public-private partnerships
         require greater institutional capacity and coordination from Government. Deficiencies
         in the Borrower’s legal and technical capacity to proactively manage concession agreements
         can negatively impact project implementation. For example, in the case of Metro Line 2,
         the Borrower procured the works and assigned the concession using a “semi-detailed” social
         and environmental assessment and required that specific management plans be developed
         by the Concessionaire and approved in phases once detailed engineering designs would be
         finalized. The Bank considered the Project as a “Category A” under its safeguard policies

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)



         and required the Borrower to supplement and/or implement (or cause the Concessionaire
         to implement) the Project’s safeguard instruments accordingly. However, the Concession
         Agreement was not able to resolve differing interpretations between the Borrower and
         Concessionaire in the implementation of these requirements.

        It is important to have a defined organizational structure to coordinate between
         multiple international financial institutions (IFIs) during project implementation. The
         Metro Line 2 Project was co-financed by several international financial institutions (IBRD,
         IDB, CAF, and KfW). The co-financiers joined the project at different times (in the case of the
         World Bank, after the Concession Agreement was awarded) and did not have the
         opportunity to formalize a cooperation agreement or designate a lead Bank, as was done in
         the Quito Metro Project with the IADB and other co-financiers. A defined organizational
         structure for the coordination of the lenders would have been beneficial for project
         implementation and could have allowed for more leverage for the implementation of
         IFI’s requirements and project supervision on socio-environmental safeguards.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR follows the OPCS guidelines and provides a good narrative on project implementation challenges. The
discussion on lack of safeguards compliance is detailed. The ICR provides relevant lessons learned from the
project experience. There are a few areas where the report could have been strengthened. First, the efficiency
section could have listed the benefits from the project. Second, at 27 pages the ICR is far longer than the
recommended length of 15 pages.

Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)




                                                                        Page 14 of 14
