     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022516

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P124109                                    KE:Transport Sector Support Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49260,IDA-54100                        31-Dec-2016                                        456,034,156.94

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Apr-2011                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            501,769,311.09                                              0.00

 Actual                                        456,034,156.94                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur               Peter Nigel Freeman          Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Objectives

   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to (a) increase the efficiency of road transport along the
   Northern Corridor and the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; (b) enhance aviation safety and security to
   meet international standards; and (c) improve the institutional arrangements and capacity in the transport
   sector (Financing Agreement page 5 and Project Appraisal Document (PAD) para 31).


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



   Revised Objectives

   Two new PDOs were added at the time of the first restructuring: (i) restore the capacity of the international
   passenger arrival terminal destroyed in a fire at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA); and (ii) strengthen
   the capacity of the Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) in disaster preparedness and responsiveness at Kenyan
   airports.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-Mar-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component A (original): Rehabilitation and improvement of roads, roadside facilities, and road
   safety interventions (appraisal estimate US$264.8 million, actual cost US$472.8 million). This component
   included: (a) rehabilitating the Kisumu - Kakamega - Kitale section (147 km) of the Tanzania - Kenya -
   Sudan road corridor including widening of the road carriageway; and constructing service roads and non-
   motorized traffic facilities at market centers to improve road safety; (b) constructing a second carriageway
   and service roads on Athi River - Machakos turn-off road section (21 km) on the Northern Corridor and
   constructing service roads and non-motorized facilities; (c) rehabilitating the Maji ya Chumvi - Bachuma
   Gate road section (53 km) on the Northern Corridor including strengthening and widening of the existing
   road carriageway, and construction of service roads and non-motorized traffic facilities to improve road
   safety, through provision of service roads and non-motorized facilities; (d) constructing four interchanges at
   Nakuru-Nyahururu turnoff; Nakuru-Njoro turnoff; Mau Summit-Kisumu turnoff, and Ahero-Kisii turnoff; and
   (e) Supervising the related construction works.

   Component A (revised): (i) upgrading to four lane carriageway a 4.5 km road section within Kisumu City
   along the Tanzania-Kenya-South Sudan road corridor, which had become a major constraint to the flow of
   traffic and movement of pedestrians; (ii) construction of four major interchanges in Kisumu City; (iii)
   construction of a new grade separated junction at the busy Majengo township, on the Tanzania-Kenya-
   South Sudan corridor; (iv) construction of access road to the East Africa School of Aviation (0.5 km) and the
   proposed office block for Kenya Civil Aviation Authority (KCAA) and road sub-sector entities (1 km)
   including associated non-motorized facilities, street lighting, and drainage (Project Paper page 23 and ICR
   page 9).

   Component B (original): Institutional strengthening and capacity building in the transport sector
   (appraisal estimate US$69.7 million, actual cost US$22.3 million).



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



Sub-Component B1: Strengthening the capacity of various institutions in the road sector (Kenya National
Highways Authority (KeNHA), Kenya Urban Roads Authority (KURA) and Kenya Rural Roads Authority
(KeRRA) through:

    a. Acquisition of relevant equipment, vehicles, modernization of management information systems,
         financial planning, contract management, to enhance service delivery;
    b. Provision of training in areas related to management information systems and private sector
         participation in service delivery
    c. Construction of a single office block for the road sector entities;
    d. Carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering designs studies for the development and
         management of the road network;
    e. Marking the boundaries for the right of way to secure KeNHA’s road assets.

Sub-Component B2: Strengthening the capacity of Kenya Roads Board (KRB) and Ministry of Roads (MoR)
through:

    a. Carrying out a study on the implications of the new constitution on the mandates and work of
         KeRRA, KURA, KeNHA and KRB;
    b. Preparing an inventory of the unclassified roads and recommendations for their improvement;
    c. Provision of technical advisory services and training to the staff at the National Construction
       Authority, MoR, Engineers Registration Board, State Law Office and External Resources
       Department to enhance their operational capacity; and
    d. Monitoring and evaluating the performance of the project and sector coordination.

Sub-Component B3: Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Transport (MoT). This included:

    a. Implementing the Integrated National Transport Sector Policy through (i) setting up of the National
         Transport and Safety Authority and support for the National Road Safety Program; (ii) setting up of
         Nairobi Metropolitan Transport Authority; (iii) establishing the legal and regulatory framework for
         railways; and (iv) setting up the Maritime Search and Rescue Unit within the MoT;
    b.   Carrying out transport sector studies on (i) developing an urban transport strategy, (ii) development
         of airstrips and air transport services at the county and regional levels, and (iii) participation of the
         private sector in the management of the port of Kisumu;
    c.   Development of navigation charts for the Kenyan Coastline, and enhancing search and rescue
         capability of Kenya on Lake Victoria;
    d.   Improvement of the maritime training facilities at the Port of Kisumu;
    e.   Strengthening of air accident investigations capacity by constructing a hangar at JKIA.

Revised Component B (revised): Sub-component B-2 (Support to the Kenya Roads Board - KRB and
MoR) and Subcomponent B-3 (Support to the Ministry of Transport - MoT) were consolidated into a new
subcomponent "Support to the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure (MoTI)" (Project Paper page 23).

Component C (original): Support to the Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) (appraisal estimate US$120.1
million, actual cost US$120.5 million). This component consisted of:

    a. Rehabilitation of Moi International Airport’s (MIAs) runway, taxiways and apron, and modernization
         of its airfield ground lighting systems;


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



      b.   Upgrading and modernizing power supply to MIA, and connection to KCAA facilities and equipment;
      c.   Provision of a new baggage-handling system at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA);
      d.   Capacity building and training of manpower in safety, security and airports management;
      e.   Augmenting water supply to JKIA and MIA; and
      f.   Supervision of construction of works.

  Component C (revised): The original scope was expanded to include emergency activities at Jomo
  Kenyatta International Airport following an accidental fire that destroyed the international arrivals facility.
  The additional scope involved: Emergency activities to install international passenger temporary and
  permanent terminal facilities at JKIA, through the provision of goods, works and services for that purpose.

  Component D (original): Support to the Kenya Civil Aviation Authority (KCAA) (appraisal estimate
  US$23.1 million, actual cost US$20.6 million). This component included following activities:

      a. Provision of technical assistance to strengthen aviation safety and oversight capacity;
      b. Technical Assistance to support the restructuring of KCAA and separation of its regulatory
           responsibilities from its service provision functions;
      c.   Construction of an office block for KCAA headquarters at JKIA;
      d.   Upgrading KCAA’s ICT facilities;
      e.   Provision of equipment to upgrade and modernize air navigation systems; and
      f.   Training in safety, security and oversight in the civil aviation industry.

  Component D (revised). No change.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$636.2 million compared to the appraisal estimate of US$
  477.8 million (ICR page 52).

  Financing. Original financing was through an IDA credit of US$300 million. Additional Financing (AF) of
  US$203.5 million was approved on March 26, 2014. The actual disbursement was US$456.0 million.
  According to the project team US$1,690,949.15 was cancelled comprising SDR 276,665.53 (US$
  381,818.29 equivalent) under the Original Credit and SDR 948,596.22 (US$ 1,309,130.86 equivalent) under
  the Additional credit at the time of Loan Closure. The balance in amount of approximately US$45.8 million
  was the foreign exchange loss. The US Dollar appreciated against the SDR over the implementation period
  of the project thereby reducing the US Dollar amount equivalent.

  Co-financing. At appraisal, the French Development Agency (AFD) committed US$ 97.54 million. The
  actual financing was US$66 million, which went towards the reconstruction of the runway and provision of
  ancillary activities at Moi International Airport, Mombasa.

  Borrower Contribution. The actual borrower contribution was US$125.6 million, significantly higher than
  the appraisal commitment of US$80.2 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on April 21, 2011, became effective on August 22, 2011, and closed on
  December 31, 2019 after a three-year delay. The project experienced delays in implementation of
  resettlement action plans, relocation of utilities/services, and late release of adequate counterpart funds and

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



   suspension and eventual termination of three contracts by contractors due to delays in payments for work
   done. The two restructurings extended the closing date to allow for completion of activities under the
   Project.

   Restructuring and/or Additional Financing (AF)

   The first restructuring on March 26, 2014 resulted in following changes (a) Additional Financing (AF) in
   the amount of US$203.5 million to increase the scope of the activities under components A and C (finance
   emergency activities to restore operations at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA) following an
   accidental fire on August 7, 2013 that destroyed the international passengers arrival facilities); and to cover
   the financing gap caused by French Development Agency (AFD) (at appraisal, AFD had committed US$
   97.54 million. This was revised to US$66 million and covered reconstruction of the runway and provision of
   ancillary activities at Moi International Airport, Mombasa); (b) revision of PDOs and results indicators; and
   (c) extension of the closing date from December 31, 2016 to December 31, 2018.

   The second restructuring on October 5, 2018 resulted in changes in the results framework; changes in
   component costs; and reallocation between disbursement categories.

   The third restructuring on December 28, 2018 resulted in change in the results framework and extension
   of closing date from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019.

   Split Rating. The three original objectives were not revised but two new objectives were added early on at
   the time of Additional Financing, which increased the scope of the project. Consequently, a split evaluation
   will not be conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Sector Context. At appraisal, 56% of Kenya’s road infrastructure was in poor condition due to lack of
maintenance, and weak and inefficient transport institutions.

The capacity of the aviation sector to sustain the tourism industry was constrained. The passenger terminal
annual capacity at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport (JKIA), a regional hub, was designed for 2.5 million,
however, it was handling 5.8 million passengers in 2011. The aviation sector has facilitated Kenya’s entry
into the global fresh flower and horticulture markets.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The project’s development objectives at appraisal and closure
were consistent with Kenya’s long-term development blueprint, Vision 2030 which aims to transform the
country into middle-income status through among other things, improvement in infrastructure; and
addressing bottlenecks to productivity and competitiveness through policy and institutional reforms.

Alignment with the Bank Strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the Bank’s Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Kenya 2014-18, which recognized Kenya as a key connector within the East
Africa Community and envisaged the rehabilitation of key transport corridors. The objectives were aligned
with the first area of engagement “Competitiveness and sustainability – growth to eradicate poverty”. The

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



               CPS expressed support for connecting communities to emerging economic opportunities. In addition, the
               Bank would support public-private partnerships in the transport sector where applicable. The Bank also
               provided an emergency response to re-build Jomo Kenyatta International Airport following the tragic fire in
               2013. The CPS was extended for two years to FY20 after the Performance and Learning Review.

               Prior Bank Experience. The previous Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project (approved in
               2006) supported major reforms including separation of policy and execution of functions and established
               Kenya National Highways Authority (KeNHA), Kenya Rural Roads Authority (KeRRA), Kenya Urban Roads
               Authority (KURA), and Kenya Maritime Authority (KMA). This project would help build the capacities of
               these transport sector institutions. It would also address the capacity constraints at Kenya’s major airports
               and enhance aviation safety and security to meet international standards.

               Development Sustainability Problem. The project sought to improve the condition of the road network
               while ensuring that adequate maintenance was carried out through strengthening road sector institutions.
               The rehabilitation of JKIA was essential to sustain and enhance Kenya’s competitiveness and tourism.
               Overall, the relevance of objectives was high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor and the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road
                             corridor.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The project’s ToC was based on the premise that the rehabilitation and
                             improvement of roads, construction of interchanges, and introduction of road safety interventions would result
                             in outcomes such as improved road condition, reduction in travel time, and reduction in road crashes; thereby
                             achieving the objective of increasing the efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor.

                             Outputs

                                        At the time of project closing, a total of 204.7 km of non-rural roads were rehabilitated compared to the
                                          target of 200 km. Also, 38.5 km of non-rural roads were constructed, against the target of 31 km.

                                        Construction of 8 out of 14 interchanges were completed. The project team informed IEG that since
                                          the preparation of the ICR, one further interchange has been completed and the remaining five are at



                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



       an advanced stage ranging between 60 to 90% (using the funding from the government. The progress
       was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Outcomes

The project interventions resulted in a reduction in travel time on project roads: (i) travel time between
Kisumu and Kitale was reduced by 2.8 hours or 56%, surpassing the target of 40%; (ii) travel time between
Bachuma Gate and Maji ya Chumvi was reduced by 1 hour or 50%, surpassing the target of 40%; and (iii)
travel time between Athi River and Machakos turnoff road section was reduced by 1.1 hours or 73%,
surpassing the target of 40%.

The road improvements resulted in more than 25% reduction of vehicle operating cost (as targeted) in the
three road sections: Kisumu-Kitale, Athi River – Machakos, and Bachuma Gate - Maji ya Chumvi.

The ICR reports (para 28 and page 69) that the project interventions (separating vehicle movements reduced
points of vehicular conflict) improved road safety, the number of road crashes along the project corridor was
reduced by 16% to 20%. No targets for road safety were set, however.

The project investments assisted in increasing the efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor by
reducing the travel time and vehicle operating costs and increasing road safety. Overall, the achievement of
this objective was substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance aviation safety and security to meet international standards.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The upgrading and modernization of navigation systems would help Kenya meet
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards and recommended practices and obtain
International Aviation Safety Assessment (IASA) Category 1 safety status. This enabled the airport to meet
the standards of a regional hub and to resume direct flights to and from the USA.

Outputs

      The KCAA was restructured through internal separation of the regulatory responsibilities from service
       provision functions. Previously, KCAA (the regulator) was housed in a rented premise of KAA, an
       organization it was supposed to oversee. The construction of an office block for KCAA has provided a
       conducive working environment for staff.

      The ICT facilities of KCAA were upgraded.



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)




        The air navigation systems were upgraded and modernized.

        Training was provided in safety, security and oversight.

Outcomes

In February 2017, Kenya was granted International Aviation Safety Assessment (IASA) Category 1 status. In
October 2018, JKIA met the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standard. Kenya is one of the 10
countries in Africa that continue to meet these standards. Overall, the achievement of this objective is high.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the institutional arrangements and capacity in the transport sector.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). By establishing the key road sector regulatory agencies, strengthening their
capacity through training, carrying out studies, and restructuring Kenya Civil Aviation Authority (KCAA), these
activities were expected to achieve the objective of improving the institutional arrangements and management
capacity in the transport sector.

Outputs

        The National Transport and Safety Authority (NTSA), a lead agency for road safety was established
         after formulation of the relevant policy supported under the project.

        The regulatory body for the construction industry, National Construction Authority (NCA) was
         established.

        The project assisted in the establishment and enhancement of the capacity of a new regulatory body,
         Engineers Board of Kenya (EBK). This regulatory body would provide oversight and professional
         development of the engineering profession. Engineer’s Act was passed.

        The regulatory framework for railways was developed, the Railway Bill 2019.

        As mentioned under the second PDO, the KCAA was restructured through the internal separation of
         the regulatory responsibilities from the service provision functions.

        The performance monitoring framework for the maritime sub-sector was developed.

        Three studies on impact and roles of new institutions were completed (as targeted).


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)




      The staff from key agencies: East Africa School of Aviation (EASA); Marine Training Institute, Kisumu;
       and Kenya Institute of Highways and Building Technology, were trained.

      The Marine Training Institute (MTI) in Kisumu was rehabilitated.

      The development of Hydrographic Navigation Charts for the Kenyan Coastline and Lake Victoria was
       not carried out as a new State Department for Maritime Affair was created and this function was not
       considered a priority at that time.

Outcomes

      The ICR reports (para 32) that the project activities improved the regulatory frameworks of the
       transport sector and enhanced the capacity of the institutions created through the reform process
       under the project as well as the preceding Bank’s Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project.
       There were no indicators to measure the improved capacity.

      The time and cost for registering contractors, engineers, vehicles and issuance of driving licenses has
       reduced significantly from several days to a few hours with the adoption of ICT based technology.

      With the establishment of NTSA, there was reduction in road accidents due to the enforcement of the
       road safety rules.

      Commencement of sanctioning of poor workmanship in the construction industry has started following
       the establishment of a regulatory body for the construction industry, the National Construction
       Authority (NCA). Cases have been taken to court, where for instance, buildings and bridges under
       construction collapsed (ICR para 84).

      The Kenya Maritime Authority (KMA) was strengthened through the development of key performance
       indicators. This resulted in the signing of a Port Charter by all the stakeholders in the maritime
       industry. The charter has bound all participants to specific actions, collective obligations, targets and
       timelines for enhanced efficiency of services. The charter has also facilitated a self-monitoring
       mechanism for the stakeholders.

      The search and rescue capability on Lake Victoria was not enhanced under this project. The KMA did
       not succeed in setting up search and rescue centers due to technicalities in the procurement of a
       consultant. However, partner countries bordering Lake Victoria including Uganda, Tanzania,
       and Kenya - successfully negotiated a project with the African Development Bank (AfDB) to develop
       search and rescue coordination capacity for Lake Victoria. Three boats were acquired and were
       deployed to Mombasa, Lamu and Kisumu Counties and are in use. This has strengthened the
       surveillance capacity along the Coast in Mombasa and Lamu, and on Lake Victoria.

Overall, the achievement of this objective is substantial.



Rating


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Restore the capacity of the international passenger arrival terminal destroyed in a fire at Jomo Kenyatta
International Airport (JKIA).

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The ToC was logical, the completion of works to replace the terminal destroyed by
the fire and the construction of temporary arrival facility, would restore the capacity of the international
passenger arrival terminal. The construction of temporary facilities was an emergency response, as
construction of permanent facilities would require more time.

Outputs

Following facilities were constructed:

      Temporary international passenger facilities (Terminal 1-E).

      A permanent arrivals facility for Terminal 1-A.

      Temporary lounges for airlines.

The project also installed an Integrated Security Management System for the temporary international
passenger terminal.

Outcomes

The passenger terminal original designed capacity (of 3 million passengers annually) was restored by the
installation of prefabricated facilities. In 2019, the terminal handled 8.2 million passengers. It should be noted
that the restored facilities useful life expires by 2024. Temporary facilities were installed, operations at the
airport restored and the facilities are still in use though the 10-year life. Overall, the rating for this objective is
substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) in disaster preparedness and responsiveness at
Kenyan airports.

Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



                            Theory of Change (ToC). The project’s activities such as providing training to the airport staff in disaster
                            preparedness and management, purchase of firefighting equipment, and technical assistance to streamline
                            the chain of command when collective action during disaster in needed, would result in the achievement of
                            the objective of strengthening the capacity of Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) in disaster preparedness and
                            responsiveness at Kenyan airports.

                            Outputs

                            The following outputs were delivered under the project:

                                  A disaster preparedness and response system was developed.

                                  The project financed the establishment of Remote Disaster Recovery Site in Moi Airport, Mombasa;
                                    and a Modernization and Remodeling of Data centre at KCAA.

                                  100 Kenyan Airport Personnel were trained in disaster preparedness and responsiveness, as
                                    targeted. The ICR does not provide any details on the content of training provided. The project team
                                    provided following details - the training was on: (a) using fire systems on controlling, containing and
                                    extinguishing incipient fires using portable fire extinguishers and hose reels, use of the hydrant
                                    system, dry riser, and manual fire alarm system; (b) using communication systems such as the radio
                                    communication system to be able to quickly respond and fight fires; (c) emergency plans and
                                    evacuation procedures; and (d) how to use manuals on disaster response that spell out the standard
                                    operating procedures, emergency plans, chain of command, and evacuation procedures that were
                                    developed as part of the project. Also, drills were conducted on how anomalies can be detected,
                                    recorded and action implemented to rectify.

                            The project streamlined the institutional arrangement at the airports by making the Chief Executive Officer of
                            KAA responsible and accountable for among things, taking the leadership at the time of emergency or
                            disaster. The development of the disaster preparedness and response system along with the training of
                            airport staff, has contributed to strengthening the capacity of Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) in disaster
                            preparedness and responsiveness at Kenyan airports. The achievement of this objective is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project increased substantially the efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor and
                            the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor, improved the institutional arrangements and capacity in the
                            transport sector, restored the capacity of the international passenger arrival terminal at Jomo Kenyatta
                            International Airport (JKIA), and strengthened the capacity of Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) in disaster


                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 19
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



  preparedness and responsiveness at Kenyan airports. The objective of the enhanced aviation safety and
  security is rated high. The overall efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

The Highway Development and Management (HDM-4) model version 2.10 was used for the cost benefit
analysis of the roads rehabilitated and constructed under the project. The methodology was similar to that
adopted during appraisal. The ex-post Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for the main road section were higher
than the ex-ante ERR:

        Kisumu – Kakamega, ex-post 21.5%, ex-ante 19.9%;
        Kakamega – Webuye, ex-post 68.1%, ex-ante 63.3%;
        Webuye – Kitale, ex-post 43.3%, ex-ante 42.2%;
        Bachuma Gate – Maji Ya Chumvi, ex-post 31.7%, ex-ante 25%.

At appraisal, the ERR for the investments in the aviation sector was 21%. No analysis was carried out at
completion.

Administrative Efficiency

Most procurement was done in a timely manner. However, there were contract amendments due to changes in
the design of civil works due to unprecedented changes in the growth in traffic and also a need to address road
safety. This resulted in significant increase in contract prices (Kisumu – Kakamega, contract price increased by
79%, Kakamega – Webuye, by 25%, and Webuye – Kitale, by 64% (ICR paras 43, 45 and 46). There were
delays in the implementation of resettlement action plans, relocation of utilities/services, and late release of
counterpart funds, which resulted in a project extension.

Although, for all road sections (which constitute 83% of the project funds), the ERRs were slightly higher than
the appraisal estimates, the overall efficiency is rated modest because of the administrative efficiency issues
discussed above.


Efficiency Rating
Modest




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  53.00
Appraisal                                                37.90
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  58.00
ICR Estimate                                             41.20
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the Bank and country priorities. The project increased the
efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor and the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor, enhanced
aviation safety and security, improved the institutional arrangements and capacity in the transport sector,
restored the capacity of the international passenger arrival terminal at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport
(JKIA), and strengthened the capacity of Kenya Airports Authority (KAA) in disaster preparedness and
responsiveness at Kenyan airports. Efficacy is rated substantial. However, efficiency is rated modest due the
administrative efficiency issues and the lack of an ERR for the aviation works. The overall outcome is
moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Roads Sector

Operations and Management (O&M) Risk. The O&M of the roads rehabilitated and reconstructed under
the project will be done through long term performance-based maintenance contracts financed from a
dedicated Road Fund. The implementation of performance-based road maintenance contracts is an essential
element of road asset management - it promotes effective and efficient maintenance of road networks.
These contracts keep roads in predefined good condition at relatively low cost. The O&M risk is considered
low.

Institutional Risk. The project supported reforms that empowered road agencies and clarified their roles
and responsibilities in road sector management, thereby ensuring enough attention is given to maintenance
which is consistent with the road policy. The institutional risk is considered low.

Aviation Sector

Institutional Risk. The risk in the enhancement of aviation safety and security to meet international
standards is high due to: (a) lack of a coherent aviation strategy covering financing and management of

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



airports; (b) the loss of revenue following closure of the airports between March-August 2020 due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Nevertheless, the Bank, through another project, has assisted the government to
procure a consultant to draft an aviation policy and a plan to ensure that Kenya sustains its category 1
status.

Technical Risk. Although the capacity of the international passenger terminal destroyed in a fire at JKIA was
restored under the project, the design life for these temporary facilities is 10 years, ending in 2024. The
project team informed IEG that KAA carried out a detailed engineering design in 2017/18 to construct
permanent facilities under the proposed Bank financed Kenya Aviation Modernization Project (P156971).The
technical risk is therefore low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives were relevant to the priority needs of the sector. This made the project design
  complex as it included roads, aviation, and maritime transport sub-sectors. The project risks and
  associated mitigation measures were identified in detail in the PAD. The M&E design was adequate
  except for the lack of an indicator to measure the third PDO “improve the institutional arrangements and
  capacity in the transport sector”. There was an appropriate plan for monitoring and evaluation by the
  University of Nairobi.

  Three major road rehabilitation and associated supervision consultancy services contracts were awarded
  by the time the project was presented to the Board for approval (accounting for 39% of the original
  credit). This demonstrated readiness for implementation. Overall, the quality at entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team's field presence provided day-to-day interaction with the client and the implementing
 agencies received real-time support on technical, fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project. The
 team swiftly processed the Additional Financing to support rehabilitation works at JKIA after the fire. The
 task team organized workshops on procurement which included (a) preparation of bidding documents, (b)
 how to carry out evaluations including identification of fraud and corruptions in bids, and (c) disbursement
 guidelines. The Bank Team Co-chaired the “Development Partners in Transport” group and took the lead in
 sector coordination meetings. However, there were shortcomings related to compliance with social
 safeguards which were rated moderately unsatisfactory at project closure, as reported by the ICR (para
 92). These related to delays in land acquisition (see section 10 a for details). Based on this, the supervision
 is moderately satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The University of Nairobi was hired as a monitoring consultant to carry out project M&E. This was expected
 to strengthen the link between academia and the road construction industry (PAD par 48).

 The main outcome indicator was the reduction of travel time and transport cost on the Northern Corridor
 and the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridors. The outcome indicators were adequate in measuring the
 achievement of the project objectives. However, there was no indicator to measure road safety. No
 baselines were provided in the PAD as the M&E consultant was responsible for collecting the baseline
 data.

 At the time of Additional financing, two PDOs indicators were added to measure the achievement of the
 additional objectives: "Passenger terminal capacity restored by installation of prefabricated facilities; and
 "Number of Kenyan Airport Personnel trained in disaster preparedness and responsiveness strengthened".

 The main weaknesses in M&E design was that there were no indicators to measure the third PDO “improve
 the institutional arrangements and capacity in the transport sector”.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E for road contracts was done by internationally recruited construction supervision consultants
  who prepared monthly progress reports (ICR para 82). The ICR further reports (paras 83 and 84) that the
  M&E data was collected and analyzed. Annual monitoring reports were prepared by the consultant
  and shared with the Borrower and the project team.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were disseminated during annual workshops and discussed with the implementing
  agencies. The consultant highlighted risks during one monitoring workshop and mitigation measures
  were addressed.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Appraisal. The project was classified as Category "B" and three safeguard policies were triggered:
   Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11). Potential environmental impacts included soil erosion and disturbance of water flows, water
   pollution, traffic disruption, noise and dust pollution, and disturbance to flora and fauna. Environmental
   assessments (EA) for the five road sections were carried out and Environmental Management Plans
   (EMPs) were disclosed both in country and at the Bank’s InfoShop (PAD para 70).

   The project would result in permanent and/or temporary land acquisition and in a very few cases the loss of
   property along the road corridors. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) approved by the World Bank
   in March 2004 for the Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project was updated for this project. All six
   Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) associated with the rehabilitation of road sections were disclosed both in
   country and at the Bank’s InfoShop (PAD para 67).

   Implementation. The ICR reports (para 90) that at times the project was not fully compliant with the
   environmental safeguards policy. For example, in November 2018, the rating for environmental assessment
   was downgraded from satisfactory to moderately satisfactory, due to non-compliance with the
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). This included: (i) poor management of auxiliary
   facilities (quarry and borrow sites); (ii) health and safety risks and incidents at construction sites; (iii)
   community complaints on drainage and lack of access to residential homes; and (iv) the Inspection Panel
   case on Webuye Interchange. A complaint was submitted to the Bank’s Inspection Panel in February 2018
   alleging that the Webuye interchange had compromised community health and safety by exposing
   vulnerable people to the risks of dust and hazardous pollutants in the air, soil and water. In April 2019 and
   December 2019, the Bank Board approved the Inspection Panel’s recommendations to defer a decision on
   whether to investigate the complaints. Both deferrals provided Bank Management and Government of
   Kenya time to address the complainants’ concerns. The Panel submitted its third and final eligibility report to
   the Board on June 9, 2020 with the recommendation not to investigate the concerns raised.

   At project closure, some safeguards activities related to component A were outstanding. These were:
   (a) restoration of Mwoki Primary School quarry; (b) restoration of the Gambogi camp site; (c) Keveye
   drainage system works; and (d) restoration of the Nabuyore quarry. The ICR notes (para 90) that the
   compliance with environmental safeguards was moderately satisfactory.

   At project closure, the compliance with social safeguards was assessed by the ICR (para 92) as moderately
   unsatisfactory because of non-compliance with Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). This was because (a)
   the original engineering design for the interchanges was not based on minimization on resettlement,
   resulting in resettlement related complaints; (b) lengthy and delayed implementation of RAP due to design
   updates as well as insufficient Government counterpart funds; (c) the compensation of the project affected
   persons was not completed before commencement of works; (d) lack of systematic stakeholders
   engagement and grievance redress processes.

   On the compliance with the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) safeguards policy, the ICR notes
   (para 91) that cultural practices were followed during relocation of graves encountered during works. The
   project team mentioned that community graves were identified under Maji ya Chumvi - Bachuma road


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



   section and Ahero interchange location and the chance find procedures were followed in relocation of the
   graves.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The ICR reports that the FM was adequate and that the project complied
   with the Bank’s financial reporting requirements. There were initial delays in submission of Interim
   Financial Reports (IFRs) by the State Department of Infrastructure and by the Kenya Airports Authority at
   the end of project. This was addressed by the responsible agencies. On average, the quarterly IFRs and
   the Annual Audit Reports were submitted on time (para 97). There were no outstanding audit issues at
   closure. The counterpart funds was not released in time and in many instances, inadequate (ICR para
   72). Due to the unprecedented challenges presented by COVID-19 pandemic, the disbursement deadline
   was extended from April 30, 2020 to June 30, 2020 (ICR par a18).

   Procurement. The procurement was undertaken in accordance with World Bank Guidelines. The agencies
   used the Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). As a result, the procurement
   for most contracts was timely (ICR para 45). There were some minor delays in the initiation of procurement
   of a contractor for construction of the office building for the road agencies by KeNHA as well as
   procurement of vehicles for the State Department of Infrastructure (SDoI). The ICR reports (para 95) that
   selective application of both Bank and Government procurement regulations was noted as a challenge in a
   few instances. Procurement performance for the project was rated as moderately satisfactory in the ISRs.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   Several socio-economic facilities were constructed alongside the road works contracts. These included:
   several classrooms in various schools (performance of pupils in the national examinations of these schools
   improved significantly and majority of the pupils were absorbed into secondary schools and
   colleges), dispensaries including a maternity wing as an Annex to an existing hospital facility, market
   structures to accommodate roadside traders to create a safer and more conducive environment to do
   business, boreholes and piping of water for communities and bus parks among others.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



                                                                                   There were shortcomings
 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    related to compliance with social
                                                                                   safeguards.
 Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

 Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons were selected from the ICR, with modification of the language:

        Proper project planning and harmonization of work plans and budgets is essential.
         This will ensure availability of funds to pay for work done and will in turn allow contractors
         and consultants to proceed with works without interruptions as well as ensure that the
         Resettlement Action Plans are implemented early enough before commencement of works,
         and relocation of utilities is synchronized with the program of works. Hence, losses arising
         from interests on delayed payments and cost overruns will be minimized.

        Effective contract management is essential for the successful performance of a
         project. The project implementation teams need to ensure that contract clauses are
         reviewed and fully understood by all team members during preparation of the contract.
         Development and utilization of Key Performance Indicators for monitoring of progress of
         works in contracts is essential.

        Inclusion of the provision of social-economic infrastructure and services to support
         host communities enhances the benefits of a project. To upgrade roads to sustainable
         services, infrastructure such as schools, dispensaries, market facilities etc. plays an
         important role and complements the improvement of the quality of life of beneficiary
         communities. This increases communities support for the project and such interventions
         should be incorporated in the scope of project where appropriate.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is results oriented, it provides evidence to support the narrative and the ratings. It is consistent with the
OPCS guidelines. The lessons are sound and based on project experience. However, there are a few
shortcomings: (a) no economic analysis for the aviation sector was carried out at completion; (b) no details on
training were provided to Kenyan Airport Personnel in disaster preparedness and responsiveness, and (c) the




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE:Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)



ICR is also excessively long, with the main text at 33 pages (more than double the recommended length of 15
pages of the main text).

Overall, the quality of ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 19 of 19
