     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022506

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P116199                                     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab.

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                          Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-11639,TF-18207                          30-Jun-2017                                            22,948,820.43

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Mar-2012                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             23,000,000.00                                     23,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              23,000,000.00                                     23,000,000.00

 Actual                                          22,948,820.43                                     22,948,820.43




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Joel J. Maweni              Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original Project Objective: As stated in Trust Fund Agreement Number TF011639, dated March 23, 2012,
   (page 6) the original project objective was “to rehabilitate and expand the electricity networks in Gaza in order
   to improve their reliability and performance”.  

   Revised Project Objective: The project underwent a comprehensive level 1 restructuring with Additional
   Financing (AF) in 2014 following severe damages to the electricity network during the Gaza war of that


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



   year. Trust Agreement Number TF18207 for the additional financing, dated December 7, 2014
   (page 1) stated that the revised project objective was “to restore and improve basic electricity services in
   Gaza”. 

   The revised PDO shifted the project’s focus from improving network performance and reliability
   to restoration and improvement of electricity services to pre-conflict levels. Several new indicators for
   connection of beneficiaries, households, commercial consumers, hospital and clinics and water pumping
   stations were added to the results framework.  In a second and third restructuring some indicators were
   dropped as they were considered no longer achievable or relevant -- distributed capacity in GWh in 2017 and
   revenue collection in 2018. In the restructurings some reconnection targets were also revised downwards. 

   For the purposes of this review a split evaluation will be done to assess the project’s achievements throughout
   its entire life against its: (a) Original objectives; and (b) Objectives after the 1st restructuring with Additional
   Financing. 



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Dec-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had the following two components and subcomponents: 

   Network Rehabilitation and Expansion 

   The estimated cost for this component at appraisal was US$11.60 million, excluding contingencies.
   The component comprised the following three subcomponents:

         1. Subcomponent 1: Rehabilitation of medium and low voltage networks 

         2. Subcomponent 2: Network Supply Improvement comprising construction of new network facilities to
           improve the performance of the electricity supply in Gaza, i.e., 22kV underground feeders from the
           Gaza Power Plant, reconfiguration and expansion of the medium and low voltage networks, and new
           22kV underground feeders from the proposed 161kV north substation.

         3. Subcomponent 3: Collection Improvement – which included purchase of mobile billing PCs and
           installation of pre-paid meters and supporting equipment to support electricity tariffs collection. 



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



  Gaza Electricity Distribution Company (GEDCO) Capacity Building and Technical Assistance to the
  Palestinian Energy Authority (PEA)  

  The estimated cost for this component at appraisal was US$3.40 million, excluding contingencies all of which
  was to be financed by the Bank. The objective of the component was to increase the capacity of GEDCO in
  system operation and management as well as to provide technical assistance to the PEA by implementing
  the following two subcomponents.  

      1. Supply of vehicles and IT systems to GEDCO - including procurement of vehicles, IT systems,
         including hardware and software and tools, GIS and load flow hardware and software .

      2. Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance to PEA including recruitment of a consulting firm
         to assist PEA in preparing a master plan for the electricity sector in Gaza, and an audit firm for project
         costs. 

  The total estimated project costs for both components at appraisal was US$16 million, including US$1
  million in contingencies and was to be financed by the World Bank and the Islamic Development Bank
  (IsDB), with each institution financing US$8 million. 

  Revisions in Project Components 

  Component 1 was revised during the Level 1 restructuring in 2014 to include: additional reconstruction and
  rehabilitation activities, and to provide urgently needed goods and materials for emergency
  repairs.  Procurement of 25,000 additional prepaid meters was added to support the PDO of re-establishing
  revenue collection.  These were additional to another 10,000 that had already been purchased by the
  Palestinian Energy and Natural Resources Authority (PENRA). Funding for the additional meters was
  redirected from the two activities that were dropped, i.e., mobile billing PCs from component 1 and financial
  management information system from component 2.  In subsequent revisions the additional meters were
  dropped during the 2018 restructuring when it became clear that the activity could not be implemented
  within the project’s life given an unsuccessful first procurement attempt and the need to prepare a proper
  metering plan before a second attempt at rebidding.  The funds released by dropping the metering
  activity were used to finance an expansion of the distribution Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
  (SCADA) system to include auto-reclosures. A fully functional SCADA performs automatic
  monitoring, protecting, and controlling of various distribution equipment, thus, helping to
  improve the reliability of supply and cost effectiveness of system operations.

  Component 2 was revised during the Level 1 restructuring in 2014 to drop the management information
  system activity as mentioned above and to include a subcomponent for Project Management Unit (PMU)
  operating costs, vehicles and office furniture; and to provide tools and equipment to allow GEDCO to
  undertake urgent repairs and maintenance.

  The total revised estimated project costs for both components after the Level 1 restructuring was US$31
  million, including the Bank’s additional financing of US$15 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



   At appraisal total project costs were estimated at US$16 million (including US$1 million for contingencies)
   and financing was split evenly between the Bank and the IsDB with each institution financing US$8 million.
   An additional financing grant of US$15 million was approved by the Bank in December 2014 together with a
   Level 1 restructuring which increased total project costs to US$31 million. 

   Actual total project costs of US$29.51 million were below the estimated total of US$31 million. The difference
   of about US$1.49 million was due to an undisbursed balance of US$1.44 million
   of the IsDB financing and a small discrepancy of about US$51,000 in the amount reported as disbursed on
   the data sheet (US$22.95 million) and that shown in Annex 3 (US$22.99 million) of the ICR. 

   Dates 

   The project’s original closing date was December 31, 2015.  The first closing date extension for 18 months to
   June 30,2017 was granted at the time of the Level 1 restructuring to allow enough time for implementation
   of the additional activities to restore basic electricity services after the Gaza war of that year. Three
   additional extensions were granted with the final 6 months extension to June 30,2020, to allow for delivery of
   auto-reclosers for the distribution SCADA system. The project implementation period was 8 years compared
   to the estimate of 5 years at the time of the Level 1 restructuring with additional Financing in 2014. 




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: The project was prepared in the context of efforts to reconstruct Gaza’s economy after
several years of an economic crisis exacerbated by the conflict with Israel in 2008.  The conflict, blockade of
entry of goods and services to the Gaza strip and general neglect had severely degraded
infrastructure and compromised provision of services.  According to the PAD, the Palestinian National
Development Plan (2011-2013) included about US$1.3 billion for the Gaza recovery and restructuring
requirements, of which about 40% was for infrastructure, including electricity. With peak demand at about
280MW in 2010 and available capacity of 167-197 MW demand was severely constrained. The sources of
electricity for Gaza were Israel (120 MW), Egypt (17-32 MW) and the Gaza Power Plant (60-140 MW).   

 In addition to the inadequacies of the power provided by the three sources, the Gaza network had many
constraints, including: (a) overloaded and limited capacity of medium and low voltage feeders connecting
the supply points and the main load centers; (b) inadequate capacity of LV networks to meet existing loads,
unsafe installations, low reliability, and voltage profiles; and (c) high network losses of about 30%. 

Hence, apart from addressing shortages of power supply, increasing the capacity of the distribution network
was the most important priority for Gaza's electricity sector at the time. 

Alignment with strategies: The project was aligned with the Palestinian National Development Plan (2011-
2013) which allocated more than US$500 million for rehabilitation and reconstruction of infrastructure
(including electricity) in Gaza.  The original project was aligned with the Interim Strategy for the West Bank
and Gaza (FY12-14) which was then under preparation. The pillars of the Interim



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



               Strategy were: (a) strengthening the institutions of a future state to efficiently manage public finances and
               ensure services to citizens; and (b) creating an enabling environment for private sector-led growth.

                At closure the World Bank Group’s Assistance Strategy for the West Bank and Gaza (FY18-21) had three
               pillars covering: (a) Setting the conditions for increased private sector investments and job creation (Pillar
               1); (b) Private Sector Enhancement Facility to realize private sector investments; and (c) Addressing the
               needs of the vulnerable and strengthening institutions for improved citizen-centered service delivery. Thus,
               the Assistance strategy focuses on private sector led growth, job creation and supporting service delivery to
               the citizens, especially the vulnerable.

               In the electricity sector the strategy is to support: (a) reforms of key sectoral institutions such as the
               regulator and the Palestinian transmission company - the latter is responsible for negotiating power
               purchases from Israel and selling to distribution companies in the territories; and (b) private sector
               investments, especially in renewables. In Gaza the development of IPP projects and
               the utilization of additional power purchases from Israel will make use of the network that has been
               strengthened under this project and its continued sustainable operation is therefore essential. Thus, the
               project continued to be relevant and aligned to the Bank strategy at closure.

               In addition, by reconnecting 190,000 persons to electricity services and improving supply for another 1.8
               million persons the project has contributed to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of reducing poverty
               and increasing shared prosperity. The project also supported the Middle East and North Africa strategy
               by facilitating growth through the provision of services and laying the foundations for future participation of
               the private sector in Gaza’s development.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the reliability of electricity networks in Gaza

                             Rationale
                             At project inception the availability of power supply was neither adequate nor reliable and those with access
                             were receiving only 6-8 hours of electricity per day (page 7 of the ICR).  Available power from all sources
                             (Israel and Egypt, and local generation from the Gaza Power Plant) was about 167-197 MW compared to a
                             peak demand of about 280MW.   However, the constraint was not only availability of power but also the
                             dilapidated electricity transmission and distribution network.  The project was intended to remove the network
                             constraints through rehabilitation and expansion of the MV/LV networks, thus enabling delivery of more and
                             reliable electricity to consumers, when bulk supplies were available from imports and local generation.  


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



Theory of change  

The ICR presents, in diagrammatic form, the causal links between rehabilitation of LV/MV networks and
construction of new ones in high load growth areas and in improved network reliability.  While the causal link
between the activities and outputs is clear in the Theory of Change in the ICR, the linkage to reliability
outcomes is vague in both the ICR and the results framework.  Specifically, the indicators and targets of
network reliability were not stated in the results framework at appraisal and are also not stated in the ICR.
The ICR acknowledges as much on page 19 when it states that “However, it would have been prudent if an
indicator of reliability was considered as part of the results framework to monitor improvement towards
network management." However, despite the shortcomings in the results framework, the rehabilitation and
construction of LV/MV distribution networks would, by strengthening grid, lead to improvements in reliability of
power supply.

Outputs  

The ICR indicates completion of the outputs listed below. The comparative target estimates are from the
Project Appraisal Document and the 1st Restructuring Paper (2014).

    1. 464km of distribution networks (LV lines mostly) were rehabilitated or constructed compared to the
       original target of 161km. 

    2. 157km of transmission lines (MV lines mostly) were rehabilitated or constructed exceeding the target
       of 36km.

    3. Distribution feeders’ capacity increased by 40MVA.

    4. transformer capacity was increased by 100MVA.

    5. a distribution SCADA system was expanded beyond the original design and was completed shortly
       after project closure. 

    6. Completed Gaza master plan

    7. Institutionalization of IT systems, hardware, and software packages to support GEDCO’s
       planning, operation, and management of the network, including GIS and software for network load
       flow analysis.

The differences between the actual and target figures for LV/MV lines represents the additional quantities
added for the Additional Financing. Therefore, the output targets for the project inclusive of the AF were fully
achieved.

Outcomes

As noted above the results framework did not provide PDO indicators and targets for assessing achievement
of this PDO. However, both the Borrower in their contribution to the ICR and the task team
have indicated some improvements in network reliability as result of network capacity improvements,



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



including installation of the SCADA system.  The improvements include, in as far as the reliability of service is
concerned:  

    1. an increase in the number of hours in which customers have electricity service from 6-8 hours per day
       to 8-16 hours per day because of the project; and 

    2.  improvements in outage management, including improved location of faults and faster reaction time to
       remedy them.   

Thus, despite the absence of monitoring data to confirm the reduction in the frequency and duration of
outages, given the scope of completed works for the rehabilitation and construction of the grid, and the
increased number of hours of electricity services available to connected consumers, achievement of
this objective is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To restore basic electricity services in Gaza

Revised Rationale
The rationale was to shift the focus away from an emphasis on network expansion and improved performance
and reliability to restoration and improvement of basic electricity services following the extensive damages to
the network. There was also an effort to restore revenue collection performance by adding 25, 000 prepaid
meters, although this was later dropped as noted above.

Theory of Change

On page 16 the ICR presents the theory of change at completion and after all restructurings. The theory of
changes includes: (a) the same rehabilitation and construction activities for LV and MV networks as at
appraisal except that the scope had been increased to restore the damaged network and complete the
original activities; (b) expansion of the SCADA system by installing auto-reclosers and related equipment; and
(c) financing of operating costs, vehicles, office furniture and equipment for the Project Management
Unit. Two original activities – a financial management information system and PC billing devices were
dropped. The decision was made to release funds for more prepaid meters to restore revenue
collection performance.

The expansion of the SCADA was included in the project only after the 3rd restructuring in 2018.

There is a strong causal link between these revised activities, the outputs, and the expected
outcomes for restoring electricity services.

Outputs


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



The actual outputs achieved under the network rehabilitation and construction component were as described
under objective 1:

.Outcomes

The achievement of this objective is assessed against the customer reconnection indicators/targets that were
set in the 1st restructuring paper - households, communities, commercial, water pumping stations, and
hospitals. The actual customer reconnections that were achieved compared to the targets are as follows:

    1.   Households' reconnections for 190,000 beneficiaries compared to 190,000
    2.   650 community reconnections compared to the target of 1056
    3.   90 water pumping stations reconnections compared to the target of 97
    4.   600 commercial reconnections compared to the target of 950
    5.   9 hospitals reconnections compared to the target of 9

The ICR reports on the targets after all the restructurings while the targets referred to here are those after the
1st restructuring which are the relevant basis for this split evaluation. In assessing the shortfalls on
community connections, it should be noted that there was: (a) a reduction from 1056 to 740 recorded in the
restructuring paper of 2017 due to the uptake of some reconnections by other financiers; and (b) a
discrepancy between the figure of 740 and the target of 650 shown in the ICR. The target for commercial
reconnections was reduced to 600 during the 2017 restructuring.

Except for the shortfalls on community, commercial and water pumping stations reconnections compared to
the targets set at the Level 1 Restructuring, the project almost fully achieved all the indicator its targets; hence
Objective 1 Revision 1 is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the performance of the electricity networks in Gaza

Rationale
At project appraisal, revenue collection was low at about 40% of billed electricity and system losses were high
at 30% of the energy delivered to the network.  The rationale for the project’s focus on loss reduction was to
increase the amount of electricity available to the consumers while the focus on enhanced revenue collection
was to support financial performance and viability of the utility.  Thus, network loss reduction and revenue
collection were the two metrics that were included in the results framework for measuring outcomes.

Theory of change

Several project activities were to support the reduction in network losses. These included the network
rehabilitation and expansion, the addition of transformer capacity, and the provision of maintenance tools and


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



equipment. For revenue collection improvement, the project included installation of pre-paid meters and the
purchase of mobile billing devices.

The project’s capacity building and technical assistance component was intended to support: (a) GEDCO in
strengthening its capabilities to plan, operate and manage the distribution network through provision of
information systems, hardware and software, including GIS and load flow software packages. Improved
GEDCO capacity would lead to improved planning, management and operation of the network resulting
in delivery of enhanced quality services to consumers.

The technical assistance to PENRA was intended to support preparation of a Gaza master plan to identify a
least cost generation, transmission, and distribution plan for up to 20 years. The plan was to provide a basis
for future investments, including by the private sector for development of the sector. The master plan, shown
as an intermediate indicator in the results framework for the project was fully achieved. The master
plan could contribute to improvement of the network in the short, medium, and long term, though not
in a direct measurable way, to this project’s development objectives at project closure.

Outputs

The activities and outputs supporting reduction in network losses were the same as for objective 1 above.  

For the revenue collection objective about 11,500 prepaid meters purchased by PENRA were installed
prior the project restructuring in 2014.  PC/mobile billing devices which had been included to help with
improvement of billing were dropped from the project activities during the project restructuring.  

Outcomes  

The outcome of this objective is assessed in relation to network loss reduction and revenue collection - the two
metrics included in the results framework. In addition, consideration is given to improvements in outage
management as stated in the ICR as well as the increased hours of electricity supply to customers because
of the project. 

 Initial losses at project appraisal were 30% and the project end target was set at 20%.  At the time of the
2014 project restructuring losses had increased to 40% due to the damages inflicted on the network during
the military conflict with Israel in that year. The end project target was revised to 30% just to restore
performance to pre-conflict level but was further revised to 23% during project restructuring in 2018. The level
of losses at project completion was 28% and was, thus, above the target of 20% set for this objective.

The baseline revenue collection indicator was 40% at project appraisal and the target was to achieve 70% by
project completion. Revenue collection virtually collapsed during the 2014 war with Israel and the indicator
was revised to 40% just to restore performance to pre-conflict levels. Finally, the indicator was entirely
dropped during project restructuring in 2018 due to difficulties in revenue collection in an environment
of continued economic fragility in Gaza and due to the delayed installation of 25,000 more prepaid meters
which had been added during the 2014 level 1 restructuring to support revenue collection.  

Since the revenue collection indicator and associated target was dropped and not reported on by the ICR, it
can -for practical purposes - be considered not achieved. The network loss reduction was significantly, though
not fully achieved.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



Two more outcomes which are not part of the results framework are an improvement in quality of supply and
an increase in the hours of electricity supply from 6-8 hours to 8-16 hours per day for connected customers.
The former, although claimed by the ICR, cannot be assessed due to lack of outage data, while the increase in
the hours of electricity supply from 6-8 hours to 8-16 hours per day for connected customers is an important
outcome that should be credited to the project 

The overall rating for the original objectives is modest. The rationale for the rating is because network loss
reductions, while large, fell short of the 20% target and revenue collection was not reported on at the end of
the project, having been dropped in later restructurings. The overall rating does, however, credit the project for
enabling connected customers to have increased hours of electricity from 6-8 hours per day to 8-16 hours by
project closure.  



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve basic electricity services in Gaza

Revised Rationale
The project development objective was revised in 2014 with two distinct objectives: to
“restore” and “improve” the basic electricity services in Gaza. On page 17, the ICR does acknowledge the
two parts to the PDO in the statement: “The project had two objectives: to restore and improve basic electricity
services in Gaza.”  It links achievement of the objective of restoring services to the improvement of the
network capacity, through rehabilitation and expansion activities, replacement of transformers and
construction of more feeders.

The ICR further links achievement of the objective “to improve basic electricity services in
Gaza” to the “expansion of the SCADA system through the addition of auto-reclosers", which “enabled faster
clearance of faults on the MV network, thus improving electricity services to the customers.” However,
it should be noted that the decision to include auto-reclosers was taken only in 2018, while the objective was
set in the 2014 1st restructuring paper.  Further, the ICR presents no data on electricity outages and fault
clearance responses to support the argument that the project resulted in improvements in the quality
of electricity services. In addition, the auto-reclosers and other equipment for the expansion of the
SCADA were delivered to Gaza only in December 2020, after the project had closed. 

Nevertheless, there are three project development indicators included in the restructured project that can be
used to assess the project’s contribution to the improvement of basic electricity services -- reduction
in network losses, improvement in revenue collection and increased distribution supply capacity in GWh. 

Network losses decreased from 40% to 28% exceeding the target of 30% that was set at the
1st restructuring The actual losses at 28%, although higher than the subsequently (2017) revised target of
23% was substantial and an important improvement in network performance. Actual values of the distribution
supply capacity and revenue collection targets, of 230 GWh per annum and 40%
respectively, were not reported in the ICR and appear to have deteriorated due to macroeconomic conditions

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



                              and shortage of power supply to Gaza. These indicators had been dropped in the 2nd and
                              3rd restructuring papers, respectively.

                              In addition to the three indicators, an improvement in basic electricity services (reduction in number and
                              duration of outages, better improved voltages) would have occurred given the substantial achievements in
                              strengthening the LV/MV networks and GEDCO’s repair and maintenance capacity. The increased number
                              of hours of connection to electricity from 6-8 hours/day to 8-16 hours for some 1.8 million people corroborates
                              the assessment that the project was impactful in improving basic electricity services to Gaza; hence Objective
                              2 Revised is rated substantial.

                              The higher rating for the Objective 2 Revision 1 is because under the revised objective the loss reduction
                              target set at restructuring was exceeded (28% compared to a 30% target) whereas it had been significantly
                              not met under the original objective.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The operation was partially successful in meeting its original objectives of improving reliability and
                            performance of the Gaza electricity network. It, however, almost fully achieved the revised objectives of
                            restoring basic electricity services to the Gazan population and improving performance of the network under a
                            revised, fuller, and clearer results framework. The rehabilitation and reconstruction of the network enabled
                            the utility to reconnect substantial numbers of customers who had been disconnected due to the military
                            conflict in 2014; to reduce network losses significantly thereby making more power supply available; and to
                            increase the number of hours of electricity supply from 6-8 hours per day to 8-16 hours per day. However, in
                            other respects, the project was less successful in improving revenue collection, utilizing improved network
                            capacity to distribute targeted levels of energy.

                            Project efficacy ratings were derived for two sets of objectives: original and after the 1st restructuring. The
                            overall efficacy rating for pre-restructuring is Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            For description see above.



                                                                                                                                Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



  Project efficacy ratings were derived for two sets of objectives: original and after the 1st restructuring. The
  overall efficacy rating for post-restructuring is Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The analysis of the Gaza electricity sector at appraisal stage confirmed that, apart from the power supply deficit
faced at the time, the distribution constraint was the most critical issue faced by the sector. Hence, the project
was designed to relieve this constraint through rehabilitation and strengthening of the LV and MV line and
related facilities. Improving the distribution network was expected to unlock several economic benefits, the most
important ones being reduction in system losses, reductions in operating costs and increased power sales to
consumers and increased distribution capacity.

A conservative estimate of the project's EIRR at appraisal was based on two streams of benefits - technical loss
reductions and increased ability to serve load growth. The ex-ante EIRR was estimated at 35% and was heavily
dependent on the technical loss reductions. About 10% reduction in total losses was assumed of which 50%
was assumed to be technical losses.

The ICR has included 4 streams of benefits in the EIRR (technical loss reduction. reductions in operating costs,
ability to serve load growth and incremental sales values to consumers. Network losses are assumed to
have decreased by 12% and the Project to have contributed to 50% of the reduction in technical losses. The
ICR EIRR is 33%.

Although the ex-ante and ex-post calculations of the EIRR are not directly comparable because of the
differences in benefit streams, it is worth noting that the ICR calculation is more conservative as it takes
only 50% of technical loss reduction and not the entire technical loss reduction because of the problem of
attribution. Further, for both the ex-ante and ex-post analysis the loss reduction values are guestimates and
cannot be robustly determined. The validity of loss reduction in the economic benefits derives from the
assessment that technical losses reduction would have been substantial given the level of investment that was
implemented.

Other assumptions include a retail tariff of US$0.1108/kWh increasing at an average annual rate of 3.5%,
annual sales of 230GWh, operating costs of 5% of incremental sales revenue.

The ex-ante and ex-post economic rates of return are about the same despite the different assumptions. Such
high rates of return are quite typical of electricity distribution rehabilitation projects, especially when the
improvements are implemented on a network in a very poor condition.

Administrative efficiency

Efficiency of resource use has been incorporated in the project's economic analysis through increased project
costs because of long delays.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



Nevertheless, given that the project was implemented over 8 years instead of 5 years including the additional
time for implementing the expanded project after the AF. Due to the 3 years delay both the Bank and the
Borrower would have incurred significantly more administrative costs to implement the project. The Bank's
original supervision cost estimate was about US$350,000 over three years compared with actual costs of about
US$776,982 over 8 years. The high supervision costs are also attributable to the FCV context in which the
project was implemented, including the constant follow up that the task team needed to do on procurement and
M&E issues. The Borrower would have experienced large cost increases for the duration of the project as well,
due to the repeated procurements, and the follow up to get materials and equipment allowed into Gaza.

An efficiency rating of Substantial is assigned because the ex-ante and ex-post EIRR are about the
same. Although, there is some uncertainty regarding the level of the most important component of project
benefits (loss reduction) and that of administrative costs given a substantial delay in project implementation, the
impact of these factors is not considered material enough to warrant a lower rating.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  35.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               33.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original Objectives (Objectives 1 and 2)

The relevance of the objectives was Substantial as described above. The efficacy was Modest because no
specific data were made available to confirm achievement of the objective of improving network reliability; for
network performance improvement, loss reduction level of 28% was significantly short of the
20% target, and revenue collection did not improve by project closure. The project is, however, credited with
enabling an increase in the number of hours of power supply to connected customers from 6-8 to 8-16. The
project’s efficiency was Substantial. Thus, the outcome was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory per OPCS
guidelines when the Efficacy rating is in the Modest range.

Objectives after 1st restructuring (Objective 1 Revision 1 and Objective 2 Revision 1)

The relevance of the objectives was Substantial. The efficacy was Substantial because, based on the indicators
set during the 1st restructuring the objectives of restoring and improving basic electricity services were both

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



almost fully met as customer reconnections were largely achieved, network loss reductions exceeded the target
of 30%, and the number of hours of access to electricity services approximately doubled as a result of the
project. The project’s efficiency was Substantial. Thus, the outcome after the first restructuring
is rated Satisfactory

As calculated in the table below, the overall outcome is Satisfactory. Per IEG Guidelines, the project is rated
against two sets of objectives separately, for the entire duration of the project – not just the period for which
each of the objectives was in effect.



Rating dimension             Original Objectives                Objectives after 1st restructuring
Relevance                    Substantial                        Substantial
Efficacy                     Modest                             Substantial
Efficiency                   Substantial                        Substantial
Outcome rating               Moderately Unsatisfactory          Satisfactory
Outcome rating weight        3                                  5
Amount disbursed             3.62                               19.33
Amount disbursed (%)         15.77%                             84.23%
Weight value                 0.47                               4.21
Total weights                4.68
Overall outcome rating       Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

 The project has contributed to a significant strengthening of the Gaza distribution network which should
enable distribution of 230 GWh per annum when supplies are available. Significant institutional capacity has
been built in GEDCO, including human skills, IT, software, and hardware to enable GEDCO to efficiently
operate and maintain the system. In addition, the Gaza masterplan prepared under the project provides a
framework of short, medium, and long-term investments that could be undertaken to strengthen the sector,
building on what has been accomplished by the project. Nevertheless, there are some clear risks to
development outcomes, and these include: (a) the risk of renewed military conflict which could endanger the
integrity of the distribution network and the capacity to maintain and operate it; (b) availability of adequate
resources for maintenance and operation of the system, especially given that there is no clear pathway for
strengthening GEDCO's financial viability: and (c) continuation of an environment of FCV, including low level
conflict in Gaza, making it difficult for GEDCO to improve revenue collection to sustain its operations and
also making it hard for private sector investment to flow in and catalyze further development of the
sector. The support of the Bank and other donors to Gaza is critical for managing these risks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed primarily to address network constraints. This was based on the
  recognition that, after power supply deficits, the second most important constraint was the capacity and
  condition of the electricity network in Gaza (ICR, page 27). The project was based on proven
  technical designs.

  Appropriate due diligence was conducted regarding the technical capacity of GEDCO and PENRA’s to
  implement the project. An Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) was prepared and so
  was an Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESIA introduced to the sector, for the
  first time, the rationale and process for stakeholder consultations. Fiduciary assessments were prepared
  Bank staff provided training to PENRA and GEDCO in both fiduciary and E&S areas.

  Provision was made in the project design for capacity building in GEDCO regarding improving IT
  systems, hardware, and software for information systems, including for load flow
  studies, accounting, and financial management systems, although the latter activity was dropped
  in a subsequent restructuring

  Although risk assessments conducted at the time rated implementation capacity and entry restrictions to
  Gaza as high, the latter risk contributed significantly to severe project implementation delays. The project
  implementation period after extension of the closing date by 18 months to allow for completion of
  additional financing activities was 5 years, but in the end the project took 8 years to complete.

  A shortcoming in the Bank’s performance at entry was the failure to align the results framework with the
  project objectives and indicators. While the original objectives had two parts: to improve network reliability
  and to improve network performance, only two outcome indicators were included – network
  loss reduction and revenue collection - both of which related to the second objective. There were no
  indicators related to network reliability improvement. Apparently, GEDCO had no M&E system at the time
  (which remains the case today) of capturing and reporting on network reliability.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR presents (Table 2, page 11 of ICR) a chronological description of significant changes during
 implementation of the project. The main events were: (a) the Gaza war of July-August 2014 which resulted
 in extensive destruction of the electricity infrastructure and the disconnection of about 190,000 customers;
 (b) repeated and partial stoppage of the entry of materials and equipment into Gaza during 2015-2016; (c)
 the placement by the PA of PENRA staff located in Gaza to coordinate with GEDCO on “financial
 retirement” or reduced salary payments since July 2017; and (d) Egypt’s stoppage of power supply to Gaza
 since March 2018. The Table helps to explain the FCV (Fragile and Conflict Vulnerable) context in which
 the project was implemented, the several restructurings that were carried out, the difficulties faced by the
 Bank in supervising the operation and the lengthy period taken to complete it.



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



 As the ICR indicates the Bank was proactive and adaptive in responding to changing
 circumstances. For example, the 2014 restructuring of the project was an appropriate and swift response to
 the new situation which called for more focus on restoration of the destroyed network than
 on its expansion. Together with the restructuring the Bank approved Additional
 Financing increasing its total financing to US$23 million – almost triple the original grant amount.

 Further, in the face of project delays caused in part by repeated and partial stoppages of the entry of
 materials, equipment, and consultants’ personnel into Gaza, the Bank showed resolve to continue
 its support for

 the project and extended project closing dates several times to enable completion of
 all activities. According to the ICR the restrictions on entry to Gaza affected the Bank’s ability
 to conduct implementation missions throughout the period.

 The project had four task team leaders over its entire duration from preparation to closure, a factor which
 affected the continuity of dialogue. Eventually, however, the Bank’s task team leader relocated to the
 country office which helped to move the remaining components to completion.

 While the Bank was flexible and adaptive in its responses to changing situations some of the changes in
 the results framework, such as the dropping of distribution system capacity (GWh) and revenue collection
 indicators appear to have been prompted by the realization that they were no longer achievable. The
 indicators were dropped entirely and not replaced with alternative measures, thus weakening the basis of
 assessing the project’s performance improvement objective.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The initial design of the M&E system was limited in scope as only two PDO indicators were to be monitored
 (network loss reduction and revenue collection) and only one intermediate indicator (preparation of the
 Gaza master plan) was included in the results framework. Simple intermediate indicators to monitor
 progress of rehabilitation and network expansion activities which would have been useful in
 tracking progress were not part of the M&E system until after the project had been restructured in
 2014. During implementation opportunities were missed during project restructurings to retrofit the project
 with suitable indicators for assessing the reliability of power supply and network improvement
 objectives.




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (page 25) the quality of the project reports submitted to the Bank by the PMU was
  reasonable. However, it is notable that while the distribution system capacity and revenue collection
  indicators were dropped during the 2017 and 2018 restructurings respectively, and while the ICR
  acknowledges the value of tracking such indicators, it does not report on them. The Bank ISRs did
  report on improvements in both indicators until they were dropped suggesting that the M&E system was
  providing the required data.



c. M&E Utilization
  The utilization of the M&E system appears to have been most useful in tracking progress of physical
  rehabilitation and expansion of the distribution network activities. According to the ICR such
  tracking enabled implementation issues to be identified and remedial actions to be taken and facilitated
  the Bank's decisions on extension of closing dates. The M&E system was also successfully used to track
  outcome indicators on system loss reduction, revenue collection and distribution system capacity
  indicators, although the ICR has not reported on the final values of the latter two indicators.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified category B during preparation and was designed to ensure compliance
   with OP 4.01. The Borrower prepared an ESIA and an ESMP, including mitigation measures for potential
   environmental impacts during construction and operation. The PMU monitored implementation of the ESMP
   and submitted reports to the Bank as agreed, and no significant issues arose. The project was rated
   satisfactory or moderately satisfactory for safeguards compliance throughout its implementation period.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement proceeded smoothly except for procurement of prepaid meters which eventually had to be
   dropped from the project scope and, for auto-reclosers for the SCADA system. The procurement of pre-
   paid meters faced difficulties due to the lack of an agreed metering plan, problems with technical
   specifications and non-responsive bids. This led to the downgrading of the procurement rating to
   moderately unsatisfactory. The auto-reclosers package for the SCADA system faced challenges due to
   problems with technical specifications and evaluation of bids, but these were resolved, and the
   procurement was successfully completed.




                                                                                                Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



   The ICR reports that there were no significant financial management issues – Interim Financial Reporting
   Statement were submitted mostly on time, disbursements were carried out smoothly, unqualified audit
   reports were submitted as agreed, including by an external technical verification consultant




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   The restoration of electricity has benefited about 190,000 persons of which 49% are women. Women and
   girls benefited more than men because of their led roles in undertaking household chores. In addition the
   restoration of power services to hospitals and clinics has benefited the population greatly especially given
   the increased need for these services in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic. Another impact has been the
   hiring of local contractors for distribution system line construction and rehabilitation works which has helped
   to create jobs and incomes during times of depressed economic conditions.




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Original design of results
                                                                                 framework was limited although
                                                                                 it was signifcantly improved
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               during implementation. Actions
                                                                                 could have been taken during
                                                                                 implementation to better align
                                                                                 PDOs with outcome indicators.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

There are three key lessons learned from this operation that could be of interest to management and
teams working in similar FCV environments.

Adaptive management and adjustment of expectations: In FCV environments or countries
emerging from such status it is important to adjust expectations and to restructure and
sequence support activities to ensure progress, even if more incremental than previously envisaged.
In this project adjustments were made to replace the prepaid metering activities with a scale up of

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)



the SCADA system after repeated failures by the Borrower to design a strategic metering plan and
after repeated procurement failures. In these circumstances it remains, nevertheless, important to
properly align the changes or adjustments of activities with outputs and outcomes in a coherent
theory of change.

Supporting common platforms for project coordination and reporting: Operating different project
coordination and reporting platforms to meet the needs of different development partners is often
taxing even for sophisticated Borrowers and is much more so for FCV countries which typically have
less capacity and resources. Coordinating with other development partners conserves scarce donor
capacity and improves the quality of M&E systems and hopefully that of the dialogue. In Gaza,
different development partners appeared to have different counterparts in Government and different
reporting mechanisms. Even though the project was designed as a single project with parallel
financing by the World Bank and IsDB, there was no sharing of information or any form of
coordination.

Virtual implementation support, including consultants support and capacity building: In contexts
where physical access to clients and project sites is restricted due to a country's FCV status, instead
of waiting for conditions to improve, the Bank should rely on virtual implementation missions, and so
should other external experts and consultants to the project. In this project the use of virtual
meetings proved effective in conducting acceptance testing for equipment manufactured outside the
country.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and provides a rich description of the context in which the project was implemented,
Table 2 is particularly instructive in this respect.

That being said, there are some areas where the ICR could have been improved. First, while it acknowledges
the lack of appropriate PDO indicators for assessing objectives 1 (improving network reliability) and objective 2
revised (Improving basic services), the ICR fails to propose alternative metrics beyond general
statements. Second, the ICR is ambivalent about the project's role in reducing network losses, minimizing its
role in some places, while using this as a key component in the economic analysis. Similarly, the distribution
capacity PDO indicator was dropped in the 2017 restructuring as not relevant to the prevailing context and yet
the target figure is used in the economic analysis. In addition, the ICR fails to report on both the distribution
system capacity and the revenue collection performance indicators even though the M&E system appears to
have tracked them, at least up to the point when they were dropped from the results framework. Other than
these observations, the ICR is well written and presented.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehab. (P116199)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                              Page 20 of 20
