     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022573

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145586                                    China Partnership for Market Readiness

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17222                                   30-Jun-2018                                           9,742,788.56

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jun-2014                                31-Aug-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             10,000,000.00                                  10,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              10,000,000.00                                   9,742,788.56

 Actual                                           9,992,788.44                                   9,742,788.56




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa                Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable China to design a national carbon emissions trading
   scheme (PAD, para 15). The formulation of the PDO in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) was
   identical to that in the PAD, though it addressed China as "the Recipient."

   This review will assessed against the following objectives:



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



         to enable the Design of Key Building Blocks for a National Emissions Trading System (ETS)
         to enable a Market Mechanism and Create an Investment Climate



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Enabling Design of Key Building Blocks for a National Emissions Trading System
   (ETS) (Estimate: US$6.5 million; Actual: US$6.5 million) intended to support technical assistance, studies
   including policy research and analysis, and workshops that aimed to assist the Department of Climate
   Change in developing the key ETS building blocks. This component covered seven subcomponents: (a)
   development of methodologies for coverage, cap, allocation, and supplementary mechanisms; (b)
   development of a legal framework and oversight system; (c) development of a data collection and
   Measurement, Reporting, and Verification system; (d) development of an ETS registry; (e) research on
   participation of State-Owned-Enterprises; (f) research on power sector issues for a national ETS; and (g)
   provincial-level enterprise and economic data collection and consultation.

   Component 2. China Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR) Synthesis Report, Consultations, and
   Project Management (Estimate: US$2.1 million; Actual: US$2.3 million, 109% of the estimate) intended to
   support project management, stakeholder and expert consultations, workshops and study tours, and a
   synthesis report for the project summarizing proposals and analysis in support of the national ETS scheme
   design. The component also financed consulting services and consultations to ensure the provision of
   appropriate quality control for terms of reference and outputs.

   Component 3. Enabling Market Mechanism and Creating Investment Climate (Estimate: US$1.9
   million; Actual: US$1.9 million) intended to support critical technical issues that emerged during project
   implementation, including (a) development of the allocation mechanism to help decision-makers evaluate
   how the rate-based system would work in contrast to a cap-based system and provide policy
   recommendations to further refine allocation methodologies; (b) development of the regulatory framework to
   supplement the regulatory system based on the framework developed under Component 1; and (c)
   provision of policy recommendations for developing financial products to increase the market liquidity of the
   ETS over time.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$8.60 million (PAD, para 30). With an
   additional financing of 2.0 million, the estimate was revised to US$10.60 million to address critical ETS
   design issues that emerged during project implementation. At project closing, the actual cost was
   US$10.50 million (ICR, page 2).

   Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed by US$8.0 million grant from the
   Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR) and US$0.6 million in-kind contribution from the Government

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



   (PAD Datasheet). The PMR was established by 30 countries with the Bank as a Secretariat to provide
   funding and technical assistance for mitigation policies, particularly carbon pricing instruments. During
   implementation, US$2.0 million additional financing was provided.

   Borrower Contribution: The Government committed to an in-kind contribution of US$0.6 million and
   disbursed US$0.7 million.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 16, 2014, and became effective on February 16, 2015. The Mid-
   Term Review was completed on January 17, 2017. The project was closed on August 31, 2020, which was
   twenty-six months after the original closing date of June 30, 2018.

   Restructurings: The project underwent three Level 2 restructurings and one Additional Financing (AF) with
   restructuring as follows.

         The first restructuring in November 2017 revised institutional and disbursement arrangements. The
          National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) relocated the Project Management Office
          (PMO) from its internal department, Department of Climate Change (DCC), to its affiliated research
          institute, the National Center for Climate Change Strategy and International Cooperation (NCSC).
          The relocation was in response to a wider reform within the NDRC to transfer foreign capital and
          related project management functions to subsidiary institutions. The Designated Account for the
          project was also relocated from the Ministry of Finance (MOF) to the NCSC.
         The second restructuring in April 2018 extended the project closing date from June 30, 2018 to June
          30, 2019 to complete development of an AF application.
         The third restructuring in April 2019 provided an AF of US$2 million to implement additional activities
          for three new Intermediate Results indicators: (1) allocation methodologies and mechanisms
          informed, (2) supplementary regulatory system informed, and (3) forward-looking policies for a liquid
          market informed, as well as extended the project closing date from June 30, 2019, to February 28,
          2020. As a result of realignment of environmental institutions, the DCC (along with the NCSC and
          the PMO under it) was transferred to the newly established Ministry of Ecology and Environment
          (MEE). This administrative reorganization was noted in the restructuring paper as not causing any
          change in implementation arrangements because the relocation did not affect the staffing and
          structure of the PMO within the NCSC.
         The fourth restructuring in February 2020 extended the project closing date from February 28 to
          August 31, 2020, due to delays in implementation resulted from the institutional restructurings in the
          Government and the COVID-19 pandemic (Also described in Section 5).

   None of the adjustments significantly altered the intended impact of the project nor changed the goal posts
   on targets, thus a split evaluation was not required.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. China had remarkable economic growth in the past few decades. An average
annual growth rate of around 10% from 1989 to 2014 (ICR, para 1). China’s growth was induced by the

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



energy sector, which relied heavily on coal and caused around 80% of national Green House Gas (GHG)
emissions; as a result, China accounted for 47% of global coal consumption and almost a quarter of global
GHG emissions (ICR, para 1). Aiming for low-carbon development, national targets to reduce energy
intensity and carbon intensity had been included in the Government’s Five-Year Plans since 2006. As
national carbon intensity reduction targets were extended to the local level, greater use of market
mechanisms was needed. Since there were wide disparities between enterprises and provincial
governments in terms of institutional capacities and climate mitigation costs, carbon pricing was identified
as a mechanism that could facilitate a more cost-effective low carbon transition by increasing the flexibility
to comply with carbon targets. The project was also expected to provide timely support to share knowledge
and lessons learned from the emissions trading schemes (ETS) pilots in five major cities (Beijing, Shanghai,
Tianjin, Chongqing, and Shenzhen) and two provinces (Hubei and Guangdong).

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the objective was aligned with the 12th Five-Year Plan
(2011–2015), which called for the gradual establishment of a carbon emission trading market. At project
closing, the objective was in line with the 13th FYP (2016-2020), which included dual binding targets
(targets for quantity and intensity) for energy consumption and carbon emissions i.e. decrease the
economy’s carbon intensity by 18% relative to 2015 and increase the share of non-fossil fuels in primary
energy supply to 15% by 2020 (ICR, para 19). At the international level, China’s nationally determined
contribution (NDC) set several targets, including to peak CO2 emissions by 2030. Both the 13th FYP and
the NDC set objectives to develop the regulations for the national ETS, which would also contribute to
China’s carbon neutrality commitment announced in September 2020 to reach carbon neutrality by 2060.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project was aligned with Strategic Theme 1:
Supporting Greener Growth in the Country Partnership Strategy FY13-16, particularly Outcome 1.1 Shifting
to a Sustainable Energy Path and Outcome 1.7 Strengthening Mechanisms for Managing Climate Change.
At project closing, the project remained relevant to the Country Partnership Framework FY20-25, which
included Engagement Area 2: Promoting Greener Growth and Objective 2.1: Facilitating the Transition to a
Lower Carbon Energy Path. Additionally, the project would support corporate commitment of the World
Bank Group to putting a price on carbon and addressing climate change.

Prior Sector Experience. The project was in line with the Bank’s longstanding support on assessments of
policy options and pilots to inform policy dialogue regarding climate change. The Bank had supported
China’s carbon market portfolio under the Kyoto Protocol since 2002. At appraisal, the Bank had a portfolio
of about $1.4 billion across 27 operations in energy efficiency, low carbon cities, clean energy solutions,
and renewable energy, that were funded by IBRD, the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Clean
Development Mechanism, and Recipient Executed Trust Funds (PAD, para 14). This project represented a
shift from supporting China’s project-based carbon finance to a new era of supporting the country’s
domestic GHG regulation and market creation. The project was expected to be complemented by GEF
China Renewable Energy Scale Up Project II (P127033, FY14-Ongoing), which involved renewable energy
certificates trading system.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Enabling Design of Key Building Blocks for a National Emissions Trading System (ETS)

               Rationale
               Theory of Change:

               Conducting analytical work on the scope and coverage of the ETS, the legal framework and oversight system,
               the Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) system, and the ETS registry would provide resources to
               design the national ETS. Conducting analytical work on the participation of State-Owned-Enterprises (SOEs),
               national power sector, provincial level enterprises, and economic data collection would solve surrounding
               issues and strengthen the design of the ETS. Conducting analytical work on allocation mechanisms, a
               supplemental regulation framework, and preparation for a liquid market would support development of
               operational and technical guidelines for these topics. A critical assumption here was that engagements of
               national and international stakeholders were adequate to obtain extensive inputs to the analytical works.
               Developing China PMR Synthesis Report by summarizing recommendations from international and national
               stakeholders and experts in a consultative manner would support designing the national ETS. Policy
               proposals, reports, and guidelines produced by the project activities would support evidence-based design
               and development of the national ETS. A critical assumption here was that findings and recommendations of
               the analytical works would be adequately reflected and adopted in the ETS design.

               Outputs:

               All the Intermediate Results (IR) indicators were designed to assess completion of outputs such as reports in
               binary terms (Yes/No), as summarized in Table 1 in the ICR.

                     A report was delivered to provide recommendations on methodologies of scope, coverage, cap setting
                      and allocation for eight sectors (namely electricity, steel, non-ferrous metals, chemicals, building
                      materials, paper, and aviation), achieving the IR target. The recommendations considered
                      international experience of other major carbon markets including the EU, the U.S. (California), and
                      Korea. The coverage of the national carbon market was assessed quantitatively by using the China
                      Global Energy Model.
                     A report was delivered to provide recommendations on legal framework and oversight system,
                      achieving the IR target. The assessment considered regional disparities, potential impact on the
                      economy, the evolving policy environment, and appropriate sharing of responsibilities among relevant
                      authorities, in order to inform the design of management mechanisms and methods and regulatory
                      systems of the national carbon market.
                     A report was delivered to provide recommendations on the Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification
                      (MRV) system for the national ETS, achieving the IR target. In particular, the report provided
                      recommendations on GHG emissions accounting methods guidelines, reporting management for
                      enterprises covered by the ETS, and measures for the administration and reporting of third-party
                      verification. A total of 4,262 days of training on MRV were held in regions that were to be covered by
                      the national ETS. A comprehensive review of the 2013-2015 accounting methods and guidelines for
                      key sectors were conducted.

                                                                                                               Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




        New software features and a user manual were developed for the national ETS registry system by
         reflecting lessons learned from the pilot ETS registry system, achieving the IR target.
        A thematic report on the SOEs’ participation in the national ETS was delivered, achieving the IR
         target. The report analyzed the characteristics of SOEs and provided policy recommendations and
         potential roadmaps for the SOEs’ effective participation, covering topics such as the allowance
         allocation method, the MRV standards, and the management of carbon trading. Training sessions
         were carried out to support 1,000 participants from SOEs.
        A thematic report on the power sector’s participation in the national ETS was delivered, achieving the
         IR target. The report analyzed laws, regulations, policies, and emission trends of the power sector and
         provided policy recommendations for their effective participation.
        A synthesis report was delivered to summarize recommendations for developing the key building
         blocks for the national ETS, achieving the IR target. The project had country-to-country exchanges
         with the Governments of Vietnam, Thailand, and Germany and consolidated feedback from PMR
         participants through the PMR Partnership Assembly. Knowledge and experience of developing the
         world’s largest ETS in China were shared with other 20 countries participating in the PMR.

Outcome:

Referring to the Theory of Change above, the project objective aimed to develop the design of the national
ETS by strengthening the policy and regulatory framework required for the national ETS with evidence-based
proposals and recommendations. The key policies and regulations were successfully informed by the project
activities and outputs, as described in Annex 7 in the ICR.

        The national ETS proposal was submitted to the Vice Chairman of the National Development and
         Reform Commission (NDRC) in 2017, achieving the PDO outcome target. Submission of the proposal
         was a key step toward making high-level decisions to launch the national ETS, and required an
         extensive internal consultation process across the Government facilitated by the project. The proposal
         for the national ETS led to the NDRC's publication of the overall ETS development plan.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enabling a Market Mechanism and Creating the Investment Climate (Added in the third restructuring in April
2019 with AF)

Rationale
Theory of Change:

Conducting research to inform allocation methodologies and mechanisms, supplementary regulatory
framework and system, and forward-looking policies for a liquid market would enable the market mechanism
and create investment climate, leading to a maximization of the national ETS’s readiness for implementation.



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



                            Outputs:

                                    A report was delivered to evaluate the impact of the proposed allocation method on the effectiveness
                                     of the national ETS in reducing emissions and the potential distributional impacts on different
                                     industries, achieving the IR target. Policy recommendations were provided on how the allocation
                                     method/carbon market benchmarking framework could be improved and adjusted over time. A quota
                                     calculator was also developed to assess how the quota could be calculated for targeted industries.
                                    A study on design of trading rules and price supervision system for the national ETS was delivered,
                                     achieving the IR target. The study assessed the interactions between the national registry, the trading
                                     platform, and local-level platforms. Case study analyses for the Beijing and Guangdong Provinces
                                     were also delivered to assess how data verifications could be carried out through supervision and law
                                     enforcement teams at the municipal level and below.
                                    Forward looking policies for a liquid market were informed, achieving the IR target. Market liquidity
                                     was critical to ensure the effectiveness of the ETS by promoting a stable, long-term carbon pricing
                                     signal. A report was developed to provide recommendations on the design elements, trading forms,
                                     and risk supervision for various carbon trading products, such as forwards, futures, and options. The
                                     report also compared and analyzed the gaps and roadmap for developing the needed policies and
                                     regulations, infrastructure, and institutional framework for carbon trading products.
                                    Extensive training and consultations were carried out to build market readiness and encourage buy-in.
                                     The project supported training programs for over 13,000 participants to build the market capacity of
                                     government officials and entities at the provincial and municipal level in six regions (see project map,
                                     Annex 9, ICR). The project also facilitated vetting, verification, and research on carbon emissions of
                                     more than 300 key emission units that would be covered by the national ETS to improve readiness at
                                     the local level to participate in the national ETS.

                            Outcome:

                            Referring to the Theory of Change above, the analysis and recommendations on the specific methodologies
                            and system for the national ETS implementation and on the liquid market policies informed the regulation and
                            action plan to operationalize the national ETS. The operationalization was a key next step towards the
                            implementation and rollout of the national ETS.

                                    The national ETS was operationalized by the Ministry of Ecology and Environment (MEE) (ICR, para
                                     22). In January 2021, the MEE published an interim regulation on the management of carbon trading.
                                     Before this, it published an action plan on the 2019–2020 allocation of carbon emissions allowances
                                     for the power generation sector and a list of 2,225 companies that would be given emissions
                                     allowances. These documents marked the operationalization of China’s ETS. These documents
                                     reflected key recommendations from the project’s outputs, as described in Annex 7 of the ICR.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Theory of Change: Delivering 23 research sub-projects to inform policies and regulations enabled the
  Government to design the national ETS and strengthen its readiness for implementation. In the long term, the
  designed national ETS would be complemented by other policies to facilitate: (1) a cost-effective GHG
  emission reduction across sectors to achieve and raise the ambition of China’s national and international
  climate targets, and (2) a smooth transition to reduce reliance on fossil fuel in the power sector. These would
  further contribute to bring impacts such as growth of energy-efficient and low-carbon industries and reduction
  of air pollution in the future. Critical assumptions here were that: (1) a robust design of the national ETS that
  complements other sectoral and economywide policies to provide strong price signal to incentivize low carbon
  investments; (2) continued political will at the level of the central and provincial governments to implement the
  ETS and institutional capacity to facilitate intermenstrual dialogue on climate actions; and (3) provincial
  government counterparts with adequate capacity to implement the national ETS and covered entities in the
  power sector with adequate capacity to participate in trading.

  The PDO outcome indicator and all of the IR indicators were achieved (ICR, Table 1 in page 13 and Annex 1
  in pages 28-35). The design of national ETS was successfully informed and strengthened by the project. A
  proposal for the national ETS design was submitted to the NDRC, which led to the NDRC's publication of the
  overall ETS development plan. Completion of the 23 research projects informed key policies and regulations,
  contributing to the impacts as described in Annex 7 in the ICR (pages 50-51). Overall, the efficacy of the
  project is rated high.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
Efficiency in use of resources: No economic or financial analysis was conducted at appraisal and project
closing, as this technical assistance project did not involve investment activities, with only indirect and long-term
economic and financial benefits expected (ICR, para 30). Efficiency was further assessed based on efficiency in
use of resources, which was the same approach taken by the ICRs of Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR)
projects in Turkey (P126101) and Morocco (P128654) (ICR, para 30).

Costs required for managing the project along with consolidating the synthesis report through consultations with
experts were US$1.6 million at project closing, which composed of approximately 16% of the total disbursed
amount of US$9.99 million (ICR, para 31). To cover staff salary, office rent, office supply, and travel, the project
mobilized US$725,373 from the MEE and NDRC as counterpart funding, exceeding the estimate of US$0.6
million at appraisal. Given the fact that the project was able to consolidate inputs from a wide range of experts to
produce high-quality outputs and disseminate the findings to targeted decision-makers, the benefits brought by
the project were considered to exceed the financial costs. The project delivered all outputs within the project
budget and closing date.

External factors that affected efficiency: Institutional restructurings in the Government, including the
relocation of project management offices and designated accounts of foreign grants to outside the ministries and

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



departments and the establishment of the MEE, as well as an unforeseen leadership change at the DCC in 2019
caused changes in implementation arrangements and delays in decision-making (ICR, para 36). A reform on
budget rules in 2019 also led to procurement delays. Delays in procurement and recruitment of staff resulted in
delays in achieving the intermediate results indicators under Components 2 and 3 and led to extensions of the
project’s closing dates. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in travel restrictions, which also
affected training and capacity programs for Monitoring, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) under Component 2.

In spite of the external factors, the project used resources efficiently, mobilized counterpart financing, and
delivered outputs within the scheduled budget and timeline. Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective was high. The efficacy was high. The efficiency was substantial. Overall, the
outcome of the project is rated highly satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following key risks apply to the sustainability of the achieved results presented in the ICR:

Policy coordination and design risks. There was a risk that the ETS-related policies would lose
complementarities with other economy-wide and sectoral issues over time, decreasing the ETS’s
effectiveness to support China’s decarbonization goals. To mitigate the risk, the project assessed how
coordination between the ETS and policies regulating the energy sector could be mutually supportive to
reduce emissions, by identifying potential conflicts, overlaps, and complementary relationships among them.

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



The national ETS was planned to be expanded to other sectors to give opportunities for policy adjustment
and learning under the 14th Five-Year Plan (2021–2025) (ICR, para 73).

Social acceptability and implementation risks. There was a risk that the ETS would not be accepted by
the public due to a fear against a reduction in economic competitiveness of some sectors and an increase in
carbon prices for the overall population. To mitigate the risk, the project conducted outreach and awareness
building activities. After the project ended, continued efforts were needed by communicating for promotion of
the rollout of the national ETS, analyzing the distributional impact of carbon pricing, and mapping
stakeholders in the political economy to inform strategies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s strategic relevance and approach was well aligned with the Government’s plans and
  strategies for the sector. The project design considered technical, fiduciary, and institutional aspects to
  make appropriate arrangements for preparation, implementation, and M&E. Risks were assessed and
  mitigated by incorporating lessons learned within and beyond the country experience in the sector.
  Technical input from the Bank was adequate to enable the project to be prepared and approved within a
  year. Overall, the quality at entry is rated highly satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision inputs and processes were adequate, with a focus on development impact. The Bank
 team adjusted the project design through restructurings to align with the changes in national policies and
 ministerial arrangements. Candor and quality of performance reporting were adequate, highlighting key
 issues for the Bank’s attention. The Bank’s task team had a sufficient mixture of technical expertise and
 conducted annual mission including field visits. The Bank team ensured the project experience to inform
 upcoming policy dialogue on climate change including low carbon and climate-resilient cities, green
 finance, and the Nationally Determined Contribution implementation. As a transition arrangement after the
 project closing, the Bank team encouraged the Government to explore collaboration opportunities with the
 Partnership for Market Implementation, the successor program to the PMR, to enhance implementation of
 the national ETS. Overall, the quality of supervision is rated highly satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Theory of Change was sound and reflected clearly in the design of the Results Framework.
 On the other hand, the formulation of indicators was not fully adequate to measure which and to what
 extent the key building blocks supported by the project were reflected in the final design of the national
 ETS. The PDO outcome indicator on submission of the national ETS proposal to the NDRC did not
 thoroughly assess attribution of the project to the submission (ICR, para 60). Moreover, all the Intermediate
 Results (IR) indicators were designed to assess completion of outputs such as reports in binary terms
 (Yes/No). The indicators could have been supplemented by additional indicators to assess the project’s
 attribution to achievement of the development outcome (e.g. number of references made to or data cited
 from the analytical reports supported by the project, by key policies and regulations that were developed or
 updated by implementing agencies or relevant institutions) and to measure progress of implementation in a
 more granular manner (e.g. number of key stakeholders who participated in working groups, provided
 inputs to each report, or had access to final outputs through dissemination), where applicable.



b. M&E Implementation
  The progress towards achievements of targets of indicators were monitored and reported adequately.
  The availability of M&E data and the data collection capacity of the responsible agency were sufficient.
  Qualitative assessments were included in the project’s progress reports to keep track of implementation
  status (ICR, para 63), supporting assessments of progress towards achievements of targets. On the
  other hand, no revision was made to the Results Framework or the indicators at restructurings.
  Considering that the PDO outcome indicator designed at appraisal was already achieved in 2017 and did
  not adequately cover the AF component approved in 2019, it could have been useful if indicators were
  revised in accordance to updates in the project design.



c. M&E Utilization
  Regular project review meetings were held among a range of stakeholders to inform decision-making,
  which resulted in the AF activities to respond to a temporary gap in awareness and capacity related to
  the ETS during the relocation of the DCC to the MEE. The China Carbon Market Monitor reports
  published on the PMR website included updates across the eight Chinese pilot ETSs and an analysis of
  climate policy and market developments at the national level, enabling the project to disclose its
  contribution to developments in key policies and its alignment with the changing policy conditions.

  The M&E design and implementation were adequate and effective with the qualitative assessments
  included in regular progress reporting activities, though the indicators in the Results Framework could
  have been improved to assess the achievement of development outcome attributable to the project more



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



  thoroughly. M&E utilization effectively informed decision-making to expand project activities by AF.
  Overall, the M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The original Environmental Assessment category was C, which stayed the same throughout the project. No
   safeguard policy was triggered from appraisal to project closing because all the project components
   consisted of technical assistance activities with no anticipation for adverse environmental or social impact.
   Terms of reference for the studies supported by the project were reviewed during implementation with
   consideration to environmental and social safeguards implications.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project’s financial management system was adequate to ensure proper use
   of the funds. Reporting on accounting and financial management was aligned with the national regulations
   set by the Ministry of Finance and the Grant Agreement. Reported issues related to financial management
   were considered minor and resolved in a timely manner. All the project audit reports were with unqualified
   opinions. The withdrawal of funds was arranged appropriately to allow timely disbursements.

   Procurement: All the contracts adequately followed the Bank’s procedures and guidelines. No major issue
   on procurement was reported during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project served as a platform for climate change dialogue that went beyond carbon pricing. The project
   facilitated inter-ministerial policy dialogue to strategically integrate carbon pricing into a larger policy
   package to achieve mitigation targets in the Nationally Determined Contribution and the Five-Year Plans.
   Particularly, the thematic report on the power sector called for a sector-wide reform to enable coal-powered
   units to adjust their operation in response to the price signal stemming from the ETS allowance allocation,
   in order to ensure effectiveness of the ETS. The recommendations in the report encouraged a concurrence
   of the power sector reform with the ETS design. Furthermore, the project enhanced the WBG’s
   collaboration with China on climate change, which led them to signing the memorandum of understanding
   on global public goods including climate change, as well as launching the first nationwide program on low-
   carbon and climate-resilient cities which tested carbon pricing to achieve decarbonization of cities.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     High


12. Lessons

The following two lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects on carbon
emissions trading scheme (ETS) and are presented here with some editing.

    1. A clear political mandate and legal basis was the key to ensuring an effective ETS
       design. The Government’s commitment to develop the national ETS was expressed stronger
       in the 13th Five-Year Plan (FYP, 2016-2020) compared to the preceding FYP, as it provided
       a detailed ETS plan and indicated the need for the rules and regulation to manage trading.
       The project’s data collection and analysis supported national GHG control targets in the 13th
       FYP to be disaggregated for the provinces. The Government also included the development
       of the national ETS as a target in the Nationally Determined Contribution. The fact that the
       national ETS was referenced as a policy priority in those top-level policy planning documents
       signaled the strong political commitment, which enhanced inter-ministerial collaboration and
       buy-in from stakeholders. The project also facilitated high-level policy dialogue in the United
       Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, that built momentum and traction for the
       national ETS development. High-level meetings between the Bank and the Ministry of
       Ecology and Environment further confirmed the strategic importance of this project in
       supporting the ETS design.
    2. Widespread stakeholder engagement and capacity building was critical for confidence
       building, data collection, and policy design. Relevant ministries, industry associations,
       and enterprises were engaged throughout the project duration to raise awareness on the
       functions of an ETS. Capacity building at the local level ensured effective participation in the
       ETS design, especially for regions that were not covered by the pilot ETSs. There was a
       wide range of complementary initiatives on capacity building led by other development
       partners such as the European Commission, the German Agency for International
       Cooperation, and the Asian Development Bank, as described in detail in the ICR (Annex 8,
       page 52-57). The project ensured close coordination with them to avoid overlapping in
       development initiatives and maximize impact of the project.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a robust evidence base to support the achievements reported. Particularly, the ICR (Annex
7, page 50-51) clarified causal relationships among the project’s sub-components, policies and regulations
informed, and impacts, which strengthened evidence on the project’s contribution to the design and
operationalization of national ETS. There was a clear link between the narrative, the ratings, and the evidence.
The theory of change in the ICR (Figure 1, page 7) helped the reader to understand how the ratings have been
reached. It provided insightful observations in line with the project development objective in a concise manner.
The report sought to triangulate data to reach conclusions and focused on results. The ICR’s lessons were
specific and based on evidence outlined in the ICR. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
