     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022375

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P128072                                    VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                    Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53300                                  31-Dec-2019                                          116,730,889.60

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Dec-2013                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            134,220,275.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        116,730,889.60                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Katharina Ferl              Maria Vanessa                Christopher David Nelson         IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. vii ) and the Financing Agreement of April 24, 2014 (p.
   4) the objective of the project was “to enhance living standards by improving livelihood opportunities in project
   communes of upland districts of the Central Highlands of Vietnam” (targeting the poorest districts in the six
   Central Highlands provinces of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Gia Lai, Kon Tum, Quang Nam and Quang Ngai).




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Village and Commune Infrastructure Development (appraisal estimate US$54.7
   million, actual US$40.94 million): This component included two sub-components.

   Sub-component 1.1: This sub-component was to finance the design, construction or repair of small-scale
   village and commune-level infrastructure (such as simple access roads, terracing, irrigation/water supply,
   basic social infrastructure, etc.) through the provision of block grants. Depending on the size and complexity
   of the identified sub-project investments, community groups were to be responsible for managing
   construction of infrastructure (for sub-projects valued at less than VND 300 million, or US$ 15,000).

   Sub-component 1.2: This sub-component was to finance sub-projects for the repair, operation and
   maintenance (O&M) of communal infrastructure. Such sub-projects were to include routine maintenance
   and small repair activities for both existing and new investments (which were to be financed by the project).
   The O&M was to contribute to the sustainable use of invested infrastructure and ensure lasting impacts on
   improving access and connectivity in the project area.

   Component 2: Sustainable Livelihoods Development (appraisal estimate US$35.2 million, actual
   US$27.39 million): This component included two sub-components:

   Sub-component 2.1: “Self-reliance and Income Generation” was to target chronically poor and at risk
   households and include activities to: a) strengthen household and community food security and nutrition
   (via improved practices for staple food crops and small livestock-raising, soil management on sloped land,
   home garden development, nutrition awareness etc.); and b) sustain/diversify income sources by enhancing
   the productive capacities of beneficiaries (small-scale cash crop production, forestry management and
   development, livestock development, etc.).

   Sub-component 2.2: “Market Linkage Initiatives” were to develop productive partnerships (PP) between
   farmer groups and agribusinesses (ABs) operating in the targeted areas for proven commercially viable
   agriculture/agro-forestry endeavors.

   Component 3: Connective Infrastructure Development, Capacity Building and Communications
   (appraisal estimate US$53.0 million, actual US$40.52 million): This component included three sub-
   components.

   Sub-component 3.1: This sub-component was to finance selective intra- and inter-commune level
   infrastructure that was to strengthen physical connectivity within and between local economic zones (such
   as roads, bridges, irrigation systems, etc.). Due to the likely size and costs of these investments, district-
   level entities were to manage their implementation. However, their identification and prioritization were to




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



  happen as a result of the commune-level analysis and sub-project planning process. The component was to
  prioritize investments that were to enhance

  synergies with Component 1 and/or 2 investments.

  Sub-component 3.2: This sub-component was to support training and capacity building at all project levels
  for all aspects of project management (planning, financial management, procurement, monitoring and
  evaluation, etc.). The sub-component was to include the financing of a technical assistance team (TAT),
  consisting of international and national specialists in project management, livelihoods and agricultural
  market linkages, capacity building, M&E, etc.

  Sub-component 3.3: This sub-component was to support communications activities to ensure beneficiaries,
  project staff, key stakeholders and the public at large were to be aware of the project’s objectives and
  operational principle.

  Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$16.5 million, actual US$15.32 million):
  This component included two sub-components:

  Sub-component 4.1: This sub-component was to support project coordination and implementation, which
  were to include the set-up and operation of coordination structures at national level and implementation
  units/teams at provincial, district and commune levels, and operational costs associated with project
  management.

  Sub-component 4.1: This sub-component was to support monitoring and evaluation, which were to include
  the design and implementation of a simple management information system (MIS) for project monitoring,
  the design and contracting of a rigorous impact evaluation, the recruitment of key personnel at central,
  provincial and district level to support M&E activities, and were to support various knowledge exchange and
  learning activities between participating provinces, with other similar projects in Vietnam and within the
  region.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$159.4 million. Actual cost was US$124.2 million due to
  a cancellation of SDR 11.5 million and a 10 percent reduction in US Dollars available due to changes in the
  SDR-US Dollar exchange rate.

  Financing: The project was to be financed by a credit in the amount of US$150.0 million of which
  US$116.7 million was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was planned to contribute US$9.4 million. Actual contribution was
  US$7.4 million.

  Dates: On October 24, 2019 the project was restructured to: i) cancel SDR 11.5 million as requested by the
  government due to restrictions placed on the level of Official Development Assistance funding that the
  Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) and the responsible Provinces were allowed to spend under the


                                                                                                Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



   Medium-Term Investment Plan of the country, and in part related to the approaching project closing date; ii)
   change in components and costs to reflect the reduction in financing for all components; and iii) reallocate
   between disbursement categories. The project became effective seven months after its approval. The
   project closed on its original closing date and did not experience any delays.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1) in the 1990s Vietnam experienced sustained and broad-based economic
growth followed by land and market reforms and widespread improvements in access to basic education
and health services. Also, in the 2000s Vietnam continued its reforms and growth rates remained
consistently high. The government implemented pro-poor programs and new initiatives to address concerns
about rising inequality between regions and socio-economic groups. However, at the time of project
appraisal overall progress in further reducing poverty had slowed down and there was a large and
increasing gap between some of the poorest households and the better off. Also, the gap between urban
and rural poverty was persistent. In 2012, while the overall rate of poverty for Vietnam as a whole was 9.6
percent (with an additional 6.6 percent near poor), there was a significant difference between urban poverty
(6 percent) and rural poverty (27 percent). Furthermore, there was a strong difference in well-being
between the Kinh/Hoa majority and the country’s ethnic minorities. In 2010, ethnic minorities, which made
up less than 15 percent of the total population, accounted for 70 percent of individuals in the lowest income
decile (a rate which was 53 percent in 2006). Furthermore, while education levels had improved, in 2008,
45 percent of ethnic minorities household heads still had not completed primary school (compared to 25
percent of Kinh/Hoa household heads) and less than 10 percent of ethnic minority heads had completed
upper secondary school or tertiary education. The PAD (p. 2) stated that in regards of landholding,
ownership of assets and access to essential public goods and services such as clean water and electricity,
ethnic minorities (EMs) were also demonstrably lagging behind.

At the time of appraisal, the Central Highlands had the highest income inequality, the worst rates of stunting
and wasting among children in the country, the lowest rate of primary school enrollment and less than half
of ethnic minorities children enrolling in lower secondary school.

According to the PAD (p. 3) the government addressed poverty issues through targeted area development
programs and policies to improve the living conditions of ethnic minorities. Programs were also
implemented to address rising household vulnerability such as the Hunger and Poverty Eradication
Program, health insurance for the poor, and monthly social protection allowances paid to the most
vulnerable under Decree 67. However, despite the government’s efforts several gaps remained such as
degree and quality of participation of indigenous ethnic minority groups in decisions regarding local
development initiatives that directly affect them as well as the lack of synergy between efforts to upgrade
community infrastructure and those to strengthen livelihood opportunities. Another gap was the persistent
poor ‘connectivity’ between many ethnic minority communities and regional economic centers/growth pole.

At appraisal, the objective was aligned with the government’s Socio-Economic Development Strategy
(2016-2020), which put a special emphasis on rural development, poverty reduction, and area-based

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



               support to ethnic minority regions. At completion, the objective was in line with the government’s current
               national programs such as the New Rural Areas Program, the National Targeted Program for Sustainable
               Poverty Reduction, and the Master Plan for Socio-Economic Development in Ethnic Minority and
               Mountainous Areas (2021-2030). Furthermore, the objective of the project was in line with the Bank’s
               Vietnam Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-20) and its focus area 1 “enable inclusive growth
               and private sector participation” under objective 2 “promote private sector and agri-business development".




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To enhance living standards by improving livelihood opportunities in project communes of upland districts of
                             the central highlands of Vietnam

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as financing of
                             small-scale village and commune level infrastructure, financing of inter-commune level infrastructure, and
                             financing of O&M of small-scale commune level infrastructure were to result in outputs such as small and
                             medium scale infrastructure (roads, irrigation, schools etc.) being build/rehabilitated. Also, the theory of
                             change envisioned that project activities such as training support and operational procedures for participation
                             and community implementation as well as wide-spread communication of project objectives and procedures
                             in local languages were to result in project outputs such as improved capacity and increased participation in
                             project of poor, ethnic minorities (EMs) and women and increased awareness of project goals, procedures,
                             and opportunities. Furthermore, the project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as the
                             provision of nutrition education and agricultural inputs, training and financing for diversified household
                             production, and training, financing and market linkages support provided were to result in project outputs such
                             as improved knowledge of nutritional foods, increased diversification of household livelihoods activities, and
                             market-linkage livelihood enhancement groups (LEGs) formed and private sector engaged.

                             All these outputs stated above were to result in the objective of living standards in the project communes of
                             upland districts of central highlands being enhanced.

                             The ICR structured the efficacy section around three key intermediate outcomes: i) improved access to
                             infrastructure and services; ii) improved nutrition and livelihood diversification; and iii) enhanced community
                             engagement in public investment activities. The achievement of these intermediate outcome is linked to the
                             achievement of the PDO. This validation will follow this structure. The selected indicators had a few
                             shortcomings. First, the PDO was not sufficiently clearly specified and did not provide a definition for

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



“enhanced living standards” making measuring project results challenging. And second, the results framework
did not include indicators to measure the second aspect of the PDO “improving livelihood opportunities”

Outputs:

Improved access to public services and infrastructure, and connectivity

      76.2 percent of the annual planned infrastructure investments were completed, not achieving the
       target of 88 percent of annual planned infrastructure investments being completed (Target not
       achieved). The following constructions/repairs were made:
            o 42,450 meters of irrigation canals
            o 30 bridges and other public building and utilities (including communal houses or in-village
               electrification)
            o 150 water systems (serving approx. 11,400 households)
            o 108 irrigation systems (serving approx. 1,733 hectares)
            o 122 schools/classrooms
            o 1,173 rural roads (666km)
      In order to improve “social” connectivity the project conducted a training program in several areas
       such as participatory planning process, construction management and supervision, project monitoring,
       financial management, safeguard policies, and sustainable livelihood development for 19,451
       beneficiaries, local government officials, and other project staff (54 percent women and 69 percent
       ethnic minority). This indicator lacked a target.

Improved nutrition and livelihood diversification:

      Block grants and training support for LEGs for food security and nutrition, income diversification, and
       market linkages were provided. A total of 4,383 LEGs benefitting 63,531 households (approx. 45
       percent of the total target area) were supported.

Enhanced community engagement in public investment decisions:

      The project provided 56,961 client days of training (16,758 training days to women), surpassing the
       target of 35,594 training days (12,394 training days to women).

Outcomes:

Improved access to public services and infrastructure, and social connectivity:

      Access of poor households to services, infrastructure and utilities changed from 38.6 percent in 2013
       to 39.5 percent in 2019, not achieving the target of a 20 percent change. However, looking at different
       areas separately, the following improvements were made:
            o Time to travel to schools was reduced by over 30 percent (with larger savings for indigenous
               EM groups and poor);
            o Time to access commune health centers was reduced by 26.3 percent (over a 30 percent
               decrease for indigenous EMs and poor households);
            o Time to travel to commune people’s committee was reduced by almost 27 percent;
            o Access to drinking water for the poor was improved by 70 percent;

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



          o Access to irrigation systems for poor households was increased by 17.6 percent.
     Connectivity, which was a composite measure of household travel times to key infrastructure and
       destinations such as schools, health station, market, and different administrative centers, was
       improved by 2.8 percent. Connectivity improved for poor and indigenous EM households at 4.1
       percent and 3.7 percent respectively. Travel times at the sub-indicator level decreased to primary
       schools by 9.7 percent, to commune health facilities by 9.4 percent, and to local markets by 6.8
       percent.

Improved nutrition and livelihood diversification:

     Dietary diversity of poor households changed from 0.573 to 0.68, a 21 percent change, achieving the
      target of 20 percent. Dietary diversity was calculated based on the Dietary Diversity Index (DDI)
      developed by USAID, which included consumption information on 12 main food groups. Significant
      increases were observed for the portion of households consuming fruits (23 percent), meat (26
      percent), eggs (28 percent), and for sugar and honey (27 percent) indicating a shift toward a healthier
      diet among beneficiaries.
     The end-line survey showed that the percentage of poor households raising cattle and poultry
      increased by 12 and 11 percentage point respectively (which, according to the ICR (p.12) was
      significantly higher than the increase among non-poor households. Also, the percentage of
      households producing annual crops decreased by eight percentage points and the percentage of
      households producing perennial crops jumped by 11 percentage points. The project’s impact
      evaluation found that household’s average incomes from primary wage employment increased by 18.2
      percent and total household wage incomes by 7.7 percent (due to workers, mostly men, changing to
      wage jobs as a primary rather than a secondary occupation). This might indicate that the project
      supported household livelihood diversification.
     On average, asset ownership improved by seven percent between baseline (51.4 percent in 2013)
      and end-line (56.20 percent in 2019), not achieving the target increase of 20 percent.
     While in 2013 the amount of money spent in food and non-food consumption of poor households was
      US$355.54 the amount increased to US$526.14 in 2019.

Enhanced community engagement in public investment decisions:

     The end-line survey found that community member’s participation in local development affairs
      increased by 16.9 percentage points and in supervision of local construction activities by 31.4 percent
      with the greatest change being for the poor (31.8 and 36.2 percentage points respectively) and
      indigenous EMs (19.4 and 39 percentage points).
     The percentage of women participating in decision-making on local public investments increased from
      25 percent in 2007 to 44.6 percent in 2019 (Target exceeded).
     The number of Livelihood Enhancement Groups (LEGs) and market link partnerships (MLPs)
      increased from 3,687 in December 2017 to 4,383 in December 2019 (Target exceeded).
     The average improvement in the satisfaction level of villagers was 32.1 percent, surpassing the target
      of 20 percent. Changes in satisfaction included: i) selection of infrastructure projects (increased from
      73 percent to 84 percent); ii) quality of those projects (increased from 59 percent to 65 percent); iii)
      quality of local roads (increased from 45 percent to 49 percent); iv) local irrigation system (increased
      from 29 percent to 62 percent); and v) agricultural extension activities (increased from 12 percent to
      28 percent).


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)




                                  25 percent of households had all three development priorities addressed in their communes,
                                   surpassing the target of 20 percent of households (Target met).
                                  In total, the project benefited 638,536 beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 540,472 beneficiaries.
                                   50.14 percent of beneficiaries were female, achieving the target of 50 percent being female.
                                   Furthermore, the project supported 141,897 beneficiary households surpassing the target of 120,000
                                   beneficiary households.

                            Overall Outcome: Enhanced living standards:

                                  Consumption of poor beneficiaries in the project communes increased by 48.7 percent between 2014
                                    and 2019, surpassing the target of 10 percent. Consumption of non-poor households only increased
                                    by 8.3 percent, indicating that poverty targeting efforts of the project were generally successful. In
                                    addition, the Impact Evaluation found that households in project communes strengthened their non-
                                    farm participation and livelihood diversification strategies, both of which are likely to improve living
                                    standards.

                            Based on the achievement of all four outcomes above, the achievement of the objective is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the objective was Substantial. However, as the ICR (p. 9) stated, the assessment of
                            achievements was based on data from the baseline and end-line surveys and the project’s Impact Evaluation.
                            The end-line survey and Impact Evaluation found that the counterfactual control communes received similar
                            levels of financing for similar types of investments as the project’s communes in the National Targeted
                            Program (which used similar criteria as the project to provide funding to the same geographic area as the
                            project). Therefore, it was not possible to conduct a difference-in-difference evaluation as planned since the
                            control communes were not a pure control group. The ICR stated that the Impact Evaluation noted that sub-
                            outcome indicators had more positive impact where higher investments were made in the project compared to
                            the National Targeted Program.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 16) included a benefit-cost analysis. The project’s total implementation cost was calculated at
US$194.0 million. In order to estimate project benefits, the analysis explored investment priorities through a
participatory process at local level for the initial 18 months of implementation and can, as a result, only be
considered indicative. Numerical estimates were prepared for all productive rural infrastructure, self-reliance and
income diversification activities, market linkage activities, and district connective infrastructure. The analysis
used a discount rate of 10 percent. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) on project investment over a 15-
year time was 46 percent. The Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR), adjusted principally for the cost of
unpaid labor for both local infrastructure construction and sustainable livelihood activities, was 13 percent for
infrastructure and 38 percent for sustainable livelihoods activities, resulting in an overall return of 15 percent.

The ICR (p. 14 and Annex 4) also conducted a benefit-cost analysis using a discount rate of five percent and
estimated a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$63.9 million, and an EIRR of 29 percent. The analysis found that
the community infrastructure investments (which accounted for approx. 60 percent of project financing) had
most benefits.

According to the Bank team (February 1, 2021) the main reason for the higher EIRR for large investments (vs.
livelihood investments) was the estimated benefits evident in both analyses and the approximately 10 percent
more roads that were built, and more than three times the number of irrigation sub-projects, than had been
anticipated in the appraisal analysis. The Bank team stated that this was the main reason for the higher EIRR at
completion.

Operational efficiency:

The project closed on its original closing date of December 31, 2019 and did not require any extensions.
According to the ICR (p. 14) project management costs accounted for approximately 13.5 percent of total project
costs, which was slightly higher than the original estimate of 10 percent. The higher project management costs
resulted from project implementation in one of the most isolated regions in the country with implementing units in
all 26 districts. However, despite project management costs being slightly higher, they were still in the mid-point
of range of project management costs for previously implemented national CDC projects worldwide (ranging
from five percent to 21 percent). Also, procurement delays decreased from 84 percent during the first year of
project implementation to 1.3 percent by project closing (according to the ICR procurement delays were
measured as the ratio of total contracts signed by the end of the year to total contracts planned for the year).

Taking everything together, the project’s efficiency rating is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given the project’s alignment with the Bank’s Vietnam Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) (FY18-20). Both, Efficacy and Efficiency were Substantial. Taking everything together, the
project’s overall outcome rating would ordinarily be Satisfactory. However, this validation agrees with the ICR’s
rating of Moderately Satisfactory due to the lack of strong counter-factual evidence from the projects impact
evaluation due to control communes receiving similar levels of financing through the National Targeted
Program. Therefore, the project’s overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcome can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: According to the Bank team (February 1,2021) the government continues to be
committed to the project’s objective. This is manifested in the continued substantial level of resources that
the government is making available for the National Targeted Program for Ethnic Minorities and Mountainous
Areas and other related poverty reduction initiatives. The ICR (p. 25) stated that one of the main risks to
project outcomes is the continuation of the provision of the Operation & Maintenance (O&M) needed for the
infrastructure built by the project. According to the Bank team (February 1, 2021) the financing of O&M is
being assumed by local committees, which require a dedicated budget line for this purpose once sub-
projects are completed and handed over to these committees. In addition, under the national targeted
program (NTPs) on sustainable poverty reduction, the annual work plan at commune level includes 6.3
percent for O&M activities, identified based on the total annual investment budget allocated to them. Under
NTPs that have similar infrastructure/subproject, the government often sets aside some budget for O&M
activities. Lastly, as with CDD-type operations globally, simple O&M activities at the local level are often
carried out through donated labor by community voluntary groups. In Vietnam, several local civil society
groups such as the Women’s Union, Youth Union and the Fatherland Front help to mobilize and manage
such efforts.

Technical capacity: The project built institutional capacity and strengthened organizational development at
the communal, district and provincial government levels. However, the ICR (p. 26) stated that the project did
not envision building capacity within the department of Agriculture and Rural Development for the delivery of
extension services, which would be a beneficial future operation.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



Sustainability: Road networks in the commune/villages were constructed under component 1 for trucks with
a carrying capacity of around three tones. However, according to the ICR (p. 18) much heavier trucks have
been using these trucks resulting in damage and reducing the productive life of these roads. The local
government has not been successful in addressing this challenge.

Financing: The project paid a percentage of sub-project grants for agricultural extension services for
farmers, which were provided by private sector companies and the Department of Agriculture and Rural
Development. This financing will not be available after project closure, impacting the sustainability of these
services. However, the ICR (p. 26) noted that the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development will
continue to support farmers working with traditional crops and livestock.

Ethnic minorities/ gender: While the project was able to engage with ethnic minorities and women through
participatory approaches and decision-making, the sustainability of this engagement is not ensured since
Commune Development Boards (CDBs) are not part of a permanent structure. However, the ICR (p. 26)
stated that members of CDBs remain within the Commune People’s Committee and could potentially foster
this type of participatory planning.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 24) the project built on the experience from several in-country and global
  operations. For example, the project design took the lesson from the Northern Mountains Poverty
  Reduction projects and the Agriculture Competitiveness project into account. These lessons included: i)
  involving provincial and district people’s committees directly to monitor implementation and ensure
  participation of other departments; ii) structuring and supporting LEGs; and iii) defining parameters and
  procedures for sub-project selection and implementation. In addition, the design of components 1 and 2
  was based on successful established CDD/livelihood models and in-country experiences. Component 3
  took the results of the preparation analysis that found EM connectivity to markets spanned both physical
  and social/cultural issues into account.

  The PAD (p. 12) identified several risks for project implementation which included a high degree of inter-
  departmental coordination required for effective project implementation (between DPI, DARD and DOH),
  the relatively low capacity of, especially, the target districts, the limited experience of the designated
  overseeing department of MPI (DTE) and the unknown efficacy of several livelihoods strategies (under
  component 2). Also, the project was to be heavily dependent on the successful implementation of the
  Impact Evaluation to provide data on project performance at outcome and impact levels. Furthermore,
  given the strongly decentralized nature of the Project and the use of investment strategies not standard to
  communes and districts (livelihoods support and community procurement), certain governance risks were
  also present. According to the ICR (p. 18) the Bank implemented adequate mitigation measures with the
  exception of a strong MIS and more strategic collaboration with the Department of Agriculture and Rural
  Development.

  The project’s M&E had several shortcomings (see section 9a for more details).



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 25) the Bank team conducted more than 20 supervision and technical support
 missions. The Bank team collaborated with different practices within the Bank and with the Food and
 Agriculture Organization (FAO) to ensure expert support fir the Impact Evaluation, the support of nutrition
 activities and for the livelihood component. The project benefitted from the same co-Task Team Leader
 and safeguard and fiduciary staff throughout project preparation and implementation. The ICR (p. 24)
 stated that aide memoires, management letters, and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were
 sufficiently candid and identified issues needing the attention of the government and Bank management.

 The ICR (p. 25) stated that the project encountered several some supervision issues including frequent
 staff turnover with the Bank's and government's livelihood experts, which negatively impacted the support
 provided to the livelihood component.

 Also, according to the ICR (p. 18) the development objective rating was Moderately Satisfactory throughout
 project implementation since key outcome data for consumption, access, dietary diversity, assets and
 connectivity not available until the end-line survey was completed. Project implementation was negatively
 affected by a slow start due to a slow setting up of the project infrastructure and recruitment of needed
 staff, in particular on the provincial and district level. The lack of sufficient staff resulted in inadequate
 technical guidance for already started livelihood activities. Furthermore, the project encountered several
 issues regarding budgeting, financing and disbursements (see section 10b for more details). Also, the
 Bank team was not able to resolve issues related to the market linkages sub-component due to commercial
 interests outside the Bank’s and project teams’ control. Finally, the Bank did not address the lack of clarity
 in regard to the definition of some indicators, which persisted until the end-line survey.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to the intended outcomes
 was sound and reflected in the results framework. The results framework in the PAD included 12 different
 indicators. One indicator (“percentage delays in procurement activities as per approved annual
 procurement plan”) was added during implementation without a formal restructuring. All indicators included
 a target and most indicators had a baseline. The results framework had a few shortcomings. First, the PDO

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



 was not sufficiently clearly specified and did not provide a definition for “enhanced living standards” making
 measuring project results challenging. And second, the results framework would have benefitted from also
 measuring the second aspect of the PDO “improving livelihood opportunities”.

 According to the PAD (p. 13) the project’s M&E system was to operate at the commune, district, provincial
 and national levels. The project was also to implement an Impact Evaluation. Furthermore, project
 management units were to monitor and report on project inputs and outputs. Reporting was to be done on
 a monthly basis between commune and district, and on a quarterly basis between districts, provinces, and
 central level, and with the Bank. According to the ICR (p. 20) the project used a web-based MIS platform
 which used mobile-data connectivity and had smart phone/tablet capabilities to enable real-time data
 collection by commune facilitators. This system was to simplify and speed up basic project progress data
 collection and reporting on a regular basis.




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 20) in 2015, before significant project implementation had been carried out, the
  project conducted a baseline survey. Baseline values were set for six out of seven outcome indicators.
  The ICR stated that lack of clarity in regard to the definition of some indicators persisted until the end-line
  survey was conducted and when the assessment methodology and interpretation of some indicators was
  improved.

  The Impact Evaluation of the project was outsourced which allowed the task team and the government to
  focus more on the design and operationalization of the MIS. According to the ICR (p. 20) while the MIS
  was working well after some issues at the start of project implementation, it continued to experience
  technical issues with data-collection forms. Also, the launch of the program’s version 2.0 platform did not
  work as planned, which resulted in the government cancelling any efforts to fully operationalize the
  system in 2018. Instead, key output data was reported through parallel excel-based systems at the
  provincial and central levels. Overall, the ICR (p. 24) stated that the project relied too heavily on a
  prototype MIS. According to the Bank team (February 1, 2021) the M&E monitoring data was of good
  quality but was inconsistent in form and timeliness. Furthermore, the ICR (p. 20) stated that the project’s
  M&E performance was negatively impacted by lack of qualified staff who did not receive sufficient
  training. While the Mid-Term Review recommended several additional intermediate outcome measures,
  the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) project management did not agree and was concerned
  about adding unplanned activities.

  According to the ICR (p. 20) the project conducted an end-line survey in 2019 as well as Mid-Term
  Review studies including a beneficiary assessment and technical and economic assessment of
  infrastructure investments of mixed quality in 2017. In addition, the project produced quarterly and annual
  progress reports and a Rapid Assessment of Livelihood Enhancement Group Outcomes in 2019. In
  addition, several technical reports on infrastructure and livelihood activities were issued. Finally, the ICR
  (p. 21) stated that progress reports and monitoring data were regularly confirmed by the Bank through
  field assessments.

  The Impact Evaluation followed a rigorous difference in difference design and was implemented to
  international standards. Nevertheless, the evaluation encountered difficulties as a result of the control


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



  communes receiving almost equal levels of financial support for similar types of investments as the
  project provided to project-communes and therefore rendering the counterfactual “without project”. Also,
  the ICR (p. 24) stated that the Impact Evaluation design was overly complex resulting in the government
  having issues to manage it.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 21) initial data from the baseline highlighted drinking water and nutrition issues
  in project communes, which allowed the project team to enhance investments in these areas. However,
  the ICR stated that it is not clear to what exact extent monitoring systems were used to inform decision
  making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.36 (Forest), and OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management). According to the
   ICR (p. 21) the project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which was
   part of the project’s feasibility study.

   The ICR (p. 21) stated that the government assigned/hired adequate staff at the provincial and district levels
   for the implementation of safeguards. Also, the government conducted trainings for commune
   representatives and beneficiaries. Technical staff at the central office and district/commune agriculture
   officers provided guidance on good agricultural practices and waste management to livelihood
   enhancement groups (LEGs) as well as guidelines on construction of animal pens, techniques of
   crop cultivation and livestock raising, proper use of fertilizer and pesticides as well as training on treatment
   of animal waste. Also, farmers were informed about proper handling and disposal of agro-chemicals and
   their containers. Furthermore, the central project office and the provincial management units monitored and
   supervised construction contractors’ compliance in regard to agreed mitigation measures and reported
   results to the Bank on a regular basis.

   According to the ICR (p. 21) the project did not receive any complaints from beneficiaries in regard to
   environmental impacts associated with construction activities. However, field studies conducted by the
   Bank’s engineer found that a number of infrastructure projects had incomplete documentation files, which
   also included environmental reports. The ICR (p. 22) stated that Bank supervision missions found that all
   sub-projects included the required Environmental Codes of Conduct and approved Environmental
   Protection Plan (which were included in bidding documents). In regard to OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management)
   the project experienced issues complying with the agreed Environmental Codes of Conduct and Good
   Agriculture Practices for rice and maize sub-projects.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



  The project also triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.10 (indigenous people) and OP/BP 4.12
  (involuntary resettlement). According to the ICR (p. 22) the project prepared and disclosed a Resettlement
  Policy Framework and a social assessment. In case of minor land acquisition, voluntary donation criteria
  and mechanism identified in the project’s resettlement policy framework and ESMF were applied. Due to
  shortcomings in the documentation of land acquisition, safeguard compliance was rated Moderately
  Satisfactory between November 2016 and March 2018. During the second half of project implementation
  district level units improved their efforts to comply with the required documentation.

  According to the ICR (p.22) the project also established a grievance redress system. Beneficiaries had the
  possibility to make a complaint. However, the implementation redress system faced implementation issues
  as it was originally designed to be part of the MIS—allowing for both SMS and internet intake, cataloging
  and response. However, as the MIS was never fully operationalized, this module was never fully effective
  either. However, the project did have a “hotline” number and a web-page that were advertised in
  communication materials that were widely disseminated in all communes, districts and provinces

   Also, the ICR (p. 23) stated that despite communication on the grievance redress system less than 100
  comments or complaints were filed (only one was addressed) since target beneficiaries doubting the
  efficacy of this mechanism and fear of retaliation and losing financing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (p. 23) the project complied with the Bank’s financial covenants and submitted annual
  audited financial management reports and quarterly Interim Financial Reports of an acceptable quality and
  on a timely basis. Also, accounting and reporting functions, internal controls and disbursement were
  performed adequately. Government staff supervised qualified consultants at the central, provincial and
  district levels to manage project finances. In addition, the Bank provided training in financial management
  to project staff.

  The ICR (p. 23) stated that at the beginning of the Medium-Term Investment Plan (MTIP) the project
  encountered discrepancies between the project’s operating budget (based on the overall IDA and
  government financing for the project) and the authorized allocations (funds that central and provincial
  implementing units were allowed to use based on MTIP parameters). The authorized allocations were less
  than the operating budget limiting the extent to which different management units were able to implement
  project activities. Also, the processing of withdrawal applications by the MOF was lengthy and took on
  average three weeks (sometimes with delays of up to one to two months) resulting in lack of financing for
  implementation units. As a result, Financial Management was consistently rated Moderately Satisfactory
  throughout project implementation.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (p. 23) the government hired procurement staff at the central, provincial and district
  levels. The staff was trained by central consultants and the Bank to ensure the project’s compliance with
  procurement guidelines and government regulations.


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



   However, the project experienced several procurement related delays due to: i) slow annual budget
   allocation and preparation of the procurement plan; ii) slow recruitment of design consultants for works; iii)
   lengthy internal processes for review and design approval; iv) slow process for soliciting quotations and
   bid evaluations; and iv) slow execution of works. The ICR (p. 23) stated that all implementing agencies
   made significant efforts to address these issues.

   Also, the project faced challenges regarding contract management, in particular for the construction of
   infrastructure at the community level during the first two years of project implementation. The Bank
   identified several issues including: i) contractors not respecting warranty periods; ii) lack of minutes of
   checking approval of field laboratories of the contractors; iii) lack of acceptance minutes for input materials;
   iv) lack of material transportation diagrams; v) lack of minutes of handing over finished construction items.
   As a result of these issues the project’s procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory
   throughout project implementation. However, between 2014 and 2019, annual procurement delays
   (measured as the percentage of works contracted by year’s end versus the number of works activities
   planned for that year) decreased from 84 percent in 2014 to 1.3 percent in 2019, indicating improved
   procurement performance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 26 to 28) included several lessons learned, which were adopted by IEG:

      Establishing strong and formal institutional linkages across all participating entities is
         critical for ensuring the sustainability of project outcomes. The project financed the



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-Central Highlands Poverty Reduction (P128072)



         private sector to fill a technical assistance gap left by relevant agriculture departments.
         However, the sustainability of this arrangement was not fully addressed by project close.
        Enabling strong supervision of local works through community members and
         technical experts allows for higher quality outcomes and stronger local ownership. In
         this project, Commune Supervisory Boards received basic training for supervising civil works.
         In addition, a technical supervision firm conducted technical reviews and spot checks at the
         provincial level and larger works contracted by districts. Furthermore, a supervising engineer
         oversaw all works that were directly implemented by the community but contracted out.
         Despite all these measures, the project faced quality issues indicating that linkages between
         different supervision entities were not sufficiently strong.
        Reaching the most isolated EM groups requires specialized outreach activities and
         language skills. The local authorities in this project faced constraints in their ability to reach
         and support more isolated communities. However, through specialized outreach activities the
         project was able to obtain high participation from women and indigenous EM groups.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation and was sufficiently candid
in identifying design and implementation bottlenecks. Also, the ICR included an appropriate benefit-cost
analysis and provided useful lessons learned. However, the ICR would have benefitted from providing more
clarification on the intermediate outcome indicator “change of transport connectivity index” and why the unit of
measurement was stated as “text” but the original target was 20 percent. Overall, the ICR's quality is rated
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 17
