     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022444

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P106909                                      BF:Urban Water Sector Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                 Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H4820,IDA-H9970                          30-Jun-2015                                        153,027,370.75

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2009                                  31-Dec-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             158,484,031.31                                               0.00

 Actual                                         153,027,370.75                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to both the Financing Agreement (p.6) dated June 9, 2009, and the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p.5) dated April 30,2009, the project objective was “to increase access to sustainable water and
   sanitation services in selected urban areas.”

   This review will assess the project objective parsed as follows:

          a. To increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas.

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



        b. To increase access to sustainable sanitation services in selected urban areas.

   Note: Some of the key associated outcome targets were revised upwards because of the expansion of the
   project scope at the first restructuring to utilize the savings to increase the number of people with access to
   on-site latrines and also at the time of the additional financing to increase the number of people with access to
   water services. These changes resulted in an increase in the level of the project’s ambition. Therefore, this
   review will not administer a split-rating, but assess the achievements of the project based on the revised
   targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-Oct-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of four components:

   A. Urban Water. (Appraisal cost: US52.78 million including physical and price contingencies; actual cost:
   US$138.84 million)

   The project activities under this component consisted of the expansion or reinforcement of the water
   production and storage capacity and the water distribution system, and the installation of household
   connections and public standpipes to increase access to water in Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso,
   Koudougou and Dédougou.

   B. Access to Sanitation. (Appraisal cost: US$35.56 million including physical and price contingencies;
   actual cost: US$28.23 million)

   This component was to support the construction of on-site sanitation facilities, i.e., latrines, wastewater
   disposal systems, and shower basins, provision of water supply and sanitation services in schools, and the
   construction of fecal sludge treatment plants in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso. Technical assistance
   activities were to support campaigns to increase awareness about sanitation services and hygiene
   practices, training of local masons for the construction of latrines.

   C. Institutional Support and Capacity Building. (Appraisal cost: US$3.93 million including physical and
   price contingencies; actual cost: US$6.45 million)

   Technical assistance activities were to support the assessment of the National Water and Sanitation
   Agency (Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement – ONEA) performance and viability, the

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



  improvement of the utility’s internal auditing function, customer management, and capacity in human
  resources. Mid-term surveys and assessments of pilot programs, and training in project management,
  procurement, and technical management were to be financed under this component.

  D. Environmental Social Management. (Appraisal cost: US$0.64 million including physical and price
  contingencies; actual cost: US$1.36 million)

  This component was to support implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework
  and the Resettlement Policy Framework, as well as the preparation of the Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessments, the Environmental and Social Management Plans and the Resettlement Action
  Plans. Borrower’s funds were to be used for acquisition of land and indemnification in connection with the
  implementation of these plans.

  Revised Components

  At the first restructuring in August 2013, piloting of public-private-partnership model in Yamtenga and
  Toudoubwéogo was added to the project scope to delegate water service provision in informal settlements
  where it was not possible for ONEA to implement its standard network planning and development approach.

  At the additional financing in October 2014, construction of water transmission mains, expansion of the
  water storage capacity, construction of water pumping stations, and expansion of secondary and tertiary
  water distribution networks in Ouagadougou were added to the project scope under Component 1 (see the
  Additional Financing and Second Restructuring entry in the following section). Technical studies on water
  supply and institutional development were also added to Component 3 in preparation of the Burkina Faso
  Water Supply and Sanitation Program for Results, P164345 (ICR, p.9).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$92.92 million including US$4.51 million
  and US$ 7.37 million for physical and price contingencies, respectively. With the increase in the project’s
  scope at the time of additional financing in October 2014, the estimated total project cost increased to
  US$172.92. In December 2019, the project closed with a total cost of US$174.88 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the International Development Association (IDA) grant was estimated at US$80.00
  million. After the additional financing in October 2014, the IDA grant amount increased to US$160.00
  million. The project fully disbursed the total grant amount. However, an amount of US$1.2 million accrued
  from the original grant because of the exchange rate fluctuations was returned to the World Bank.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the ONEA’s contribution was estimated at US$4.53 million and the
  beneficiaries’ contribution at US$8.39 million, totaling US$12.92 million. At project closing, the ONEA’s
  contribution stood at US$7.24 million and the beneficiaries’ estimated actual contribution was US$7.64
  million.

  Restructurings: There were three project restructurings, one of which was with additional financing:

        First Restructuring (Level 2 – August 30, 2013): Four indicators measuring the increase in access
         to water and sanitation services in percentages were deleted because of the difficulty in establishing

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



          attribution between project’s intervention and the achievement of the targets of those indicators. The
          indicators expressed as “number of additional people provided with improved water and sanitation
          services,” which were classified as intermediate results indicators at appraisal, were reclassified as
          objective level indicators—also core indicators—at this restructuring. Three new indictors were
          added to the results framework to measure the number of household connections, standposts and
          latrines constructed under the project. Although these indicators were not included in the original
          results framework, the targets were defined in the project appraisal document (PAD, pp.7-8).
          Because of the savings in the sanitation component, it was also decided to increase the number of
          latrines constructed under the project from 28,000 to 39,955. This resulted in an increase in the
          “number of additional people in urban areas provided with access to improved sanitation” from
          246,000 351,600. Lastly, since most of the civil works contracts had already been awarded by the
          time of this restructuring, the balance uncommitted grant proceeds were reallocated among
          expenditure categories to finance additional water supply activities piloting the PPP model in
          informal settlements in Yamtenga and Toudoubwéogo.
         Additional Financing and Second Restructuring (Level 1 – October 21, 2014): An additional
          grant of US$80.00 million was approved to strengthen the water transmission network and increase
          access to water in Ouagadougou. The activities to be financed by the additional financing were
          construction of water transmission mains, expansion of the water storage capacity, construction of
          water pumping stations, expansion of secondary and tertiary water distribution networks, installation
          of household connections and public standpipes. The project closing date was extended by three
          year six months (42 months) from June 30, 2015 to December 31, 2018 to allow time for the
          completion of the additional civil works and the operation of the sludge treatment facilities. The
          target values of some indicators were revised to reflect the increase in the project’s scope: (i)
          number of people provided with access to water from 527,000 to 759,000; (ii) the number of
          household water connections from 56,170 to 82,170; and (iii) the number of standpipes from 106 to
          186. Additionally, the target values of two indicators were revised to reflect the achievements at the
          time of additional financing: (i) the number of ONEA employees per 1,000 water connections from
          3.5 to 3.4; and (ii) the private customer bill collection ratio from 97 percent to 97.5 percent.
         Third Restructuring (Level 2 – December 17, 2018): The project closing date was extended by
          one year from December 31, 2018 to December 31, 2019 to allow time for the completion of works
          under three contracts financed by additional financing. Procurement issues, such as bidders
          contesting the bidding results, revision of the biding results, and subsequent lengthy negotiations of
          the contracts resulted in a 12-month delay in the implementation of works under these three
          contracts related to the expansion of distribution networks and installation of household connections.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 28, 2009. The Financing Agreement was signed on June 9, 2009
   and became effective on October 5, 2009. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in January-February 2013.
   The original closing date was June 30, 2015. It was extended by 4 years and 6 months, and the project
   closed on December 31, 2019. The reasons for closing date extensions have been outlined in the project
   restructuring entries above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



The project objectives are highly relevant to the country context. Despite a significant increase in the rate of
access to water in urban areas from 37 percent in early 1990s to 91 percent in 2018, Burkina Faso, a water
scarce country, is faced with a continuously increasing demand for water because of a high urbanization
rate of 5.7 percent (7.2 percent in the capital city of Ouagadougou and 11 percent in the second city of
Bobo-Dioulasso). Contrary to the high rate of access to water, only 38 percent of the urban population has
access to on-site sanitation services. This rate falls to a mere 12 percent in rural areas. The project
objectives are also aligned with the government’s objectives to achieve universal access to potable water
and to eradicate open defecation by achieving universal access to sanitation services as defined in the
National Program for Water Supply and the National Program for Sanitation of Wastewater and Excreta
2016-2030 (ICR, p.12). The government’s firm commitment to achieve these goals and the National Water
and Sanitation Agency’s (Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement – ONEA) high implementation
capacity, which was the first public utility to receive ISO 9001 certification, are sufficient to expect the
achievement of the project objectives.

The project objectives are assessed as highly aligned with the World Bank’s current strategy as defined in
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Burkina Faso, FY18-FY23. The project sought to address the
development problem of lack of access to water and sanitation services by financing the related
infrastructure investments, including new solutions such as sludge treatment plants, and technical
assistance activities to induce behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices. The project objectives
correspond to “Objective 2.4 Expand access to water and sanitation services” under the “Focus Are 2:
Invest in human capital and social protection systems” (CPF, pp.35-36). Since poor access to water and
sanitation services disproportionately impacts women and girls because of time loss in fetching water and
health burdens, the project objectives are also aligned with the cross-cutting objective of the CPF to
improve gender related biases and inequalities (CPF, pp.38-39).

The World Bank has been a long-term development partner for Burkina Faso in the water and sanitation
services sector since mid-1990s. The World Bank supported the development of the sanitation sector
through the Urban Environment Project (1995-2005), which supported the scaling-up of on-site sanitation
and demonstrated the benefits of strategic sanitation planning and the water sector through the
Ouagadougou Water Supply Project (2001-2007), which was instrumental in reforming the ONEA and
improving water services in the capital city of Ouagadougou (PAD, p.4). This project was structured based
on the achievements of the first two projects aiming at increasing access to both water and sanitation
services in a wider implementation area. However, while the objective remained relevant throughout the
project cycle and was a necessary response to a development gap in Burkina Faso, a significant
shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the project formulation around what outcomes would be achieved
through increasing access to water. The causal chain between funding and outcomes was clear, albeit with
most targets at output level, as the objective was closer to the output level, rather than the outcome level.

Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban areas.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change for Objective 1

               The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., IDA grant and technical assistance
               support, would directly lead to the achievement of project outputs of increased water production and storage
               facilities, expanded and improved water transmission and distribution networks, household connections to the
               water network, installed public standpipes, and improved internal auditing functions, customer management,
               and human resources management of the ONEA. In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the
               outcome of more people in targeted urban center using safe water that would be supplied sustainably by
               ONEA. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the outcomes
               achieved could be mostly attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the expected outcomes were
               closer to output level in the results chain and the project’s impact on health and economic activities of the
               beneficiaries were not captured by the theory of change, such as improved health and time saved for fetching
               water that could be used for money earning activities. Additionally, the financial viability of the utility—a key
               requirement for adequate operation and maintenance of the water system to ensure the sustainability of water
               services—was dependent on the adjustment of the water tariffs by the government, which was outside of the
               project’s scope.

               Outputs

               Project activities resulted in the following outputs:

               A. Ouagadougou

                       The water distribution network was expanded by 386.6 km. The target was 145 km.
                       The number of household connections increased by 63,028. The target was 51,000.
                       The number of standpipes built was 271. The target was 175.
                       The transmission main was expanded by 23.7 km as planned.
                       The south branch feeder was expanded by 8.1 km as planned.
                       The north branch feeder was expanded by 10 km as planned.
                       Two ground tanks and one elevated tank were built as planned.
                       One pumping station was built as planned.
                       A total of 451 km of secondary and tertiary distribution network was built against the target of 344 km.

               B. Bobo-Dioulasso

                       Three boreholes were constructed. The target was two.
                       One water treatment plant was built as planned.
                       Three elevated water tanks were built against the target of two.
                       Three pumping stations were built as planned.

                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)




      The water distribution network was expanded by 347 km, slightly lower than the target of 374 km.
      The number of household connections increased by 18,327, lower than the target of 28,000.
      The number of standpipes built was 31. The target was 30.

C. Koudougou

        One electricity supply line was built for the pumping stations as planned.
        Two elevated water tanks were built, against the target of one.
        The water distribution network was expanded by 92 km. The target was 58.6 km.
        The number of household connections increased by 3,581. The target was 2,580.
        The number of standpipes built was 26. The target was 10.

D. Dédougou

        One production borehole, one filtration unit and one elevated water tank were built as planned.
        The water distribution network was expanded by 60 km. The target was 18.6 km.
        The number of household connections increased by 1,896. The target was 590.
        The number of standpipes built was 21. The target was 16.

E. Technical Assistance

These outputs are reported in the ICR but were not in the Results Framework and therefore did not have any
targets.

      648 members of ONEA staff, including all managers, attended technical trainings on water production,
         sanitation, and project management, and trainings on financial management for the use and
         internalization of the utility’s financial model that was first developed as part of the 2005 tariff study.
        Study tours were arranged to the utilities in Tunisia, Kenya, Senegal, and Morocco.
        Call center was structured with support from the Water Company of Marseilles in France.
        The ONEA’s training facility (Centre de Formation des Métiers de l’Eau) transformed into a fully
         functioning training center.
        Human management tools including career management plans, a personal evaluation system,
         procedures manuals, and management planning were developed
        A financial auditor recruited under the project assessed the capacity of the internal audit unit. An audit
         manual was drafted including set procedures. The staff of the internal audit unit were trained through
         workshops and a pilot audit was conducted.
        A risk mapping exercise was implemented.
        Private-public-partnership model was piloted in semi-urban settlements in Ouagadougou for the
         provision of water.

Outcomes




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



One indicator was defined for increase in access to improved water services and three indicators for the
sustainability of water services through improvements in operational efficiency and financial viability of the
utility:

      Number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources under the
       project: In the project area, an additional 848,000 people gained access to water through household
       connections and standpipes installed under the project. The target was 759,000 people. However, the
       achievement in Bobo-Dioulasso was 170,578 people, which was about 85,000 people lower than the
       target of 255,400 because of lower demand for water connections than estimated at appraisal. Higher
       achievements in other three cities compensated for this shortfall: (i) in Ouagadougou 615,125 people
       against the target of 501,300; (ii) in Koudougou 39,313 people against the target of 25,704; and (iii) in
       Dédougou 22,985 people against the target of 9,992. The lower achievement in Bobo-Dioulasso was
       because of lower demand than estimated at the time of appraisal.
      The financial equilibrium of the urban sector maintained with agreed tariff policy based on cost
       recovery: The implementation of a cost-recovery tariff policy that was supported by the project
       ensured the continuation of ONEA’s urban water sector financial equilibrium. During project
       implementation ONEA achieved the target of maintaining financial equilibrium that was measured as
       annual revenues being higher than annual operating costs and repayment of debts. This expected to
       contribute to sustainability of water services through adequate operation and maintenance.
      Number of ONEA’s employees per 1,000 water connections: During project implementation the
       number of ONEA’s water employees per 1,000 water connections dropped from 4.3 to 2.2 although its
       total workforce increased by 31.7 percent. The target was 3.4. However, at the time of the project
       assessment, 27 percent of the posts in ONEA were registered as vacant since recruitment was frozen
       in 2016. These posts were filled by short-term consultants (ICR, p.18).
      Bill collection ratio of private water customers (Per cent of bills collected): ONEA’s bill collection
       ratio for private customers has increased from 95 percent to 96.9 percent. The revised target at the
       additional financing was 97.5 percent. A direct attribution could not be established between the project
       outcomes and this achievement. This indicator measured the bill collection ratio at the system level
       including large houses (with a collection rate of 80.08 percent) and industries (with a collections rate of
       78.16 percent), both of which were not targeted by the project. However, the indicator still shows that
       ONEA is capable of collection a high percentage of the bills that contributes to the financial viability of
       the utility and the sustainability of the services.

Additionally, the ICR reports the following outcomes that were not captured by the results framework:

      The delegation of provision of water service to private companies in informal settlements where ONEA
       could not implement its usual network planning and development approach resulted in increasing the
       number of people with access to water by 18,900. No target was set for this outcome.
      As a result of the boreholes constructed under the project, the water production capacity increased by
       16,300 cubic meters per day in Bobo-Dioulasso and 720 cubic meters per day in Dédougou. There
       were no targets set for these outcomes.
      According to the project team’s observations made during a site visit for the preparation of the ICR,
       the beneficiaries who gained access to water under the project did not spend time for fetching water
       anymore, and they paid less for water. The project team also observed that availability of water
       resulted in some economic activities, such as bricks manufacturing using water (ICR, p.15). The
       project’s results framework did not include these outcomes, and there were no indicators measuring
       their achievement.

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)




      Project activities contributed to the improvement of water service continuity through the strengthening
       of water mains and distribution networks in Ouagadougou and water production and storage capacity
       increases in other three cities. According to the information provided by the project team, the water
       service continuity in Ouagadougou is 24 hours, in Bobo-Dioulasso 21 hours and in both Koudougou
       and Dédougou 22 hours, which are higher than ONEA’s 16 hours of water service on average
       including all service regions in the country. Baselines were not defined at project start. The ONEA’s
       target is to achieve 24-hour water service in its service area.
      As a result of tariffs set to cover the operation and maintenance costs of water services, the utility’s
       financial viability sustainability of these services would be achieved.
      Strengthening of the audit functions improved ONEA’s capacity to “provide accurate, detailed
       information about their technical operations (assets, quality of service, losses) and financial operations
       (revenues, costs, customer data)” (ICR, p.27).
      Before the project the utility operated a leak reporting switchboard. As a result of technical assistance
       support, the switchboard was reorganized as a fully operational call center. The information gathered
       by the call center is used to plan for new connections and densification of the water network. In 2018,
       86.5 percent of the calls received by the call center were processed including grievances and
       requests.

The project achieved its goal of increasing the overall number of people with access to potable water in the
project area using a check-based (verification) approach to ensure that only dwellings with occupants were
connected to the water network, but the increase in Bobo-Dioulasso was lower than the target set at
appraisal.. The project contributed directly to the improvement of water service continuity in all four cities
through investments in water production and transmission mains to increase water supply. The project also
contributed to the sustainability of water services through the strengthening of the operational efficiency and
financial viability of the utility through technical assistance, but absence of regular tariff adjustments to reflect
increasing operational costs can adversely affect the sustainability of water services. Overall, the project’s
efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban
areas is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to sustainable sanitation services in selected urban areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

Under Component 2, the project was to finance the construction of non-networked sanitation solutions, such
as household and school latrines with access to water, sumps to dispose wastewater and construction of
fecal sludge treatment plants in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso. The expected outputs of these
investment activities were increased availability of sanitation facilities in households and schools, and
capacity developed for fecal sludge treatment. The project was also to finance technical assistance activities

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



to implement hygiene campaigns, train masons and pit emptiers and build ONEA’s capacity to operate and
maintain the sludge treatment plants. The expected outputs of these technical assistance activities were
increased awareness about the benefits of hygiene and sanitation in the public and improved local capacity
for the production of sanitation facilities and the management of fecal sludge removal and treatment. The
expected outcomes of these outputs were behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices, and
continuity in the sanitation service chain. Creation of a sanitation markets through the training of the masons
in the construction of sanitation facilities and the pit emptiers in removing fecal sludge from households to
ONEA’s sludge treatment plant were expected to contribute to the sustainability of the sanitation services.
Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were partly valid and direct, and the outcomes
achieved could be partly attributed to the project’s intervention. There was a logical gap in the assumption
that hygiene campaigns and training would automatically lead to better hygiene practices; long-term
affordability of sludge removal from latrines pits by poorer households was not addressed by the theory of
change; and the impact of improved sanitation services on public health—reduction in diseases due to better
hygiene and sanitation practices—and environment—reduction in open defecation and dumping of fecal
sludge to the environment---was not captured by the results framework.

Outputs

A. Ouagadougou

        The number of latrines built was 37,807. The target was 30,000.
        The number of wastewater disposal facilities built was 34,897. The target was 27,000.
        The number of schools with improved water and sanitation increased by 308. The target was 250.
        One fecal sludge treatment plant was built as planned.

B. Bobo-Dioulasso

        The number of latrines built was 11,879. The target was 10,000.
        The number of wastewater disposal facilities built was 24,648. The target was 30,000.
        The number of schools with improved water and sanitation increased by 44. The target was 100.
        One fecal sludge treatment plant was built as planned.

C. Technical assistance (in addition to the technical assistance listed under Objective 1)

These outputs are reported in the ICR but were not in the Results Framework and therefore did not have any
targets.

      Trainings were given to 780 teachers on hygiene practices.
      A total of 2,895 artisans were trained in the construction of latrines and installation of sumps, wash
       basins, and shower components in accordance with ONEA standards.
      ONEA’s sanitation procedures were reviewed.
      Consultants conducted community meetings and household visits to increase public awareness about
       sanitation services and promotion campaigns to create demand for latrines.
      The project financed mass campaigns (a television sitcom, radio and television spots, posters, and
       shirts) and communications at the beneficiary level to promote correct use and maintenance of latrines
       and hygienic practices.

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)




      Pit emptiers were trained at ONEA’s training facility on safe pit emptying practices.
      The project supported the formal recognition of the Association of Pit Emptiers as an environmental
       association by the Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization.

Outcomes

Two indicators were defined for increase in access to improved sanitation services. Sustainability of these
services or the impact of the project’s intervention on behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices
was not captured by the results framework.

      Number of people with access to improved sanitation services: In the project area, a total of
       437,237 people gained access to sanitation services through the construction of latrines. The target
       was 351,600 people. The achievement in Ouagadougou was 332,702 people against the target of
       263,700, and in Bobo-Dioulasso 104,535 people against the target of 87,900.
      Number of additional students provided with access to appropriate sanitation facilities in their
       schools: A total of 120,666 students gained access to sanitation facilities against the target of
       120,000. The achievement of 105,583 students in Ouagadougou was higher than the target of 85,715,
       whereas in Bobo-Dioulasso the achievement of 15,083 was less than half of the target of 34,285.
       Project team commented that the demand for school latrines in Ouagadougou was higher than the
       demand in Bobo-Dioulasso. All these schools also have access to water.

Additionally, the ICR reports the following observations that were not captured by the results framework:

      ONEA now has the technical capacity to treat fecal sludge because of the treatment plants
       constructed under the project. This is a critical component of the sanitation service chain that prevents
       illegal dumping of fecal sludge to the environment. However, the project’s results framework did not
       capture this outcome.
      According to the observations of the project team, diarrhea and bilharzia—an infectious disease
       caused by freshwater parasitic worms—cases among children and adults were reduced in the project
       area, and the environment was cleaner around Ouagadougou because of a significant decrease in
       illegal discharge of fecal sludge after the opening of the fecal sludge treatment plant (ICR, p.21 and
       54). However, the achievement of these outcomes were not captured by the results framework nor
       were they measured before and after the project’s intervention.

The project achieved its goal of increasing the number of households with access to sanitation services
through ONEA-approved latrines, waste-water disposal facilities (sumps), wash basins, and shower
components. Sanitation promotion campaigns to create demand and option given to the beneficiaries to
rehabilitate their existing traditional latrines (80 percent of households had traditional latrines) in accordance
with ONEA standards were the key factors in increasing the number of on-site sanitation facilities. The project
supported the creation of a sanitation market; artisans trained under the project now have the capacity to
construct and repair sanitation facilities. The support given to the Association of Pit Emptiers was critical in
ensuring sustainability of pit emptying and sludge transport services from households to ONEA’s sludge
treatment facilities. The project also supported ONEA on how to operate the fecal sludge treatment facilities in
Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso. The project also achieved its goal of increasing the number of latrines
with access to water in schools, but mostly in Ouagadougou. However, overall evidence is insufficient to
assess project’s outcomes, such as reduction in open defecation or dumping of fecal sludge to the
environment, and impact on behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices at schools and

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



                            households. The sanitation activities were completed around the time of additional financing and there was
                            sufficient time to measure the impact of the project on the sustainability of sanitation and hygiene practices
                            through surveys, but such surveys were not conducted, nor did the results framework include any indicator to
                            monitor this behavioral change or other outcomes expected from the project’s intervention. Furthermore, the
                            evidence is insufficient to conclude whether the cost to empty the latrine pits is affordable by households or
                            not. The latrine pits require emptying every five or ten years, which is estimated to cost around US$40. If
                            households could not afford this cost, a slippage to open defecation or dumping fecal sludge to environment
                            would be highly likely. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase access to
                            sustainable sanitation services in selected urban areas is rated modest due to lack of evidence about
                            outcomes and the sustainability of services.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved its goal of increasing access to water and sanitation services in the project area and
                            strengthening the operational efficiency and financial viability of ONEA, while supporting the creation of a
                            sanitation market to ensure the sustainability of sanitation service chain. The evidence is sufficient for the
                            sustainability of water services, but a worsening in the financial viability of ONEA could jeopardize the
                            sustainability of these services in the future. Evidence is insufficient to assess sustainability of sanitation
                            services, the project’s impact on behavioral change in hygiene practices, and the outcomes expected as a
                            result of increased access to improved water and sanitations services, such as improved health and reduction
                            in water fetching time, open defecation, and dumping of fecal sludge to the environment that formed the basis
                            of the economic analysis in the following section. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the objective to
                            increase access to sustainable water and sanitation services, which is closer to the output level than
                            outcome, is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   A “with project” and “without project” economic analysis was conducted at appraisal, which consisted of a cost-
   benefit analysis of the water supply component, and an assessment of the cost-effectiveness of the sanitation
   component (PAD, p.79). The assumptions used in the cost-benefit analysis were relevant. The consumer
   surplus was calculated as the multiplication of the increase in water consumption by the difference of water price

                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



before and after the project. The costs included the investment costs and the operation and maintenance costs
of the water supply network. However, the benefits stemming from the elimination of time spent for water
fetching and reduction in health costs were not included in the cost-benefit analysis; therefore, the analysis was
rather conservative. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) calculated for the water component at appraisal
was 16.8 percent, and the net present value (NPV) was US$8.3 million at a discount rate of 12 percent.

The economic benefits of the sanitation investments, i.e., reduction in morbidity rates linked to waterborne
diseases, were not quantifiable at appraisal because of the lack of data to measure the impact of the project on
morbidity rates. Even if the reductions in morbidity rates were measurable, it would not be possible to establish
direct attribution with the project’s intervention because of other factors affecting the morbidity rates, such as
improvement in health services. Therefore, cost-effectiveness analysis was conducted to compare alternative
sanitation services. Compared to sewerage connection and septic tanks solutions that are more expensive and
require high housing standards, the double pit latrines and rehabilitation of traditional latrines were cheaper and
suitable to medium and low housing standards common in the project area (PAD, p.83).

At project closing, a similar economic analysis was conducted, which also included estimated economic benefits
from the delegation of water service in semi-urban areas where significant profits margins were achieved,
savings in health costs due to the reduction of waterborne diseases, and time savings for women because of the
elimination of fetching water. However, these health and time saving benefits were not based on actual figures
that were measured by a beneficiary survey or impact evaluation but were estimates. Therefore, the
methodology used in the calculation of the EIRR (14.5 percent) and NPV (US$20.12 million at a discount rate of
10 percent) was not robust. (The discount rate was adjusted from 12 percent at appraisal to 10 percent to
reflect the current practice for water supply projects and the decrease of the opportunity cost of capital.)
Although the economic analysis took these estimated additional economic benefits into consideration, the EIRR
at project closing was lower than the EIRR at appraisal. This decrease can be partly explained by the increase
in the project cost because of the addition of the transmission reinforcement investments (70 percent of the
additional financing) to the project scope. These investments were essential to strengthen the water
transmission network in Ouagadougou to ensure the availability of water for existing and new customers and did
not focus solely on increasing the number of connections that have an immediate impact on water sales (Project
Paper, Report No: PAD958, p.11).

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, the financial impact of the project was estimated by measuring the incremental revenue to be
generated by the water supply and fecal sludge treatment plant investments. These incremental revenues
consisted of water sales as a result of the installation of water connections to be financed by the project,
customer contribution per connection and monthly fixed charges, and the sanitation surcharge paid on additional
water consumption. As in the economic analysis, the incremental costs consisted of the investment costs and
the operation and maintenance costs of the water supply network and the fecal sludge treatment plants. Costs
related to counterpart funding and the debt service on the portion of the grant that was to be on-lent to ONEA as
a credit were also included in the financial analysis (PAD, pp.77-78). The assumptions used in the analysis were
adequate to measure the financial impact of the project. The analysis resulted in a financial internal rate of
return (FIRR) of 13.6 percent and an NPV of US$1.58 million at a discount rate of 12 percent. Using the same
methodology and actual figures, a financial analysis was conducted at project closing. The FIRR at project
closing was calculated at 10.2 percent and the NPV at US$0.2 million at a discount rate of 10 percent. The
decrease in the FIRR and NPV are attributable to the increase in the project cost because of the addition of




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



transmission reinforcement investments in Ouagadougou that did not have an immediate impact on water sales,
and the lower additional water consumption than estimated at appraisal (see Economic Analysis above).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project was sufficiently prepared for implementation. A detailed procurement plan for the first 18 months of
project implementation was already agreed upon during project preparation, all disclosure requirements were
met, project implementation team was identified, and consultants were mobilized for detailed design studies
(PAD, p.23). Procurement and disbursement under the original grant were efficient. At the time of the additional
financing, the project closing date was extended by 42 months because of the addition of transmission
reinforcement investments to project scope to strengthen water availability in Ouagadougou. The project closed
within budget, but the implementation of some civil works financed under the additional financing were delayed
by more than one year because of procurement issues caused by staffing inadequacies (see Procurement in
section 10. Other Issues, b. Fiduciary below). Additionally, some transmission related civil works had to be
suspended because of non-compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy (see section 10.
Other Issues, a. Safeguards below). These delays resulted in a 12-month extension of the project closing date.

Overall, the costs involved in achieving the project objectives were reasonable in comparison with the estimated
long-term benefits, and the project was mostly implemented efficiently. However, the methodology used to
calculate the health and time saving benefits was not robust and there were moderate shortcomings in
procurement and implementation of safeguard policies that delayed project implementation. The efficiency of the
project is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      62.00
 Appraisal                                                 16.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      79.00
 ICR Estimate                                              14.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives to the country context and the World Bank strategy is substantial. The efficacy of
the achievement of the objective to increase access to sustainable water services is rated substantial. The
efficacy of the achievement of the objective to increase access to sustainable sanitation services is rated
substantial with some shortcomings; overall evidence is insufficient to assess the sustainability of the sanitation
outputs and behavioral change in hygiene practices at schools and households. Overall efficacy of the

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



achievement of the project objectives is rated substantial. The costs involved in achieving the project objectives
were reasonable in comparison with the benefits, but there were minor shortcomings in procurement and
implementation of safeguards policies; therefore, the efficiency of the project is rated substantial. Overall, the
outcome of the project is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk: A worsening of the financial viability of ONEA can adversely affect the sustainability of
water and sanitation services. ONEA has gradually transformed into a well-performing utility starting from
early 2000s, but the utility’s financial equilibrium is fragile. Absence of regular tariff adjustments to reflect
increasing operational costs and reliance of the tariff structure on industrial and commercial customers to
cross-subsidize the tariff are two potential risks that could weaken the financial viability of ONEA (Water
Supply and Sanitation Program-for-Results PAD, p.3). Without sufficient funds, ONEA could not efficiently
operate and maintain the water network and the fecal sludge treatment plants, and sustainability of these
services could be adversely affected.

Technical risk: Limited availability of water resources poses a significant risk for maintaining service
provision in rapidly growing urban centers and semi-urban areas. With less than 900 cubic meters of
renewable freshwater per capita per year, Burkina Faso is a water scarce country. It is expected that climate
change will have significant adverse effects on water resource availability in the country. The demand for
water has been increasing rapidly parallel to the growth of urban centers and semi-urban areas. The water
supply is lagging behind the increase in water demand. Water supply is continuous only in Ouagadougou. To
maintain water service provision to a rapidly increasing population and to achieve universal access, a better
knowledge of water availability and improved mechanism for its management is needed (ICR, p.35).

Sustainability risk: Beneficiaries switching back to poor sanitation and hygiene practices poses as a
substantial risk for the sustainability of sanitation services. The latrines constructed under the project
require regular cleaning. The pits are emptied every five or ten years depending on their sizes, and the cost
of emptying the pits is around US$40. The evidence is insufficient whether this is an affordable amount or
not. On the other hand, the project implemented a demand-driven approach with citizen engagement in
facilitating the take-up of sanitation facilities. The beneficiaries also contributed to the construction cost of the
latrines and wastewater discharge systems. This is, therefore, expected to result in a higher beneficiary
ownership of the sanitation facilities. Water up to eight cubic meters is supplied at a highly subsidized tariff
rate (social tariff) of US$0.35 per cubic meter. Since the water consumption of most of the new connections
is below eight cubic meters, this level of consumption is deemed to be affordable by the poorer strata of the
society, unless the government increases the social tariff as planned, which has not been changed since
2003. The sanitation and hygiene trainings given to school children are also expected to lead to a permanent
behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices. But as noted under the efficacy section, the evidence
was insufficient to assess the impact of the project’s intervention on the behavioral change in sanitation and
hygiene practices.




                                                                                                         Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goal of sustainable improvement of hygiene and environmental health by expanding
  water and sanitation services in the urban areas in accordance with the targets set in the national
  programs for water and sanitation services and the poverty reduction strategy was of high strategic
  priority. The project’s approach was straightforward, i.e., construction of water supply network and
  installation of household connections, standpipes, and latrines, the introduction of new applications, such
  as the fecal sludge treatment plants. The project was to provide technical support to improve the financial
  viability of the utility and also to induce behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices. The project
  activities were sufficient to achieve the project objectives. The technical aspects of the project were
  sound; the project introduced sector standard, proven technologies to address the development problem
  of limited access to water and sanitation services. Economic and financial aspects of the project were
  sufficiently assessed justifying the viability of the project. Financial management and project
  implementation arrangements benefited from the systems set up for the implementation of the previous
  Ouagadougou Water Sector Project (OWSP). The project implementing agency, ONEA, had capacity and
  experience to implement the project, but to ensure the adequate implementation of the sanitation
  activities, a project implementation manual was prepared. Lessons learned from OWSP and other water
  and sanitation services projects in West Africa were incorporated to the project, such as public-public
  partnership between the Burkinabe government and ONEA established under OWSP and flexibility of
  access interventions to adapt to changing project implementation circumstances (PAD, pp.9-10). The
  risks were appropriately identified but those related to procurement and safeguards were not assessed
  adequately. These two risks were rated low, but non-compliance with procurement and safeguard
  policies resulted in lengthy delays in project implementation (see section 10. Other Issues below). The
  original indicators in the results framework were insufficient to capture the project outputs and outcomes
  that were attributable to the project, and the results framework did not include indicators monitoring the
  sustainability of the project’s outcomes, such as water availability and behavioral change in sanitation
  and hygiene practices (see section 9. M&E design, Implementation and Utilization below).

  Overall, there were moderate shortcomings in the World Bank`s identification, preparation, and appraisal
  of the project to achieve the project objectives. Therefore, quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were only three task team leader changes during project implementation. The last task team leader
 had been with the project since project preparation. Most of the members of the project team were
 stationed in Ouagadougou. Supervision missions were regularly held every six months. Presence of Bank
 staff in the field allowed regular contact with ONEA management and government officials. The candor and
 quality of performance reporting in the Implementation Status and Result Reports and Aide Memoires were

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



 high. Based on the monitoring and evaluation data, the project team proactively processed an additional
 financing to strengthen the water production and distribution network and ensure the sustainability of water
 services in Ouagadougou. Supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project was appropriate.
 The project team was quick to suspend project activities when non-compliance with the Involuntary
 Resettlement safeguard policy was noticed. An action plan was prepared and implemented, and the
 suspension of works was lifted within six months. Similarly, the project team was actively involved in
 resolving the delays in the procurement of two contracts for the installation of main transmission water
 pipes, standpipes, and household connections in Ouagadougou. Staffing inadequacy that is beyond the
 control of the project team resulted in a 12-month extension of the project closing date. Although the
 project was restructured three times, the shortcomings in the M&E system were not addressed adequately
 to capture the sustainability of the water and sanitation services, the outcomes from increased access to
 water and sanitation services, and also the behavioral change in sanitation and hygiene practices.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated moderately satisfactory because of significant shortcomings in
 addressing the weaknesses in the M&E system.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change had gaps. Objectives to increase access to sustainable water and sanitation services
 were clearly formulated but they were closer to the output level and no relevant outcomes were identified –
 resulting in a lack of relevant outcome indicators to measure the actual outcomes of the project. The
 indicators in the results framework were adapted from the ONEA’s national programs for water and
 sanitation services, which measured the achievements at the system level; hence, some indicators were
 not relevant to capture the project’s achievements. The target values for project outputs, such as number of
 household connections, standpipes and latrines to be constructed under the project or the length of the
 distribution network expansions, were defined in the project appraisal document, but the results framework
 did not include any indicator monitoring the actual achievements of these outputs. All indicators in the M&E
 design were at the intermediate outcome level capturing only the increase in the number of people with
 access to water and sanitation services, and the number of students with access to sanitation facilities.
 Sustainability aspect of the project outcomes were not adequately captured by the results framework. the
 three indicators that broadly monitored the financial viability of the utility did not sufficiently encompass the
 achievement of sustainability of services. Project’s impact on behavioral change in practicing hygiene,
 availability and quality of services, gender, affordability of services that are closely related to the
 sustainability of these services were not captured by the results framework. Some of these impacts were to
 be evaluated through customer satisfaction surveys; ONEA was to conduct these surveys every two years
 “to assess beneficiaries’ satisfaction with water coverage and the quality of the service in project areas”
 (PAD, p.12). Overall, ONEA had the capacity to implement the M&E arrangements and the indicators were

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



 sufficient to measure the achievements of the project in increasing the access to water and sanitation
 services, but the results framework had shortcomings in monitoring and evaluating the sustainability aspect
 of the services and the health, economic and environmental outcomes of increased access to water and
 sanitation services.



b. M&E Implementation
  At the first project restructuring in August 2013, indicators not relevant to the project were deleted, and
  three output-level indicators, i.e., number of household connections, number of standpipes and number of
  latrines, were added to the results framework. Although the outputs of other project activities, such as
  expansion of water network, number pumping stations, and number of fecal sludge treatment plants,
  were not captured by the results framework, ONEA monitored the achievement of these activities, which
  were later reported in the ICR. All indicators in the results framework were measured adequately, but not
  all relevant indicators were included in the results framework. The number of beneficiaries were
  estimated assuming that on average 8.8 persons benefited from household water connections and
  latrines, and 300 people from standpipes. The average household size of 8.8 persons used by ONEA is
  significantly higher than the average household size of 5.9 persons estimated by the United Nations
  (Household Size and Composition, 2019, population.un.org/Household/index.html#/countries/854). ONEA
  conducted customer satisfaction surveys, but these were system-wide surveys, not specific to the project
  area. The M&E design’s shortcomings in capturing the behavioral change in hygiene practice and
  technical and operational sustainability of the water and sanitation services were not addressed during
  project implementation. Despite the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in early 2020, limited beneficiary
  interviews and school visits were conducted to evaluate the project’s impact. These interviews and visits
  provided some observations of project outcomes, such as decrease in diarrhea and open defecation,
  elimination of time spent for fetching water, and productive uses of water—production of bricks by using
  tap water (ICR, p.15). However, it would have been beneficial if relevant outcome indicators to measure,
  record and report on such outcomes had been included in the Results Framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings led to the processing of an additional financing in the amount of US$80 million to
  strengthen the water production and transmission systems in Ouagadougou to strengthen the water
  supply network and ensure the availability of water. The M&E data were used to provide evidence of
  achievement of the increase in the access to water and sanitation services. The shortcomings in
  providing evidence of achievement of the sustainability aspect of the services were partially addressed
  by data gathered through beneficiary and staff interviews and school visits. The M&E findings informed
  the subsequent Water Supply and Sanitation Program-for-Results with a budget of US$250 million of
  IDA credit and US$50 million of IDA grant. This program-for-results has played a pivotal role in
  sustaining the achievements of Urban Water Sector Project and also ensuring the functioning of the
  water and sanitation supply chain during the Covid-19 pandemic.

  The M&E system as designed and implemented was sufficient to assess the achievements of the project
  objectives to increase access to water and sanitation services, but there were moderate shortcomings in
  capturing the sustainability of these services, the project’s impact on behavioral change in hygiene




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



  practices, and the impact of access to improved water and sanitation services on beneficiaries. Overall,
  the M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
   minimal, site-specific, and manageable environmental impacts of the construction works. ONEA prepared
   an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) because specific areas of intervention were
   not confirmed before appraisal. ONEA had sufficient consultation with the concerned populations and local
   governments in preparing the ESMF. The Government of Burkina Faso disclosed the ESMF to the public on
   January 30, 2009. The World Bank disclosed the framework report at its InfoShop on February 6, 2009. At
   the time of the additional financing, the ESMF was updated and redisclosed in Burkina Faso and at the
   World Bank’s InfoShop on June 5, 2014. During project implementation, work-specific Environmental and
   Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) were prepared in consultation with relevant stakeholders, approved by
   the National Bureau of Environmental Assessments, and implemented. The fourth component of the project
   supported the preparation of the ESIAs. ONEA’s Environmental Social Unit was responsible for the
   implementation of the ESMF and ESIAs. The unit had sufficient capacity because of the experience gained
   during the implementation of the previous Bank-financed Ouagadougou Water Sector Project. The project
   was compliant with the Environment Assessment safeguard policy.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Since specific areas of intervention were not confirmed before
   appraisal, ONEA prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in consultation with the stakeholders
   and disclosed it to the public on January 30, 2009. The World Bank disclosed the framework policy at its
   InfoShop on February 6, 2009. Original six sub-projects, i.e., secondary water distribution networks in Bobo-
   Dioulasso, Dédougou, and Koudougou, boreholes in Bobo-Dioulasso and Dédougou, and distribution line in
   Koudougou, required compensation payments to landowners. Resettlement action plans (RAPs) for these
   six sub-projects were prepared and implemented in accordance with the World Bank’s safeguard policy
   requirements. No physical settlement occurred because of the implementation of these sub-projects. At the
   time of additional financing, the RPF was updated to reflect the impact of the additional water network
   investments. The framework policy was disclosed in Burkina Faso and at the World Bank’s InfoShop on
   June 5, 2014. However, ONEA started the Ouagadougou water transmission civil works funded under
   additional financing without preparing a RAP and without compensating four project-affected people, which
   resulted in the suspension of works in December 2016. The World Bank and ONEA agreed on an action
   plan to ensure the project’s compliance with the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy. ONEA prepared
   a RAP, which was approved by the World Bank in April 2017. Excluding 49 project-affected people who
   could not be located, all other 768 project-affected people were compensated by May 2017. The
   compensation amounts for the 49 project-affected people were deposited in an escrow account for future



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



  payments. After achieving compliance with the requirements of the safeguard policy, the suspension of the
  civil works was lifted in June 2017 (Implementation Status and Results Report No:16, p.2).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The project benefited from the financial management arrangements set up in the previous Ouagadougou
  Water Sector Project. ONEA had sufficient capacity for financial management of the project. The project
  also supported the strengthening of ONEA’s internal audit unit that was responsible for the preparation of
  the interim financial reports. Flow-of-funds arrangements were in place. ONEA submitted the interim
  financial reports on time. The external audit reports were also submitted on time and were unqualified. The
  average self-financing ratio of ONEA during project implementation was 21 percent. This average ratio
  fulfilled the financial covenant requirement of “higher than 15 percent” but the ratio fluctuated sharply every
  year. For example, the ratio was 50 percent in 2009, but dropped to 8 percent in 2011 and increased to 33
  per cent in 2013 before dropping to minus 8 percent in 2017. In 2018, the self-financing ratio bounced back
  to 32 per cent (ICR, p.52). There were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with
  the project. US$1.2 million from the original grant that had accrued because of exchange rate fluctuations
  was returned to the World Bank. All project funds were accounted for at project closing. The project’s
  financial management was compliant with the World Bank’s requirements.

  Procurement

  Procurement was implemented in accordance with the World Bank’s procurement policies and procedures,
  but lengthy delays in the procurement of contracts to be financed under the additional financing adversely
  affected the project implementation starting from 2017. The main reason was ONEA’s low procurement
  capacity because of frequent rotation of the procurement specialist and the utility’s failure in fulfilling its
  obligation to hire a dedicated procurement specialist for the project (ICR, p.31 and ISR No:18, p.3).
  Therefore, the project coordinator had to assume the functions of the procurement specialist between May
  2017 and end of 2018. This resulted in a lengthy evaluation process of the two contracts for the installation
  of 344 km of water pipes, 80 standpipes, and 26,100 connections in the same period. These civil works,
  which were estimated to be completed in 18 months, had not started six months before the project closing
  date of December 31, 2018. Therefore, the project closing date was extended by one year.

  There were also delays in the government’s approval of the contracts. Contract approvals that should take
  normally three days were processed in one month during project implementation (ICR, p33). After the
  appointment of a focal point within the General Directorate for the Control of Public Tenders and Financial
  Engagements, delays in government’s approval of contracts were reduced significantly.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)




d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The relevance of project
                                                                               objectives was substantial, and
                                                                               the overall efficacy of the project
                                                                               objective was rated substantial
Outcome                        Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              due to weak evidence of
                                                                               sanitation sustainability. The
                                                                               project’s efficiency in achieving
                                                                               project objectives is also rated
                                                                               substantial.
                                                                               At entry, there were moderate
                                                                               shortcomings in identifying the
                                                                               risks related to procurement and
                                                                               safeguards policy
                                                                               implementation, and the results
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   framework did not adequately
                                                                               capture the project’s expected
                                                                               outputs and outcomes. During
                                                                               supervision, there were some
                                                                               shortcomings in addressing the
                                                                               weaknesses in the M&E system.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Four lessons were derived from the ICR and the additional information provided by the project team.

A check-based (verification) approach can contribute to the achievement of the project
outcomes in increasing access to water. Upon receiving a request for water connection, ONEA
connected a dwelling to the water network after verifying that there was someone residing in that
dwelling. Such verification process prevented unnecessary connections to vacant dwellings or plots
where there was no dwelling. This check-based approach ensured that services were provided in
urban and semi-urban areas where such services were needed. This contributed to the achievement
of a higher number of people with access to water than the revised target value set at additional
financing and reduction of inactive connections (Project team’s email dated April 21, 2021)



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



Delegation of water service provision to private companies in public-private-partnership
(PPP) models can be a more efficient and practical solution for increasing access to water in
informal settlements where the poor live. Because of the absence of official streets and
delimitation of properties, ONEA could not develop a water network and install connections in
informal settlements in Ouagadougou using its usual network planning and development approach.
To meet the high demand, ONEA partnered with local neighborhood operators for the provision of
water in informal settlements. According to the PPP contract, ONEA is responsible for the supply of
bulk water to the delegated perimeter, and the private operator is responsible for the distribution of
the water to the beneficiaries. Operators used simplified networks built by using polyethylene high
density pipes and implemented tailored payment plans for customers in line with their revenue
streams (ICR, pp.27-28). This approach directly benefited 18,900 people living in informal
settlements (ICR, p.15).

Strengthening the whole sanitation service chain can improve the sustainability of sanitation
services. The project supported the construction of on-site sanitation facilities at households and
schools, the training of the masons in latrines manufacturing and repair, the training of the pit
emptiers in emptying pits and transporting of fecal sludge to treatment, and the construction of fecal
sludge treatment plants to be operated by ONEA. The absence of any of these sanitation service
chain components could adversely affect the sustainability sanitation services. The project’s support
to the whole sanitation service chain was critical in the development of sanitation services in
Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso, and the creation of a sanitation market (ICR, pp.19-21)

The demand-responsive approach and activities to induce demand for services can be
critical in increasing access to sanitation services. The project supported the creation of
demand for sanitation services through community meetings, household visits, and sanitation
promotion campaigns. The beneficiaries contributed to the cost of construction of latrines, which
were subsidized by the project. Citizen engagement and availability of options, such as the
rehabilitation of traditional latrines instead of construction of new ones, were critical in latrine take-up
by beneficiaries. At project closing, the beneficiaries’ estimated contribution to the cost of on-site
sanitation facilities was US$7.64 million (ICR, p.20).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. It provides a substantial critique of the
project’s performance. The narrative is mostly evaluative and results oriented; the report sufficiently
emphasizes how activities inform outcomes. The report is internally consistent; it is also consistent with the
World Bank guidance in narrating the performance of the project. The report is focused on what occurred as a
consequence of the project. The quality of analysis is high. The evidence is credible and appropriately
referenced. The ICR including its annexes presents a sufficient base to support the achievements in increasing
access to water and sanitation services. However, the narrative does not support a highly satisfactory rating for
outcome. There are shortcomings in the achievement of the second objective and in administrative and

                                                                                                        Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF:Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)



operational efficiency. The Lessons and Recommendations section consists mostly of findings rather than
lessons. The ICR is substantially longer (37 pages) than recommended in the World Bank guidance (15-20
pages). Frequent references to the subsequent Bank intervention, i.e., program for results, were not all relevant
to the performance narrative of the Urban Water Sector Project.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 23
