     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022611

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P152358                                     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                     Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0175,TF-A7699                           30-Sep-2019                                           9,500,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Jun-2015                                 30-Jun-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               9,500,000.00                                   9,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                9,500,000.00                                   9,500,000.00

 Actual                                            9,500,000.00                                   9,500,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PDO, page 5), was "to support the Information and Communication
   Technology (ICT) sector in Somalia by contributing to establishing an enabling environment and by
   encouraging efficiency and equity in access to connectivity".




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



   This review is based on the two objectives: (1) to support the ICT sector by contributing to establishing an
   enabling environment; (2) to encourage efficiency and equity in access to connectivity.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  19-Oct-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   This project used a hybrid modality, by having both fully recipient-executed (RE) activities, and activities that
   were bank-executed (BE) on behalf of the recipient. This modality was specifically designed for fragile
   countries with limited capacity.

   There were three components (PAD pages 10 -11):

   1. Enabling environment (estimated cost at appraisal was US$4.5 million; actual cost was US$4.95
   million). This component was BE and RE. This component aimed to support the regulatory and governance
   framework of the ICT sector, following the passage of the new Communications Law, in particular for mobile
   money. There were two sub-components.

   a. Ongoing ICT regulatory support. Activities included support for designing and passing of the
   Communications law, establishing and operationalizing the new telecommunications regulator (the National
   Communications Authority (NCA), and regulatory support in areas such as spectrum management,
   numbering, licensing, and the repatriation of the .so domain name.

   b. Support and facilitate implementation of a framework for mobile money. Activities in this component
   included research on using mobile money. This research was to be conducted through a through a
   household survey covering about 1,800 households. This component was RE. This component would also
   provide technical assistance for the implementation of a legal framework for mobile money, including
   preparing draft legal documents.

   Revised component. The focus on mobile money was expanded in scope, to include research aimed at
   extending the use of mobile money in emergencies and other new thematic issues (such as, usage
   of mobile money by women and vulnerable groups), and to cover a pilot program of humanitarian programs
   made by the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) to families affected by the drought.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



  2. Efficiency and equity in access to connectivity (estimated cost at appraisal was US$7.8 million; actual
  cost was US$7.34 million). This component aimed at developing the telecommunications infrastructure and
  to make optimal use of the new fiber connectivity arriving in Somalia. There were three subcomponents.

  a. Establishing a framework for Subscriber Identification Module (SIM) registration. Activities included
  developing a framework for SIM card registration and commissioning a study on African best practices on
  SIM card registration system This component would provide TA to the Somali Communications Commission
  (SCC) in developing regulatory bylaws to handle security and privacy concerns related to SIM card
  registration.

  Revised component. The focus on SIM card registration was shifted to digital Identification (ID), as SIM
  card registration was made mandatory for operators in the 2017 Law. The project would support research
  on the potential for digital ID roll-out and would finance two studies on introducing a foundational Digital ID
  system.

  b. Supporting connectivity in the higher education sector. Activities included: (i) technical assistance
  (TA) and connectivity support to the Somali Research and Education Network (SomaliREN), funding
  Somalia's membership fees to the European Union's (EU) connect 2 program to provide connectivity
  to universities, and establishing a network operations center (NOC), and purchasing a router. This
  component would also cover the cost to enable Somalia to participate in the second phase of the
  AfricaConnect program.

  c. Extending communications rooms in key ministries across all economic zones. Activities
  included, establishment of a government backbone network covering 26 government locations around
  Mogadishu, and 30 communications rooms across the country equipped with videoconferencing equipment
  and connectivity to the federal ministries and public institutions in the Federal Member States (FMS).

  3. Support the Project Implementation Unit (estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.7 million; actual cost
  was US$2.16 million). This component aimed to support capacity building of the Project Implementation
  Unit (PIU), established in the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and Technology (MPTT).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$14.0 million. The actual cost was US$14.4 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by a Somalia Multi-Partner Fund Trust Fund (TF) of US$14.0
  million. AF of US$2.0 million was approved from the State and Peace - Building TF on October 19, 2016.
  With this, the total TF for the project was S$16.0 million. Of this, US$14.4 was disbursed. The undisbursed
  amount of about US$1.5 million were returned to the TFs. There was parallel financing of US$1.5 million
  from the European Union (EU), via AfricaConnect TF.

  Recipient contribution. No contribution was planned at appraisal. There was no recipient contribution
  during implementation.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 8, 2015, became effective on June 15, 2015, and was scheduled
  to close on March 30, 2018. AF was approved on October 19, 2016. The project closed on June 30, 2020.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



   Restructurings. The project was restructured four times.

   The ICR (paragraph 20) notes that although the project was appraised for US$14.0 million, it did not receive
   this amount of financing from the outset, under the hybrid modality. Instead the funds were allocated in
   tranches. The main reason for the first project restructuring on October 19, 2016, second restructuring on
   June 6, 2017, and the third restructuring on April 24, 2019, was to increase the grant amount allocated for
   BE/RE activities. The second restructuring extended the closing date by18 months to September 30,
   2019, due to delays in receiving donor contributions.

   The main changes made through the fourth restructuring on September 17, 2019 are as follows:

         The closing date was extended by nine months from September 30, 2019 to June 30, 2020, for
          completing activities that were delayed due to administrative reasons.
         One indicator, on SIM card registration, was deleted due to the shift in focus of the project.
         Funds were reallocated from component two to component three activities, as additional funds were
          needed by the PIU due to the extension of the closing date.

   Split Rating. This review is not based on a split rating of objectives, as the PDOs did not change and
   targets were modified with the increased scope of Additional Financing (AF) for the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Somalia, classified as a fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) affected country, has
witnessed severe conflict and violence over the past decade, that destroyed legitimate
institutions. Somalia's human development indicators are among the lowest in the world, with an estimated
73% of the population classified as poor (61% in urban and 80% in rural areas respectively) and 43%
classified as extremely poor. This project was prepared, when the Federal Government of Somalia came to
power with a four year term under a provisional constitution approved by the new parliament, thus ending
Somalia's long period of revolving transitional government at the federal level.

Sector context. The ICT sector was strategically important to the economy. A survey of Telecom Finance
in Somalia estimated that about 11% of gross domestic product in 2013 came from this sector. Mobile
penetration rates were higher, and prices lower in Somalia than in neighboring Djibouti and Ethiopia, which
had retained state-owned monopolies. In contrast, the sector was entirely with private companies in
Somalia.

That said, the sector was not formally regulated. The market structure was evolving towards consolidation
around larger companies resulting from mergers and alliances, undermining effective competition in the
sector. There were no interconnection agreements among operators, and no opportunities for mobile
roaming either domestically or internationally. The sector did not formally contribute to the Treasury by way
of taxes, and license and spectrum fees. Building up regulatory oversight and helping the sector transition
from an unregulated market to a well-regulated market practices, was important to the government
strategy.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



               Alignment with the Government strategy. The PDOs were relevant to the Federal Government of
               Somalia's (FGS) Economic Recovery Plan for 2014 - 2015 at appraisal. This plan sought funding for the
               information, telecommunications and transport sector and providing a framework for the proposed ICT
               Sector Support Project. The project was aligned with the Somali Compact Peace and State-building Goals
               for Economic Foundations (PSG5) and Revenue and Services (PSG4). This project was to support PSG4,
               as ICT is a productive sector that will support the enabling environment and enhance productivity through
               infrastructure investment, as well as contribute to the generation of employment. This project was to
               support PSG5 by contributing to the effective management of revenues and building capacity for
               accountability and service delivery, while enhancing transparent and accountable revenue generation.

               Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The PDOs continue to be well-aligned with the Bank
               strategy. At appraisal, the project was aligned with two priority areas of the Bank's Interim Strategy Note
               (ISN) for 2014 - 2016: (i) strengthening core institutions; and (ii) expanding economic opportunities. The
               PDOs are aligned with the Bank's Country Partner Framework (CPF) for 2019 - 2022. The CPF prioritized
               two focus areas: (i) building institutions for service delivery; and (ii) restoring economic resilience and
               opportunities. Under Focus Area one of the CPF, the Bank planned technical assistance for tax policy for
               the telecommunications sector. Under Focus Area two, the Bank proposed leveraging Public-Private
               Dialogue (PPD) to spur policy and regulatory reforms, and develop enabling frameworks in catalytic sectors
               like the ICT sector.

               Prior World Bank Experience. This project was the second phase of the ICT sector support program.
               The first phase of the program focused on regulatory support for the passage of the telecommunications
               act, setting a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), and pilot communication rooms in three ministries. The
               recommendations from the analytical studies financed under phase 1 were used for designing the second
               phase. The second phase built on the progress achieved thus far, and besides including activities aimed at
               strengthening regulatory oversight, added technical assistance activities of strategic value for Somalia, such
               as mobile money (which had helped in expanding financial inclusion in the absence of a strong, formal
               banking system), and SIM card registration (for verifying ownership of phones and mobile money accounts
               to reduce the risks of money laundering and financing of terrorism). Other key challenges the project sought
               to address were related to the limited, unreliable, and expensive communication facilities to government
               and universities. The level of ambition was appropriately increased with the AF for the project (discussed in
               the section 4). The relevance of PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the ICT sector by contributing to establishing an enabling environment.


                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)




Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
The intended outcomes were monitorable. Capacity building activities aimed at improving the regulatory
framework, capacity of the regulator and technical assistance (TA) for establishing ICT data collection unit
were aimed at improving regulation and governance of the sector. TA aimed at implementing a taxation
framework for the contribution of telecom sector to public finance were aimed at improving the governance
framework for taxation. TA activities aimed at implementing a mobile money framework were aimed at
improving the regulatory framework for mobile money. Assuming that the Government was committed to
the legal and regulatory changes and that it was able to get sufficient technical expertise to implement the
activities, these activities were likely to aid in creating an enabling environment for the sector, and thereby to
the long-term development outcomes of improving sector performance and expanding economic
opportunities.

Outputs (ICR, pages 13 - 15).

      The Parliament approved the Communications Law in 2017, thereby providing a regulatory framework
         for the sector. The technical assistance activities provided under this project played a key role in the
         development and passage of the law. This law was the first to be approved by the new parliament,
         and one of the few sector laws approved in Somalia.
        The independent federal regulatory agency - the National Communications Authority (NCA) -
         was established.
        The ICR (paragraph 27) notes that through the course of the project, Somalia leaped from the
         absolute bottom of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Regulatory Tracker 16 of 100
         points to 63 points, which positioned Somalia in the vicinity of regional peers with more mature
         markets.
        Six mobile licenses were issued by the regulator on June 1, 2020. However, the operators had not
         accepted the licenses and had asked for further consultation. The licenses issued were later
         invalidated. However, four new licenses were approved by the National Communications Authority
         (NCA) in November 2020 as targeted.
        Four Internet Service Providers (ISP) were authorized when the project closed, short of the target of
         10.
        TA was provided to the NCA on implementing the Communications Law, including support for
         stakeholder consultations on the taxation and licensing framework, and to the Financial Governance
         Committee for developing a framework for taxation.
        A set of regulations and guidelines on numbering, spectrum allocation and interconnection were
         adopted.
        The project supported the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and Technology (MPTT) in
         preparing the five-year ICT policy and strategy for guiding ICT investments. This policy was adopted
         by the Cabinet in 2019.
        The country code top level domain names for Somalia (.so) was repatriated, and an Internet
         Exchange Point (IXP) was established. TA was provided to the Somali Research and Education
         Network (SomaliREN) on developing procedures and a business model and to the Somali Network
         Information Center (SONIC) on managing the .so domain name and installing IXP.
        TA was provided to the MPTT and NCA to improve sector monitoring in the short term. The ICR
         (paragraph 28) notes that a risk assessment was carried out to identify threats to the Critical
         Information Infrastructure (CII) in Somalia, assess vulnerabilities, and evaluate the impact of potential

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



       threats to the ICT systems. This study was to inform a Cybersecurity Maturity Model (CMM)
       assessment that is currently being conducted with Bank funding.
      The AF ensured that the project supported timely project response to the drought in Somalia.

Following activities were not completed.

      The ICT Data Collection Unit for monitoring and tracking progress on PDO indicators was not
       established as targeted.
      Interconnection agreements among the operators based on the interconnection regulations published
       in 2017 were not completed, due to the lack of adequate dispute resolution mechanism.

Outcomes

The project activities were expected to increase the ICT sector's contribution to the Treasury and improve
communications through lower prices.

      Before this project, the telecommunication sector did not contribute to the treasury. In 2014, following
       the start of phase 1 of the program, mobile operators started contributing to the Ministry of Finance
       (MoF), and the total payments by operators in 2014, was US$3.9 million. But at that time, this
       contribution was based on a negotiated deal between the leading operator and the government for a
       fixed monthly amount. For phase 2, a target of a cumulative contribution of US$12 million was set, to
       be achieved by the end of the project. By the end of 2020, the telecommunication sector contributed
       more than US$42.8 million to the MoF by way of license fees. Financial contributions from the telecom
       sector aided the government to reach its revenue raising targets under the International Monetary
       Funds (IMF) Staff Management Program and aided in the eventual partial cancellation of Somalia's
       historical public debts (pre-1990) and the process of achieving Heavily Indebted Poor County (HIPC)
       status. This enabled Somalia to start borrowing again initially under the pre-arrears clearance
       financing (PACF) and latterly through full IDA lending. The ICR (paragraph 31) notes that sector
       contributions to the public treasury are still partly through a "negotiated" process, and that while the
       license operators now pay license fees, these are voluntary contributions and not by way of taxes. The
       ICR reports (paragraph 29) that the establishment of the NCA as an independent regulator is
       expected to lead to more significant contributions to the national treasury in future.
      The project activities were expected to improve communications through lower prices. The ICR
       (paragraph 30) notes that a reputed international price comparison database (cable.co.uk) ranked
       Somalia as the cheapest country in Africa to purchase a Gigabyte (GB) of mobile data, and the
       seventh cheapest country in the world at US$0.50. International Telecommunication Union (ITU) data
       indicated that the price of a low-user basket of mobile services (70 minutes of calls, 20 SMS and 500
       MB of data) for Somalia fell by 76% (from US$15.40 in 2015 to US$3.70 in 2020).

The project significantly contributed to creating an enabling environment for the sector, given that the sector is
now contributing to the Treasury. While the fall in prices of mobile services is not fully attributable to
the project, given that the fall in prices is part of an industry-wide trend, it is reasonable to conclude that the
project activities aided in moving towards a more stable and predictable environment for the sector.



Rating

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

To encourage efficiency and equity in access to connectivity.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and the
intended outcomes were measurable in principle. Activities such as best practice survey of mandatory SIM
card registrations and recommendations on adapting them to the local context were likely to increase the
number of registered SIMs. Advance purchase of international internet capacity for universities
and ministries, departments and agencies, were likely to increase the number of universities and government
agencies connected to the internet. The combination of these activities were likely to increase efficiency and
to the long term development outcome of equity in access to connectivity.

Outputs

      A first market analysis and household survey undertaken in 2016- 2017 looked into the use of mobile
         money and the wider state of mobile money in Somalia. The survey covered all economic zones and
         Federal Member States, with field teams deployed in both urban and rural areas. The survey used
         innovative digital tools for collecting primary data. A second round of research in 2018-
         2019 addressed key issues, such as financial behaviors (that is, savings and borrowing using mobile
         money), gender issues (such as the barriers women face when accessing or using mobile money, the
         extent to which mobile money supported women's financial independence and economic
         empowerment, and whether mobile money usage has translated into a greater role for women in
         decision-making or increased their bargaining power within the household), identification access, risks
         of fraud, usage patterns associated with the drought, and explored how mobile money might be
         leveraged to boost resilience. Findings of the two surveys are discussed in the outcome section
         below.
        30 communication rooms were established key ministries across all economic zones (in Mogadishu,
         Galmududg, Somaliland, South West, Jubbaland, Puntland, and Hirshabelle) under the project with
         broadband equipment, for stakeholder consultations with partners, exceeding the target of 15.
        50 universities (campuses) were provided with improved bandwidth, exceeding the target of 15.
        The project supported competitive tendering of the pre-purchase of "high speed" international
         bandwidth for 25 ministries and the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) - allowing for a more affordable
         rate, compared to what would have been achieved if each negotiated their own deals with suppliers.
        The CBS staff were trained on the use of the mobile money bulk dispatch system.
        550 people were trained under the project, as targeted, on areas such as membership of the
         AfricaConnect 2 program, spectrum management, numbering, cybersecurity, ICT data collection and
         analysis, on the use of mobile money bulk dispatch system, Digital ID, managing the .so domain name
         and installing the Internet Exchange Point.
        2,500 secure mobile payments were made using government systems, exceeding the target of 1,000.
        A pilot aimed at assisting the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS) in using mobile money was completed.
         This was used by the CBS in paying monthly salary benefits to public servants and making monthly


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



                                    humanitarian payments to households in drought-affected areas through Non-Governmental
                                    Organizations.

                            Outcomes

                            The project activities were expected to increase efficiency and equity in access to connectivity.

                                   According to TeleGeography records, total international bandwidth available to the country was only 5
                                    Gigabits per second (Gbit/s) in 2015, when phase 1 of the project started. By 2020, this had grown to
                                    204 Gbit/s. At the time of phase 1, there were no international submarine cables serving the country.
                                    By 2020, there were three (EASSy, DARE - 1, Somcable). The Results Framework target of
                                    international bandwidth per subscriber was significantly exceeded, at 7,083 Mbit/s versus an expected
                                    850 Mbit/s. It is not clear if this outcome could be fully attributed to the project, given the global
                                    changes in the sector.
                                   The ICR (paragraph 35) notes that the two rounds of household surveys on mobile money usage
                                    commissioned by the project showed a reduction in terms of digital divides - regarding mobile phone
                                    ownership and mobile money - for certain vulnerable groups (especially women). The overall
                                    improvement in affordability of mobile communications improved digital inclusion.
                                   The communications rooms were critical in responding to the COVID - 19 pandemic, in ensuring
                                    business continuity and exchange both within Somalia and with external partners.
                                   There were no indicators aimed at measuring the equity aspect of the PDO. In terms of equity to
                                    access to connectivity for the entire population, the two rounds of household surveys on mobile money
                                    usage commissioned by the project showed a reduction in terms of digital divides - regarding mobile
                                    phone ownership and mobile money for certain vulnerable groups (such as women). Given this, the
                                    project activities contributed to improving affordability, and this is likely to contribute to equity in
                                    connectivity.

                            The outcome and output targets were significantly overachieved under this objective, however there is a lack
                            of more direct evidence on equity. The efficacy of this objective is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of the two objectives is substantial. There is credible evidence that the capacity building project
                            activities aimed at improving the regulatory oversight of the ICT sector significantly contributed to creating an
                            enabling environment of the ICT sector. There is adequate evidence that the project activities made a
                            significant contribution to encouraging efficiency, and affordability of ICT services which are likely to
                            contribute to equity in access to connectivity. Overall, the efficacy is rated substantial.



                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. There was no formal economic analysis of the project, given that the project mainly
financed capacity building activities, aimed at creating an enabling environment for the sector. The main project
benefits were expected from the sector's contribution to the treasury, and increased internet connectivity to the
universities and government agencies.

Cost effectiveness. In the absence of a formal analysis, the efficiency was assessed through comparing the
costs of various activities financed under the projects with comparable projects. The cost of component activities
associated with creating an enabling environment (US$2.97 million) was comparable to the costs associated
with similar work in other countries (the cost for the Djibouti Digital project which included activities associated
with operationalization of a newly established regulator was US$2.0 million). Activities related to connecting
universities and the government agencies were completed below budget but still exceeded the targets
considerably. Technical assistance activities on SIM and digital ID were completed below half the price of the
original budget. Expenses associated with government connectivity (backbone network) were higher than
expected, given the challenges associated with attracting supplier and international vendors in the FCV context.

Administrative and operational issues. The project experienced delays in the initial years until 2016, due to a
combination of factors, including the weak capacity of the implementing agency, lack of trust by stakeholders on
regulatory issues, inadequate coordination between the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the Federal
Member States (FMS), exacerbated by changes in leadership (with the Minister of the Ministry of Post,
Telecommunications and Technology (MPTT changing thrice during the project lifetime), changes in leadership
in the Central Bank of Somalia (CBS), frequent staff turnovers at the PIU, the security situation, and the
administrative complexity of the hybrid modality. Things were more stable since 2017, and this aided in
acceleration of activities since then. The project also experienced delays in grant disbursements, the need for
multiple trust funds, and the requirement to process many grant amendments and to deal with changes in trust
fund rules (ICR, paragraph 43). The ICR (paragraph 41) notes that a recent Somalia Country Management Unit
(CMU) benchmark showed that overall staff costs were just below the median, based a sample of 14 projects.

In sum, efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies is rated as High. Efficacy of the two
objectives "to support the ICT sector by contributing to establishing an enabling environment" and "to encourage
efficiency and equity in access to connectivity" are rated substantial, as the outcomes were largely realized.
Efficiency is rated substantial. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The key risk is financial risk. While the telecommunication law was adopted by the Parliament, there
are challenges associated with enforcement of the legislation. The ICR (paragraph 94) notes that while the
NCA has licensed some operators, there are still systemic issues that could undermine its independence.
The contributions made by license operators to the treasury is still voluntary and on a "negotiated" basis
(license operators at project closure were paying license fees; taxes were still being paid on voluntary
“negotiated” basis). It is not clear if the government may be able to raise the resources needed for
maintaining the Communication Room and government network. This risk is rated as substantial.

The ICR (paragraph 93) notes that the program was initially planned as a series of three projects. However,
the Country Management Unit (CMU) decided not to move ahead with the third phase and decided to merge
the Digital Development (DD) and Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation activities under the Somalia
Capacity Advancement Livelihood and Entrepreneurship through Digital Uplift project (SCALED-UP), to
maximize synergies and cross-Global Practice (GP) collaboration. This had an impact on project
sustainability as only some activities were carried forward by the other projects. There is a substantial risk
that some development outcomes might not be sustained, or may even be reversed, without support efforts
through existing or planned World Bank or donor partner projects.

The ICR (paragraph 95) notes that SomaliREN's financial sustainability is in jeopardy and the institution
cannot extend further connectivity, especially as many universities are now struggling to pay their bandwidth
subscription fees.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The approach of supporting technical assistance activities aimed at strengthening ICT sector's
  regulatory oversight was appropriate, given the strategic importance of the sector to the Somali economy.
  The analytical underpinnings of the project were appropriate and based on the recommendations of the
  Bank's World Development Report (WDR) on 2011 on Conflict, Security and Development and for the
  ICT sector in particular on the recommendations of the WDR 2016 on Internet for Development.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. The project was structured as a recipient-executed
  grant, with component one activities executed by the Bank on behalf of the recipient, given the weak
  implementation capacity. The Project Implementation Unit in the Ministry of Posts, Telecoms and
  Technology (MPTT) was responsible for components two and three activities. Some aspects of
  implementation of these components were delegated locally to a local project coordination unit (PCU)
  within the Ministry of Information, Communication and Cultural Heritage (MICCH) of the Puntland State of
  Somalia, to foster collaboration between the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) and the Federal
  Member States (FMS), and Puntland was at the time one of the most developed states to pilot such an
  arrangement.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including high risks with governance, macroeconomic
  risk, weak implementation capacity, stakeholder risk and security risk (PAD, paragraph 45). Mitigation
  measures incorporated at design, included transparent dialogue with stakeholders, seeking to increase
  revenue from the telecommunication sector for the treasury and minimizing security risk through locating
  project activities in ministries within secure compounds. Even with the mitigation measures, the overall
  project risk was rated as High at appraisal (PAD, 47). The arrangements made at appraisal for fiduciary
  compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings in preparation: (i) although the hybrid modality did help in expediting
  work on regulatory support for the sector, issues relating to the availability of funding were not sufficiently
  considered at design. Donor funds were pledged but not delivered, and the disbursement was aligned
  with expected donor cycles; (ii) the team initially had no Somalis on the team to decipher and navigate
  the political dynamics; and (iii) there were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9).

  On balance, the quality at entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Nineteen supervision missions (on average four times a year) were conducted during the project
 lifetime. The continuity of leadership was maintained with the phase 1 Task Team Leaders (TTL) ,
 managing phase 2.. The co-TTLs was located in Nairobi during the main part of implementation and this
 helped in saving costs. One of the TTLs had thirty years of ICT experience, as well as specific expertise in
 handling FCV experience having coauthored a book on ICT in FCV countries (The Role of Information and
 Communication Technologies in Post-Conflict Reconstruction). The supervision team appropriately shifted
 focus on activities associated with digital Identification, once SIM registration was made mandatory

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



 following the passage of the telecommunications law in 2017. Although there were initial delays in
 procurement, the support provided by the team aided in fiduciary compliance. Security issues added to the
 complexity of supervision. Collaboration between different Bank units was strengthened and generated
 important synergies, e.g. with the FCI-led SCALED-UP program and the Recurrent costs and Reform
 Financing operation, as well as active engagement with the Financial Governance Committee.

 There were minor shortcomings. One, given the difficulties associated with M&E, the team could have
 provided more training to the PIU on M&E implementation. The ICR (paragraph 89) notes that the Bank
 team could have interacted more with the local PCU established in Puntland.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Given the paucity of data in Somalia and the low implementation capacity, the M&E design was simple,
 with the chosen indicators having baselines and appropriate targets. The indicator associated with the PDO
 of enabling environment was appropriate, with the indicator monitoring the contributions from the sector to
 the treasury. However, there were shortcomings in M&E design.

 One, there were no indicators associated with the PDO of achieving equity in access to connectivity. Two,
 the indicator associated with international bandwidth per inhabitant was not fully attributable to the project.
 Three, there were some disconnects between the PDO expected outcomes/results and the selected PDO
 indicators (as noted by the ICR para 68, the expected outcome Improved communications, with lower
 prices was not matched to a PDO indicator). An indicator on gender could have been useful (e.g., in
 respect to persons trained – as the telecommunications sector is male dominated in Somalia).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that the data collection methods were basic, mostly relying on the PIU and
  task team to compile data from external sources (such as, using data from third party sources such as
  TeleGeography and the International Telecommunication Union). Given the limited data on the ground,
  the project appropriately relied on household surveys. This helped in overcoming many of the
  shortcomings in M&E design. For instance, given that it was too difficult to get data on access to
  connectivity for the entire population, the household surveys showed a reduction in terms of digital
  divides - regarding mobile phone ownership and mobile money - for certain vulnerable groups (women).

  The ICT Data Collection Unit that was envisioned at design for monitoring and tracking progress was not
  established. Despite the M&E framework being simple, the task team overestimated the capacity of the

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



  PIU to collect the requested data. The project coordinator had to keep track of indicators as the PIU did
  not have a M&E specialist. The ICR (paragraph 71) notes that the PIU staff felt that they could have
  benefitted from more training on monitoring.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project's implementation and results were reported on a regular basis, and the collected data was
  utilized for monitoring project progress (ICR, paragraph 72).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This project was classified as a Category C project under the World Bank safeguard policies. No safeguards
   were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page ix and x). The ICR (paragraph 73) notes that there were no negative
   impacts on livelihoods, land use or physical relocation of people.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. A financial assessment conducted at appraisal, concluded that the financial
   management risk was high, in view of the low implementation capacity and security considerations (PAD,
   paragraph 50). The mitigation measures incorporated at design, included setting an accounting system
   and training the relevant staff.(PAD, paragraph 50). The overall financial management was rated as
   'moderately satisfactory' in the first Implementation Status Results (ISR) Report, and 'satisfactory' in the
   remaining six ISRs. The ICR notes that there were limited ineligible expenses. Most of these were rectified.
   The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that to ensure sustainability it was decided to apply a pragmatic "Use of
   Country Systems (UCS) approach. The audits were unqualified.

   Procurement management. A procurement assessment conducted at appraisal concluded that the
   procurement risk was high, due to the weak capacity of the PIU (PAD, paragraph 28). The mitigation
   measures incorporated at design, included hiring a locally-recruited procurement specialist and updating
   the procurement manual and training respective staff on procurement. The ICR (paragraph 76) reports that
   there was compliance with the Bank's procurement procedures. Since the national procurement law was
   not fully operational, customized World Bank standard procurement documents were used. Although there
   were some procurement delays, these were eventually resolved. The ICR does not report any instance of
   mis-procurement.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, which
are presented here with some adaptation of language.

1. The project design needs to be simple and adaptable, especially in a Fragile, Conflict and
Violence (FCA) context. This project had a limited number of components and interdependent
activities. Many of the project activities were dependent on the passing of the Communications Law,
but were designed in a way that allowed for flexibility and adaptability, given that it was still uncertain
whether the Act would be approved by the parliament.

2. "Standard" interventions need significant adaptation. The choice to support a
Communications Act and the National Communications Authority in this project was informed by
telecom development across many countries (including FCV countries), and by the first phase of this
project. While these interventions are fundamental building blocks for the evolution of the sector,
looking forward, when developing this type of core sector interventions, it would be useful to
incorporate features such as private sector incentives, understanding fragility drivers and developing
adequate risk mitigation strategies and engaging stakeholders who can provide insight on what is
needed to ensure sustainability.

3. Reform drivers can help in expediting implementation. This project helped in the passage of
the communication law and establishing the ICT regulator. A success factor was the ability to link the
expected reforms under this project to the government goals of achieving High Indebted Poor
Country (HIPC) status, enabling critical debt release. This was critical in a FCV context where policy
reforms are needed to counteract power dynamics.

4. Even if the hybrid modality is necessary in a FCV context, they are not always efficient,
and hence steps to mitigate the effect of these inefficiencies are required. The lesson from this
project is that, while this modality can be successful in kick-starting implementation, it adds to


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SO: ICT Sector Support - Phase II (P152358)



administrative complexities, and the uncertainty over the availability of donor funding adds to the
complication of project management.

5. Local anchoring is particularly important in a low security environment. This project
demonstrated the importance of employing local language speaking staff, and with an understanding
of the local context, sensitivities and relationships. This project eventually did this through a Somali
speaking consultant, and this proved to be essential in supporting the supervision team.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. The quality of analysis provided in the ICR is clear and summarizes the salient points and
clearly links evidence to findings. The ICR clearly discusses the positive and negative aspects of the hybrid
modality of financing used for this project. The ICR is internally consistent and there is logical linking and
integration of the various parts of the report. The ICR candidly discusses the issues with the design of M&E.
The theory of change listing the causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes is well-
articulated and the ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project. The ICR made
good attempts to report on cost effectiveness of the project. Given the data limitations in a fragile country with
weak implementation capacity, the ICR provides good narrative of how the shortcomings in M&E design were
overcome during implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
