     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022593

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P120026                                    GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ghana                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47890,IDA-61280                       30-Jun-2016                                       120,527,501.45

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2010                               30-Jun-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           75,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                           120,690,814.45                                             0.00

 Actual                                       120,527,501.45                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan                Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) was:

   "To expand access to, and ensure sustainable water supply and sanitation services in rural and small
   town communities in six regions of Ghana."



                                                                                                Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



   This review is based on the three sub-objectives: (1) To expand access to water supply services in rural and
   small town communities: (2) To expand access to sanitation services in rural and small town
   communities: and (3) To ensure sustainable water supply and sanitation services in rural and small town
   communities.

   A split rating was not used for this review, as the PDO was unchanged, and the targets were revised upwards
   with the Additional Financing (AF) increasing the ambition of the project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Nov-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 5 - 7).

   1. Rural and Small Town Water Supply. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$47.6 million. The
   revised estimate with AF was US$77.6 million. The actual cost was US$85.2 million. This component
   planned to increase access to water supply in six regions in Ghana. Activities to be financed in this
   component were as follows: (i) construction of boreholes with hand pumps for rural communities: (ii)
   construction of medium-sized systems, small sized elevated tanks and standpipes based on mechanized
   boreholes for medium-size small towns: (iii) construction of mechanized boreholes, larger sized elevated
   tanks for larger-size small towns: (iv) construction of piped schemes to connect with transmission lines of
   the Ghana Water Company Limited (GWCL) systems for rural and small towns : (v) rehabilitation of broken
   down "orphan" boreholes in rural communities and small towns (old boreholes, usually over thirty years old
   and not claimed by any donor): and (vi) rehabilitation of non-optimal performing water supply systems in
   small towns transferred from GWCL. Additionally, this component was to finance technical advisory services
   for the design, appraisal, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of the above-listed investment
   activities.

   2, Rural and Small Town Integrated Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$18.6 million. The revised estimate with AF was US$29.8 million. The actual cost was US$21.0
   million. This component planned to finance investments in sanitation systems for accelerating the pace for
   attaining Ghana's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to reach open defecation free status. Activities to
   be financed in this component were as follows: (i) construction of core elements of basic household latrines,
   and latrines, urinals, and hand washing facilities for schools and health facilities; and (ii)
   implementing behavioral change communication campaigns.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



  3. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$11.1
  million. The revised estimate with AF was US$15.6 million. The actual cost was US$14.2 million. This
  component planned to finance technical assistance activities for building capacity of stakeholders in the
  water and sanitation sectors. Activities in this component were as follows:

  (i) Capacity building of public sector institutions at the national, regional, district and community levels and
  an assessment of the roles of the Ministry of Sanitation and Water Resources (MSWR), Ministry of Local
  Government and community level institutions, training Regional Coordination Councils for supervision of
  the District Assemblies (DAs) for water and sanitation subprojects, strengthening capacity of the key
  directorates in MSWR for planning and monitoring, provision of technical advisory services, training and
  logistical support to the DAs, non-governmental organizations and public service providers.

  (ii) Operationalization of a Sector Information System (SIS) to facilitate information sharing, coordination,
  and monitoring and evaluation in water and sanitation operations.

  (iii) Capacity building of the Community Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$77.3 million. The revised estimate with AF was
  US$120.6 million. The actual cost was US$120.5 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA credit of US$75.0 million. AF of US$47.5 million
  was approved in November 29, 2017. With this, the Bank financing for the project was US$122.5 million.
  The amount disbursed at closure was US$120.5 million.

  Borrower contribution. Counterpart funding of US$2.3 million from District Assemblies (DAs) was planned
  at appraisal. There was no contribution from DAs during implementation and funds were allocated from the
  AF to cover the five percent counterpart funding that were to be paid by the DAs.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 23, 2010 and became effective on December 6, 2010. It was
  scheduled to close on June 30, 2016. AF was approved on November 29, 2017. The project closed on June
  30, 2020, four years behind the original schedule.

  Other changes. There were three Level 2 restructurings. The changes made during the project lifetime
  in sequential order are as follows.

  The following changes were made through the first restructuring on June 27, 2017.

        The closing date was extended by one year from June 30, 2016, to June 30, 2017, to allow time for
         the completion of some water supply systems that were behind schedule (as their costs had been
         underestimated at design), and for completing the sanitation activities that were behind schedule.

  The second restructuring on June 2017 extended the closing date by six months from June 30, 2017 to
  December 31, 2017 to provide time for signing the Credit Agreement for AF.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



   The following changes were made with the AF for the project on November 29, 2017.

         The AF was meant to achieve the original targets (particularly related to the sanitation component).
         The target values of the key outcome indicators for water supply and sanitation services were
          increased. The targets that were increased are as follows: (i) Increase in the number of people with
          access to improved water services: (ii) Increase in the number of boreholes to small town water
          supply systems, and new water supply systems for small towns: and (iii increase in the number
          of toilets in project areas.
         Funds were allocated to cover the five percent counterpart funding that were to be paid by the
          District Assemblies (DA).
         Technical Assistance activities were added to support the District Environmental Health Officers
          (DEHOs) and the Regional Health Environment Officers (RHEOs) for the campaign to construct
          household toilets with the aim of attaining open defecation free status in an additional 490
          communities.
         Logistical support for rolling out the Sector Information System, and capacity building support for the
          Ministry of Sanitation and Water Resources (MSWR), the Regional Coordinating Councils
          (RCCs), and the DAs.

   The third restructuring on December 2019, extended the closing date by six months from December 31,
   2019, to June 30, 2020, to allow time for completion of the civil works in Northern and Northeast regions
   that were delayed because of the boreholes vandalized during local communal conflicts.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Government strategy. The PDO was well-aligned with the Government's ongoing National Community and
Water Sanitation Program (NCWSP) launched in 1994. The PDO was consistent with the goals of the
National Water Policy of 2007, and the pillars of the second Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS
II) for 2006 -2009. The PDO was aligned with the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) relating to access to safe and affordable water and adequate sanitation for all by 2030.

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. The Bank's Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2018 focused on improving health outcomes in a sustainable manner,
and specifically referred to the lack of progress made in Ghana for improving delivery of sanitation
services. The Bank's Ghana Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) published in 2018, advocated the need
for further investments, especially in the sanitation sector. The Bank's Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for 2020-2026 is currently under preparation.

Prior Bank experience. The Bank has executed prior projects in the water and sanitation sectors (Phase
one and two of the Community Water and Sanitation project), and the Community-Based Rural
Development Project. This project aimed at building upon gains achieved thus far while adding activities at
aimed at supporting the Government's decentralization policy framework in the sectors through holding
the District Assemblies (DAs) responsible for implementing subnational level subprojects. This project also
aimed at adding value in the sanitation sector, through providing Community-Led Total (CLT) sanitation, to

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



               create awareness for sanitation services (an approach that had been effective in parts of Bangladesh and
               India), and to help the communities achieve an open defecation free status. Given the limited success in
               improving delivery of sanitation services thus far in the country, and the need to increase access to
               improved water in rural areas, the project objectives were sufficiently challenging. However, while the
               objective remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary response to a development
               gap in Ghana, a significant shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the objective formulation around what
               outcomes would be achieved through increasing access to water and sanitation services. The causal chain
               between funding and outcomes was clear, albeit with most targets at output level (excluding the one related
               to the achievement of open defecation free status in the project area), as the objective was closer to the
               output level, rather than the outcome level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To expand access to water supply services in rural and small town communities.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The
                             intended outcomes were attributable to project activities and monitorable. The outputs of activities such as,
                             providing boreholes with hand pumps for rural communities, medium-sized systems based on mechanized
                             boreholes for small-size small towns, large-size mechanized boreholes for larger-sized small towns,
                             connecting transmission lines from Ghana Water Company Limited (GWCL) for small towns, and
                             rehabilitating broken-down "orphan" boreholes and non-optimal performing water supply systems were
                             expected to increase access to water supply services in rural and small town communities.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 13 -14 and 35 -37).

                                        1,373 boreholes that were fitted with hand pumps were operational at closure, exceeding the target of
                                           1,200.
                                          58 new mechanized boreholes for small towns were operational at project closure. This was
                                           marginally short of the revised target of 60.
                                          75 new water systems were operational in small towns when the project closed, exceeding the revised
                                           target of 60.
                                          376 orphan boreholes were rehabilitated, exceeding the revised target of 300.
                                          15 former Ghana Water Company Limited (GWCL) systems were rehabilitated and transferred to the
                                           communities, as targeted.


                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)




      Nine Community piped water system from the GWCL were rehabilitated, exceeding the target of five.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 13 and 31).

The project activities were expected to increase the number of people with access to improved water supply.

      1,356.340 people had access to improved water supply at closure. This exceeded the revised target
       of 800,000. The beneficiaries included 524,700 people benefitting from boreholes with hand pumps in
       rural areas and 831,640 people in small towns. Fifty two per cent of the beneficiaries were estimated
       to be women.
      The reliability of water services improved in the project areas to 16 hours of service per day as
       targeted.
      The team clarified that the quality of water was regularly tested for quality assurance. The ICR
       (paragraph 47) notes that a beneficiary assessment was conducted through a mini-census in each
       beneficiary community. The assessment noted that 90 percent of the respondents were satisfied with
       the increased access to potable drinking water, and reduction in time to fetching water. The
       beneficiary assessment however noted some lapses in operation and management of some small
       towns water systems due to inadequate oversight.

Given that the outcomes were attributable to the project activities, efficacy of this sub-objective is rated as
substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To expand access to sanitation services in rural and small town communities.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The
intended outcomes were attributable to project activities and monitorable. The outputs of activities aimed
at constructing basic household latrines, latrines for schools and health facilities, coupled with communication
campaign aimed at behavioral change towards better hygienic practices, were expected to increase access to
sanitation services in rural and small town communities.

Outputs (pages 37-38).

      56,228 improved latrines were constructed, exceeding the target of 40,000.
      568 institutions (schools and clinics) were provided with improved latrines, exceeding the revised
       target of 400.
      1,168 communities were trained in areas such as personal hygiene and sanitation practices, linkages
       between sanitation, water and diseases, and environmental sanitation, exceeding the target of 600.


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



Outcomes (ICR, page 16).

The project activities were expected to increase the number of people with improved sanitation and the
number of open defecation free communities in the project area.

      672,676 people in the project area had improved sanitation services, exceeding the target of 600,000.
      1,052 communities in the project area were declared free of open defecation, almost double the target
       of 550 communities.
      The ICR (paragraph 34) notes that qualitative assessment of beneficiaries conducted in the household
       survey indicated that less than seven percent of children under five years experienced symptoms of
       recent diarrhea (in a 24 hour period during two weeks before the survey) in some project areas,
       suggesting that the incidence of diarrhea might have gone down for children in that age cohort as
       compared to in the previous years. The community surveys also indicated that 95 percent of the
       respondents practiced hand washing at critical times (before eating and after defecation). The
       beneficiary assessment indicated that majority of respondents noted an increase in their level of
       knowledge about personal hygiene practices. The assessment however indicated that just over half
       (51%) of the respondents had access to improved latrines in the community and in schools.

Given that the outcomes pertaining to expanding access to sanitation services in rural and small towns were
realized, the project’s efficacy in achieving this objective is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To ensure sustainable water supply and sanitation facilities in rural and small town communities.

Rationale
Theory of change.

The theory of change had gaps. The activities that were expected to ensure the sustainability of water and
sanitation services were not clearly defined. Establishing a Comprehensive Water Supply and Sanitation
Information System (SIS) for information sharing and monitoring and evaluation of the water and sanitation
operations, capacity building of the Community Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA) and of the District
Assemblies in (DAs) for monitoring the District Monitoring and Evaluation System (DIMES) were aimed at
increasing the capacity of the CWSA and district assemblies in using relevant sector information. The outputs
of these activities were expected to contribute to the financial and physical sustainability of water supply and
sanitation facilities in rural and small-town communities. It is not, however, clear whether these outputs were
by themselves sufficient for realizing the expected outcomes. The project activities did not fully address the
barriers to the sustainability of water and sanitation services, except behavioral change education and
campaigns for improved sanitation and hygiene. The theory of change implicitly assumes that beneficiaries
would adequately take care of the latrines and that there would be adequate financing and efficient supply
chains of spare parts for the maintenance of boreholes and hand pumps.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



Outputs (ICR, pages 14 -15).

     94 District Assemblies (Das) were operating the District Monitoring and Evaluation System (DIME) as
      targeted.
     The comprehensive Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Information System (SIS) was not
      operational when the project closed. According to the team, at the end of the parent project a
      validation workshop was held, and a web server system was installed at the Water Resources
      Commission to serve as a hub for the information system. A list of facilities including computers and
      hardware facilities were procured to facilitate operationalization of the system, and staff of the relevant
      agencies were trained on using the system. While these activities were completed under the parent
      project, AF for the project was intended to support the operationalization of the system. The team
      clarified that the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) sector was going through institutional
      changes when this project closed. Given this, the Community Water and Sanitation Agency and the
      Ministry of Water Resources Works decided to delay the operationalizing the SIS system, until the
      institutional studies and actions were completed.
     Given that the default rate of water users was significantly higher for water systems that utilized a
      monthly flat rate for water tariffs when compared with Pay-As-You-Fetch modality, the project
      introduced “smart” technologies, such as token activated pre-paid public water stand pipes and
      controlled solar-powered pumping systems for improving service delivery.
     The project introduced plastic latrine slabs as an alternative to basic sanitation option for households.
      These plastic toilet slabs are installed over a pit and can easily be removed and relocated once the pit
      is full. The team stated that no report of filled pit was received to date.

Outcomes

     There were no key outcome indicators aimed at monitoring the sustainability of sanitation services. As
      indicated above, only half of the beneficiaries were satisfied with the access to improved latrines and
      in schools.
     Full cost recovery including depreciation and effective fee collection are essential for the long-term
      sustainability of water systems. The financial sustainability of the systems was to be monitored
      through comparing their revenues to costs. Specifically, the revenues raised by the water supply
      systems were to either be equal or exceed their operational and maintenance costs. This ratio of the
      water supply systems could not be determined when the project closed. The ICR (paragraph 35) notes
      that several of the water systems were just completed towards the end of the project and at that time
      the government was providing free water for the population, due to the exceptional circumstance of
      the on-going COVID -19 pandemic (from April 2020 to December 2020 and beyond), a situation which
      was expected to last for a while even after the project closure date. Given that the water and
      sanitation systems can be adversely affected if they are not properly operated or maintained, it is not
      clear to which extent the activities contributed to ensuring the sustainability of the water systems.
     The beneficiary assessment highlighted challenges around a few cases of inadequate oversight of
      water systems by some District Assemblies and the risks associated eventual rundown or collapse of
      the systems. The ICR notes that there were challenges with supply chains for handpump spare parts,
      borehole replacement, and inadequate handpump mechanics in some communities. The ICR notes
      that 23 schemes under the CWSA benefitted from increased capacity of CWSA but provides no
      information about the other schemes.
     It is not clear if there are adequate arrangements for the sustainability of the plastic latrine slaps or
      behavioral change in hygiene. The ICR does not provide any quantitative or qualitative evidence that

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



                                    the Open Defecation Status (ODS) will likely be maintained. Given that the likelihood of slippage to
                                    open defecation following rural sanitation interventions is high, the project did not adequately address
                                    this issue.

                            Because of the significant shortcomings in ensuring the sustainability of water and sanitation services and
                            lack of evidence, the project’s efficacy in achieving the third objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the project in achieving objectives pertaining to expanding access to water supply and
                            sanitation services are rated Substantial. The efficacy of the project in achieving the third objective to ensure
                            sustainable water supply and sanitation services is rated Modest for lack of credible evidence. Taking these
                            ratings into account, overall efficacy of the project is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analysis. A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was conducted at appraisal and at closure to
   estimate the financial returns from water supply investments. This component accounted for 62% percent of the
   appraisal estimate and 70% of actual cost. The financial benefits were assumed to come from the revenue from
   the sale of (incremental) water production, connection fees for new customers, and consumer surplus form
   incremental sales of water. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate at closure was US$7.5 million as
   compared to the NPV of US$26.4 million at appraisal at the same discount rate. The ex post Internal Rate of
   Return (IRR) was 17.2% as compared to the ex-ante IRR of 20.5%. The ex post IRR was lower than the ex-ante
   IRR due a combination of factors including the long implementation period, increase in costs of water supply
   systems, and delayed project benefits. However, despite the extension of project duration and cost overruns
   which resulted in AF, the IRR exceeded the discount rate. The economic analysis of sanitation investments
   was not undertaken as they were not income-generating activities.

   Administrative and Operational Issues. The parent project suffered from shortcomings in preparation due to
   the large expansion of target communities and the correspondingly larger populations, which led to cost
   overruns. The costs of water supply investments of the original project were underestimated, with the costs
   of rehabilitating water systems proving to be higher than estimated at design due to a combination of technical
   factors including: (i) original designs had to be replaced by concrete reservoirs to withstand weather conditions:

                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



(ii) longer pipelines were deemed necessary to connect communities in high saline areas: and (iii)
some communities did not have electricity from the national grid (especially in the Upper East region), and the
cost of connecting these communities to the national grid was higher than anticipated. The cost overruns were
covered by funding from AF for the project. There was lower than anticipated demand for sanitation services in
the initial years due to affordability concerns (resolved eventually through direct support to the rural households).
Initial progress from the District Assemblies (DAs) was slow and this led to delays in sub-project starts.

The operational issues were eventually resolved with the AF for the project. And given that the project exceeded
its revised end targets both in terms of people provided with access to improved water supply (169% of the
revised target), with improved sanitation services (112%), and communities which attained open defecation free
status (191%), efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       62.00
 Appraisal                                                  20.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       70.00
 ICR Estimate                                               17.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated as Substantial. Efficiency is rated substantial given the economic justification
for the project. The project’s efficacy in achieving the objectives to expand access to water supply and sanitation
services is rated Substantial. The project’s efficacy in achieving the objective to ensure the sustainability of
these services is rated Modest because of lack of credible evidence. As per the Bank guidance (p.38), overall
outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



Institutional risk. There is risk to development outcome associated with the sustainable operation and
management of the completed water supply and sanitation systems, given that it is not clear if there will be
adequate resources for maintaining these systems.

Stakeholder risk. The ICR (paragraph 93) notes that the beneficiary assessment report indicated
challenges associated with oversight of water systems by District Assemblies. There is risk to development
outcome given that lack of oversight could lead to the eventual rundown of the systems.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance of the project was well-articulated at entry and matched the client priorities. The
  project was prepared based on the experiences from prior-Bank financed projects in Ghana (Phases one
  and two of the Second Community Water and Sanitation Project), and from the experiences from Bank-
  financed projects in Bangladesh and India. Lessons incorporated at design included adopting Community
  Ownership and Management (COM) approach, decentralized service delivery through holding the District
  Assemblies (DAs) responsible for implementing sub-projects, and unlike prior projects where funds
  allocated for sanitation services were limited, allocating 17 percent of the project funds for Community-
  Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) activities. Given the Government's decentralization program framework for
  the sectors, the implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the Community Water Supply and
  Sanitation Agency (CWSA) responsible for overall coordination and the DAs for implementing sub-
  projects at the subnational level. The financial management capacity of CWSA was deemed to be
  adequate at appraisal.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks with weak implementation capacity,
  governance and fiduciary risks, and concerns about the financial sustainability of water systems.
  Mitigation measures at design, included support to DAs on fiduciary compliance. Appropriate
  arrangements were made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation, and safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance (discussed in sections nine and ten).

  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. It is not clear if the design was based on in-depth
  studies or assessments and if there was adequate due-diligence at design, given the large expansion of
  target communities and the corresponding larger population. This led to cost overruns (discussed in
  section 5). These cost overruns necessitated AF for the project. The design of the sanitation component
  could have befitted from additional studies and assessments (to better understand and define the works
  and optimal implementation arrangements. This could have helped in preventing the low achievement of
  the delivery of household latrines and open defecation free status for the rural communities during the
  first years of the project. (The issue was eventually resolved through providing direct material support to
  rural households).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)




b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were held twice a year during the project lifetime. The supervision teams included
 multidisciplinary teams with expertise in fiduciary management and safeguards. This aided in safeguards
 and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10). The supervision team was proactive and resolved
 issues, such as issues associated with limited demand for sanitation activities in the initial years of the
 project. Given the cost overruns associated with water supply activities and challenges associated with
 mobilizing counterpart funding from the District Assemblies, the supervision team was instrumental in
 resolving these issues through the AF for the project. This aided in completion of all project activities at
 closure. According to the clarifications provided by the team, with a field-based Task Team Leader (TTL)
 up until six months before the revised closing date, and a third headquarters based TTL since then.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results chain was logical, and the key outcome indicators (the number of people with access to water
 and sanitation services, reliability of water supply and the number of communities declared free of open
 defecation in the targeted areas, were attributable to the project activities and monitorable. The indicator
 associated with the ratio of revenue over operation and maintenance (O&M) was appropriate for monitoring
 the institutional strengthening project components. There were no appropriate indicators to monitor the
 sustainability of the sanitation sector.

 The baseline for the indicators were to be established at appraisal. The M&E was to be through a system
 that was to be established. Since assessment of system performance was not done in the prior Bank-
 financed projects in Ghana, the M&E design envisioned assessment of the system through a performance
 contract signed between the District Assemblies and the service providers of the Water and Sanitation
 Development Board (WSDB) (PAD, paragraph 39).



b. M&E Implementation
  The District Monitoring and Evaluation (DIMES) - the official database platform of the Community Water
  and Sanitation System (CWSA) was established as envisioned at appraisal. The ICR (paragraph 71)
  notes that where it was difficult to establish a clear baseline, the project considered the baseline to be
  zero and measured additionality. The data collected by the District Assemblies
  (DA) for monitoring subprojects at the district level, was submitted to the Regional Coordination Councils


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



  (RCC) and the Regional Water and Sanitation System (RWST), and the databases of the central
  Community Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA).

  The indicator associated with the ratio of revenues over Operational and Maintenance (O&M) costs could
  not be determined for lack of data. The activity associated with the installation of a comprehensive water
  and sanitation information system was repeatedly delayed, and the system was not operational when the
  project closed. The weaknesses in the M&E system, especially relating to sustainability of the water and
  sanitation systems were not corrected during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was used to support decision making and for monitoring implementation progress. The
  ICR (paragraph 74) notes that the M&E system was likely to be used by CWSA and the DAs to influence
  subsequent interventions in the near term.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated modest because of the shortcomings in the M&E design and
  implementation in capturing the sustainability of services. The M&E system was, otherwise, sufficient to
  capture the achievements in increasing access to water and sanitation that were closer to the output
  level.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   This project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under World Bank safeguard
   policies. Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 25). No other safeguard policies were triggered with the
   AF.

   Environmental safeguards. The PAD (paragraph 72) notes that the environmental impacts of the project,
   were expected to be minimal and site-specific. An Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal. Following the AF for the project, the ESMF was
   updated to reflect the changes in the project. The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that the project was
   in compliance with environmental safeguards during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed
   at appraisal to address involuntary resettlement issues (PAD, paragraph 65). This framework was updated
   with the AF. The ICR (paragraph 77) notes that the project was in compliance with social safeguards during
   implementation. Twenty three site-specific RPF plans were prepared during implementation to address
   resettlement issues. Grievance Redressal Mechanisms (GRMs) were established across all project
   locations and all grievances were resolved before the project end date.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment conducted at appraisal concluded that the financial management
   arrangements were satisfactory. The financial risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph
   62). There were no major financial issues during implementation (ICR, paragraph 80). The Community
   Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA) submitted acceptable periodic financial reports, including audits,
   although with some delays. The external auditors noted some internal control and accountability issues,
   most of which were rectified by closure. The most recent audit report for the year ending December 2019
   was submitted in September 2020, after the deadline. This was accepted by the Bank, in view of
   the restrictions on social activities and delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment was conducted at appraisal. CWSA, the agency in charge of
   overall coordination, had executed Bank-financed projects and was familiar with the Bank's procurement
   procedures (PAD, paragraph 9). The procurement risk was however rated as substantial at appraisal, in
   view of the large number of project entities under the project, and many of the Regional CWSA's and
   District Assemblies (DA's) unfamiliar with Bank procedures. The mitigation measures incorporated at
   design included recruitment of additional procurement specialist and training the DA staff. The ICR
   (paragraph 81) notes that there were no major issues with compliance on procurement procedures. The
   ICR reports no case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   An unintended positive impact of the project was its contribution to managing the COVID-19 pandemic.
   The project implemented a hygiene and handwashing promotion, which were considered critical elements
   to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. The Community Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA) championed
   the hand washing with soap campaign in Ghana and provided veronica buckets, free water and other hand
   washing facilities to households and institutions, to enable them to adhere to the hand washing with soap
   protocols. The protocols implemented by the government helped to mitigate the spread of the COVID-19
   pandemic.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The project’s efficacy in ensuring
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   the sustainability of water and
                                                                               sanitation services is rated

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



                                                                               modest due to insufficient
                                                                               evidence. The project’s efficacy
                                                                               in achieving the other two
                                                                               objectives was rated substantial.
                                                                               The relevance of objectives and
                                                                               the project’s efficiency in
                                                                               achieving the objectives are both
                                                                               rated substantial. Overall, in
                                                                               accordance with the Bank
                                                                               guidance (p.38), the outcome is
                                                                               rated moderately satisfactory
                                                                               because of modest achievement
                                                                               of one of the objectives, i.e., to
                                                                               ensure the sustainability of
                                                                               services.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               There were shortcomings in the
                                                                               M&E design and implementation
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                               in capturing the sustainability of
                                                                               services.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following lessons from the experience of implementing this project with some
adaptation of language.

1. Projects need to be prepared with due diligence to avoid implementation delays. In this
project, the costs of water supply systems were underestimated due to technical considerations, and
there was less than anticipated demand for sanitation services during the initial years. These issues
were eventually resolved through the AF for the project. The lesson is that rigorous project
preparation and pre-project due diligence is required for avoiding implementation delays.

2. Technology improvements and innovative methods could help enhance access to
affordable and sustainable water supply and sanitation systems. Small town piped systems in
Ghana had used electrical systems. For a typical small town power system, the cost of power supply
could represent 50 percent of the operational cost. To address this issue, the project introduced
solar panels (instead of the grid powered systems) for improving the operational efficiency of the
water systems. Likewise, for sanitation issues, the project pioneered plastic latrine slabs to assist
low income communities in the construction of household toilets.

3. An effective fee collection system for full cost recovery is essential for the long-term
sustainability of the water systems. The beneficiary assessment in this project noted that in some
areas the default rate of water users was significantly higher for water systems that used a monthly



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       GH:Sustainable Rural Water & Sanit Serv (P120026)



rate for water tariffs when compared with a Pay-As-You-Fetch modality. These difficulties were
addressed in this project through installing pre-paid smart meters for standpipes.

4. Behavior change communication strategies delivered by relevant stakeholders, coupled
with material support, can help in achieving open defecation free status. In this project, there
was demand for household toilets. The limited results were due to inadequate consultants and
targeted communities. This issue was resolved in this project through a more intensive outreach by
the District Assemblies and the targeted communities and providing direct material support to the
rural households.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and for the most part, the evidence for increasing access to water supply and sanitation
services that were attributable to project activities, is from a credible source. The evidence provided about the
sustainability of water and sanitation systems is, however, sparse. The quality of analysis is sufficient, and to
the extent possible, the ICR includes evidence from a beneficiary assessment. The lessons from the
experience of implementing this project are based on evidence and appropriately respond to the specific
experiences for the project, and they are sufficiently linked to the narrative.

However, the ICR’s rating for the project development objective of ensuring sustainability of water supply and
sanitation systems is not backed by sufficient quantitative or qualitative evidence. The main body of the text at
25 pages is more than the recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
