     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022583

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P156455                                    SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Balkans                            Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-95647,TF-A6354                          30-Jun-2020                                         11,056,559.46

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Sep-2015                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            11,056,976.97                                   11,056,976.97

 Revised Commitment                             11,056,976.97                                   11,056,559.46

 Actual                                         11,056,559.46                                   11,056,559.46




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (page 5), the project development objective of the Southeast
   Europe Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (SEE CRIF) Technical Assistance SECO Project was "(i) to
   increase the access of homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector, and government agencies to affordable
   insurance covering losses to property and crops caused by climate change and geological hazards in Albania,
   FYR of Macedonia, and Serbia, and (ii) to expand the offering of innovative catastrophe insurance products
   developed under the SEE CRIF Project to Bosnia and Herzegovina."


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



   This technical assistance project, funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO),
   represents the second phase of the development of the SEE CRIF, established in 2010 to develop
   catastrophe risk insurance markets in Albania, North Macedonia (the Former Yugoslav Republic of
   Macedonia was renamed Republic of North Macedonia in 2019), Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina:

         The first or start-up phase, in 2009-15, also funded by SECO (P117069 and TF071362), launched the
          SEE CRIF as a catastrophe and weather risk insurance program in the SEE and the Europa
          Reinsurance Facility Ltd. (Europa Re) as the program implementing agency (Europa Re was
          incorporated under Swiss Law by the three founding SEE states in 2009). Albania joined SEE CRIF in
          2008 and Serbia and North Macedonia in 2010, all three borrowing from the World Bank to finance
          their contributions to Europa Re. SECO provided technical assistance grants to Europa Re in 2009
          and 2010. Europa Re also received a technical assistance grants from the Global Environment
          Facility in 2011 and from the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. By 2015, Europa
          Re had become a full-pledged Swiss reinsurer, domiciled and licensed in Switzerland, regulated by the
          Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority (FINMA), offering various catastrophe risk insurance
          products, and supporting the sales of catastrophe insurance policies by local insurance partners.
         This second phase, in 2015-20, funded by SECO (P156455 and TF095647 and TF0A6354), aimed to
          further develop the catastrophe risk insurance market in the three original member states and to
          expand SEE CRIF to Bosnia and Herzegovina. In 2017, a new activity – to raise Europa Re's capital
          reserve – was added to this project, in response to a mandate by FINMA requiring all Swiss reinsurers
          to meet additional statutory capital requirements.

   This ICR Review and the ICR cover only the second phase of the development of SEE CRIF and the
   operations of Europa Re. For purposes of this evaluation, the project development objectives are parsed as
   follows (the first two drawn from the Project Appraisal Document of 2015 and the third adapted from the
   Restructuring Paper of 2017 and the ICR of 2021):

         Objective 1 - To increase the access of homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector, and government
          agencies to affordable insurance covering losses to property and crops caused by climate change and
          geological hazards in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia.
         Objective 2 - To expand the offering of innovative catastrophe insurance products developed under
          the Southeast Europe Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
         Objective 3 - To support the financial sustainability of Europa Re.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components.

   Technical Assistance (US$4.158 million estimated at appraisal for technical assistance activities, fully
   disbursed to Europa Re; and US$0.08 million for project supervision and trust fund management disbursed


                                                                                                Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



  to the World Bank) aimed to increase access to catastrophe risk insurance for homeowners, farmers, the
  enterprise sector and government agencies in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia and to expand the
  offering of innovative catastrophe insurance products developed under the SEE CRIF to Bosnia and
  Herzegovina. The technical assistance activities included: (a) consulting services to support
  insurance product development, capacity development for risk-based supervision by national insurance
  regulators, marketing of insurance products, and information technology for insurance sales and claims
  management; (b) country risk assessment for the development of new catastrophe risk models, risk
  underwriting services, actuarial work, and disaster risk management advisory work; (c) project
  management, including compensation for the Europa Re board of directors and project administrative staff;
  (d) audits of the SECO trust fund and the Europa Re financial statements; and (e) training of project staff on
  project management, procurement, and financial management.

  Capital Reserve Financing (US$2.851 estimated at restructuring in 2017 for capital reserve financing, fully
  disbursed to Europa Re; and US$0.15 for project supervision and trust fund management disbursed to the
  World Bank) aimed to raise the capital reserve of Europa Re to meet new statutory capital requirements for
  all Swiss reinsurers set in 2017 by FINMA, the regulator of banks, insurance companies, stock
  exchanges, securities dealers, and other financial intermediaries in Switzerland.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: According to the Project Appraisal Document of August 2015, the project was estimated
  originally to cost US$4.23 million at appraisal, for technical assistance activities. According to the
  Restructuring Paper of October 2017, an additional project cost of US$3.0 million was required for the
  capital reserve financing activity. The estimated project costs were inclusive of costs for project supervision
  and trust fund management due to the World Bank.

  Financing: This technical assistance project was financed by grant of US$4.158 million from SECO to
  Europa Re Ltd., as grantee and project implementing agency, in 2015 and another grant of
  US$2.851 million in 2017. To complete the financing picture over the two-phase development of SEE CRIF
  and Europa Re, SECO had previously provided a grant of US$2.23 million in 2009 and another
  US$1.9 million in 2010, taking the total SECO grants funds extended to Europa Re to US$11.1 million over
  2009-2020.

  Borrower Contribution: There was no contribution to this technical assistance project by the grantee and
  implementing agency, Europa Re Ltd., or by the SEE countries benefitting from SEE CRIF and Europa Re's
  operations – Albania, North Macedonia, Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina.

  Dates: The project was approved and became effective on September 14, 2015, and closed on June 30,
  2020.

  Restructuring: This project was restructured on October 25, 2017. The restructuring: (a) added a new
  project activity – "Funding for Europa Re Capital Reserve," involving the increase in Europa Re's statutory
  capital by CHF2.851 million to meet a mandate by FINMA that all Swiss reinsurers meet a new statutory
  capital requirement of CHF10 million, regardless of their risk exposure and risk-based solvency; (b)
  provided additional funding of US$3.0 million from SECO; and (c) extended the project closing date for two
  years from June 30, 2018 to June 30, 2020.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project development objectives of this operation were relevant to efforts by the SEE countries to build
resilience to natural disasters.

      The frequency and severity of natural disasters had risen in recent years in the SEE region, ninety
       percent of which is located in trans-boundary river basins that are highly prone to flooding. Flooding
       affects US$200 million of GDP annually in Albania (GDP was US$11.6 billion in 2015) and 50,000 of
       the population (population was 2.9 million in 2015). Earthquakes, however, pose the greater risk of
       a higher impact lower probability event and affect US$700 million of GDP and 20,000 of the
       population annually. In Northern Macedonia, where the capital Skopje is exposed to flooding from
       the Vardar, Treska and Lepenec rivers due to heavy rainfall and snow melting, flooding affects
       US$500 million of GDP (GDP was US$10.5 billion in 2015) and 70,000 of the population (population
       was 2.1 million in 2015) annually. Earthquakes affect US$200 million of GDP and 40,000 of the
       population annually. The capital losses from earthquakes are US$100 million annually. Floods
       pose the greater risk to Serbia and occur mostly along the river courses of Sava, Drina,
       Velika Morava, Juzna Morava, and Zapadna Morava. Flooding affects US$1 billion of GDP (GDP
       was US$36.4 billion in 2015) and 200,000 of the population (population was 7.1 million in 2015)
       annually. Meanwhile, earthquakes affect US$300 million of GDP and 60,000 of the population
       annually. Flooding also poses the greater risk in Bosnia and Herzegovina and affects US$600
       million of GDP (GDP was US$15.3 billion in 2015) and 100,000 of the population (population was
       3.8 million in 2015) annually. With Bosnia and Herzegovina lying within the Mediterranean-Trans-
       Asia fault zone, one of the most seismic areas in the Balkan Peninsula, earthquakes affect US$200
       million of GDP and 20,000 of the population annually.
      With the SEE governments facing limited capacity to respond to and recover from natural disasters,
       it was thought in 2009 that the SEE states could transfer the financial risks arising from natural
       disasters to the private sector with the organization of a regional catastrophe insurance market. A
       regional market would be more viable than small under-developed national markets and would be of
       greater commercial interest to reinsurers. Since then, half a decade after the creation of SEE CRIF
       and the organization of Europa Re, catastrophe insurance products had become available and
       affordable to the regional market. This project, representing the second phase in the development
       of SEE CRIF and Europa Re, would deepen the market in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia,
       and introduce catastrophe risk insurance to a fourth market, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
      The project would also support the financial sustainability of Europa Re, after the company shifted
       its business model in 2017 from being a specialized catastrophe reinsurer in the SEE to being a
       universal non-life reinsurer writing business worldwide. When SEE CRIF and Europa Re were
       created in 2009, it was expected (although not required) that the SEE countries would pass laws
       making property catastrophe insurance mandatory following similar schemes in other catastrophe
       insurance programs supported by the Bank, including the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool, the
       Romanian Pool-ul de Asigurare Împotriva Dezastrelor Naturale, and the Caribbean Catastrophe
       Risk Insurance Facility. Making catastrophe insurance mandatory would: increase demand for
       catastrophe insurance products; ensure extensive catastrophic risk coverage; and improve the long-
       term viability of SEE CRIF and Europa Re. When the SEE countries would not adopt the mandatory

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



                                        insurance scheme, but, in fact, continued to compensate uninsured homeowners, following a major
                                        earthquake in Albania and floods in North Macedonia and Serbia, Europa Re adjusted its business
                                        model to gain financial sustainability – the company would not be able to cover its operating costs
                                        from limited reinsurance premium income alone if the demand for catastrophe insurance were lower
                                        than expected.

               The project development objectives were aligned with the Bank Group strategy in Albania, North
               Macedonia, Serbia and Bosnia Herzegovina:

                                       The Country Partnership Framework for Albania 2015-2019 acknowledged that "Albania has high
                                        vulnerability to natural disasters, especially floods, on account of weather variability and climate
                                        change" and cites efforts at disaster risk management and flood management studies on Drin River
                                        in response to these risks.
                                       The Country Partnership Strategy for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for the Period
                                        FY2015-FY2018 states that "continued development of insurance mechanisms can help limit the
                                        financial damage of natural disasters to which FYR Macedonia is prone."
                                       The Country Partnership Framework for Serbia for the Period FY16-FY20 notes that the 2012 and
                                        2014 recessions were primarily caused by natural disasters and that, “Disaster Risk Management is
                                        an inherent part of the policy coordination and rationalization agenda (Objective 1b) as well of
                                        financial risk mitigation through the Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility (Objective 2b)."
                                       The Country Partnership Framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina for the Period FY16-FY20 cites
                                        three focus areas, one being "building resilience to external shocks, including climate-induced
                                        natural disasters."

               The project development objectives were also relevant to the work of the SEE countries and the Bank
               relative to:

                                       the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005-2015, which considered the "development of financial risk-
                                        sharing mechanisms, particularly insurance and reinsurance against disasters" as a priority action
                                        for improving the resilience of states and communities to natural disasters;
                                       the Cancun Agreements on Climate Change, which called for enhanced action on climate change
                                        adaptation with significant focus on the role of insurance and other risk transfer mechanisms; and,
                                       the U.N. Sustainable Development Goals, particularly with SDG 13 "to take urgent action to
                                        combat climate change and its impacts" and the target "to strengthen resilience and adaptive
                                        capacity to climate-related disasters."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To increase the access of homeowners, farmers, the enterprise sector, and government agencies to
affordable insurance covering losses to property and crops caused by climate change and geological hazards
in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The expansion of Europa Re's catastrophe risk reinsurance business in Albania, North
Macedonia, and Serbia would increase the access of households, farms, enterprises, and governments in
these countries to affordable insurance covering losses to their property and agricultural produce caused by
natural disasters. This assumes that: (a) primary private insurers are able to develop, structure and offer
catastrophe risk insurance products that are suitable and affordable; (b) consumers are knowledgeable about
and have the economic incentive to purchase these insurance products; and (c) the reinsurer has the
capacity to pool and diversify risks across risk classes, locations, customers, and time and provide an
additional layer of risk absorption capacity to the insurance market. The provision of technical assistance
for insurance product development, marketing of insurance products, information technology for insurance
sales and claims management, development of new catastrophe risk models, risk underwriting services,
actuarial work, disaster risk management advisory work, and capacity development for risk-based supervision
by national insurance regulators would help achieve this objective.

Outputs. The project met the three output targets set for this objective.

      The percentage of insurance agents offering Europa Re insurance products was 43.7 percent in
       Albania, 23.6 percent in North Macedonia, and 10 percent in Serbia, meeting the target of 10 percent
       for each market. Europa Re has signed business cooperation agreements with four insurance
       companies in Albania, four in North Macedonia, and three in Serbia, which offer Europa Re insurance
       products to consumers. The business partnerships have allowed these companies to offer
       catastrophe insurance products developed under SEE CRIF as well as those developed by the
       companies inhouse.
      An insurance microproduct costing Euro (EUR) 1.00-2.00 per annum (for an insured sum of EUR
       20,000-30,000) had been available in Albania and Serbia since October 2015 and an earthquake
       insurance microproduct costing EUR 7.00 per annum (for an insured sum of EUR 15,000-20,000) is
       available in North Macedonia, meeting the target that insurance products costing US$2.00 be
       available to ensure the affordability of insurance premiums for basic catastrophe insurance. The
       insurance microproduct is distributed by several banks and a specialty retailer in Albania and Serbia
       while the earthquake insurance microproduct is part of the mortgage lending program of two
       commercial banks in North Macedonia. Europa Re provides reinsurance coverage for these
       microinsurance products.
      The number of insurance companies offering catastrophe risk insurance products developed under
       the project to the public reached 10, exactly meeting the target.

Outcome. The project met the outcome target set for this objective.

      Insurance products designed under SEE CRIF are widely available in Albania, North Macedonia, and
       Serbia, meeting the target. The target did not specify the number of products that would be made
       available in these national markets.


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




      From 2015 to 2019, a total 10,152 policies had been written for products including area yield index
       insurance (AYII), micro earthquake stand-alone, package commercial, package residential,
       earthquake stand-alone, earthquake commercial, earthquake residential, disaster relief stand-alone,
       and disaster relief motor third-party liability (MTPL). The total premiums collected amounted to EUR
       580,080 for the total insured sum of EUR 65.358 million on a total insured area of 242.8 million square
       meters. In 2019 alone, 890 policies were written and EUR 116,295 in premium were collected on
       EUR 16.0 million of insured assets covering an insured area of 12,743 square meters. All the
       catastrophe insurance products were developed under SEE CRIF, were introduced to the market by
       Europa Re, were actuarially priced, and did not receive any premium subsidy.
      Moreover, over the course of this project, Europa Re has developed sovereign and municipal
       insurance products in all three SEE states – sovereign disaster risk transfer products, municipal
       budget protection products for natural disasters, AYII for municipalities (AYII is a multiple-peril index-
       based insurance policy that insures farmers against all climatic and biological perils that could cause a
       drop in yield below a historical average for a certain planted area). None of the three states have so
       far availed of sovereign catastrophe insurance coverage, but Serbia has been active in the municipal
       catastrophe insurance market (the business has generated US$500,000 in premiums over the course
       of this project).

While the project met all output and outcome targets, the uptake of catastrophe risk insurance products in
Albania, North Macedonia and Serbia would have been greater had the governments adopted a mandatory
risk insurance system.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To expand the offering of innovative catastrophe insurance products developed under the SEE CRIF to
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The extension of SEE CRIF and Europa Re's reinsurance business to Bosnia and
Herzegovina would make catastrophe risk insurance products available to households, farms, enterprises,
and governments in the country, in the same way that these insurance products were available in Albania,
North Macedonia, and Serbia. The same interventions – technical assistance for various product and market
development activities – would be applied to Bosnia and Herzegovina. The same set of assumptions
about the markets in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia would have to hold for the outcome to be
achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Output. The project met the output target set for this objective.

      Catastrophe risk insurance products are available in Bosnia Herzegovina, meeting the target. The
       Europa Re Board approved the expansion of the company's operations to Bosnia and Herzegovina in
       2015. Europa Re renewed its participation in commercial reinsurance coverages for six companies


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



       that provide earthquake and flood insurance to homeowners in 2018. The company also offered its
       earthquake insurance tariff (the fixed price list that determines the premium rates which insurance
       companies can charge consumers for insurance products sold by them) to the local market – the tariff
       is used by local companies in pricing earthquake insurance coverage.

Outcome. The project met the outcome target set for this objective, which was also the same as the outcome
target.

      Catastrophe risk insurance products are available in Bosnia Herzegovina, meeting the target. As with
       the output indicator, the target for this outcome indicator did not specify the number of products that
       would be made available in this national market.
      Europa Re has since December 2018 offered global reinsurance coverage to six insurance companies
       in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

While the project met all output and outcome targets, the uptake of catastrophe risk insurance products in
Bosnia and Herzegovina would have been greater had the government adopted a mandatory risk insurance
system.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support the future financial sustainability of Europa Re.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The provision of additional capital to Europa Re would allow the company to meet new
statutory capital requirements imposed by the regulator FINMA on all Swiss reinsurers. Higher capital buffers
would boost Europa Re's ability to meet its profitability target and maintain its credit rating, thus enabling it
to perform its reinsurance functions in the SEE catastrophe risk insurance market.

Output. The project achieved the output target set for this objective.

      The amount of capital reserve of Europa Re that was financed by the project was US$2.815 million,
       meeting the target. Following the capital infusion, Europa Re's equity capital rose from CHF10.8
       million in end-2018 to CHF12.3 million in end-2019. The equity capital is estimated to top CHF13.5
       million in end-2020 and projected to increase to CH14.9 million in end-2021 and CHF16.6 million in
       end-2022. With the addition to its capital reserve, Europa Re was able to maintain it reinsurance
       license with FINMA, adding to its credibility and good standing as a reinsurer. FINMA had required all
       Swiss reinsurers, regardless of their risk exposures and risk-based solvency margins, to meet
       a minimum capital requirement of CHF10 million in 2017. For Europa Re, FINMA required the
       reinsurer to increase its statutory capital by at least CHF2.5 million before end-2017.

Outcome. The project met the outcome target set for this objective.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




                                    Europa Re's return on equity (ROE) – the ratio of net income to shareholders' equity, an indicator of
                                     profitability – reached 3.4 percent in 2018, and although it dipped to 1.7 percent in 2019, it bounced
                                     back to 5.1 percent in the first half of 2020, exceeding the target of 3 percent. Calculations based on
                                     unaudited financial statements estimate the ROE at 7.4 percent for the full year 2020, and project it to
                                     strengthen to 8.7 percent in 2021 and 9 percent in 2022. Because Albania, North Macedonia, and
                                     Serbia had not mandated compulsory catastrophe insurance among their residents, the demand for
                                     Europa Re's products had not been as strong as originally expected. To address the shortfall in
                                     expected demand, Europa began to write reinsurance business worldwide beginning in end-
                                     2017. The change, however, raised concerns about the company's financial stability and
                                     motivated the addition of this capital raising activity and results indicator to the project results
                                     framework..
                                    Apart from meeting the profitability target, Europa Re also strengthened
                                     its creditworthiness. According corporate financial data reported to FINMA in May 2020 and publicly
                                     disclosed by the reinsurer, the company's solvency ratio – calculated, following the regulatory Swiss
                                     Solvency Test (SST), as SST risk-bearing capital (SST RBC) minus the market value margin (MVM),
                                     divided by SST solvency capital requirement (SCR) – remained a high 216 percent as of January 1,
                                     2020. The solvency ratio had been consistently high, at par or above 200 percent since 2016, an
                                     indicator of the company’s creditworthiness. The risk-based SST regime is equivalent to the
                                     European Union (EU) Solvency II standard, which measures a reinsurer's probability of default based
                                     on: (a) ratings assigned by external credit assessment institutions (ECAI’s), in case of a rated
                                     reinsurer; or (b) risk-based solvency ratios, in the case of an unrated reinsurer domiciled in an EU-
                                     equivalent supervisory regime. For a solvency ratio of at least 196 percent, which Europa Re meets,
                                     the associated probability of default would be 0.01 percent and the equivalent ECAI rating would be
                                     AA (by S&P), Aa (Moody's), and AA (Fitch).
                                    Moreover, Europa Re's pivot toward the global reinsurance business beginning in 2017 affords it the
                                     opportunity to attain even better financial results moving forward.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project met all of the output and outcome targets set for the objectives to increase the access to
                            affordable insurance covering losses to property and crops caused by climate change and geological hazards
                            in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia, to expand the offering of catastrophe insurance products developed
                            under SEE CRIF to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to support the future financial sustainability of Europa
                            Re. The degree of achievement of the project objectives is assessed as substantial. The adoption
                            by Albania, North Macedonia, Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina of mandatory catastrophe risk insurance,
                            an expected but not required action by the SEE governments, would have set a stronger foundation for the
                            regional catastrophe risk insurance market in the SEE region but was not completed. The rating for overall
                            efficacy is lower (substantial, rather than high) for this reason.


                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The Bank did not conduct any formal cost-benefit analysis for this project at appraisal or at
completion. The ICR (page 24), however, argues that Europa Re, the implementing agency, was a cost-
effective reinsurer. While most insurance companies would allocate 20-30 percent of the budget for developing
and selling a new insurance product for administrative expenses, Europa Re used only 10 percent of the grant
funds for administrative expenses.

Operational Efficiency. The operational efficiency of this project is assessed as substantial. All planned project
activities were implemented, and they were completed on time and within budget. Bank audits of Europa Re
concluded that the project funds were used properly and efficiently.

Because there is no evidential basis for drawing a firm conclusion about economic efficiency, the overall
efficiency of this project is assessed as modest. A cost-benefit analysis could have been attempted. According
to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), for instance – see OECD, "The
Contribution of Reinsurance Markets to Managing Catastrophe Risk," 2018, page 39 – it is possible to calculate
a simple loss ratio (the ratio of reinsurance claims paid to reinsurance premiums written, excluding commissions
and loss adjustment expenses) to judge the cost of a reinsurance system (the simple average loss ratio was
67.9 percent for property catastrophe reinsurance across a sample of 29 countries for 2014-2016).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




The project development objective was relevant to efforts by the SEE countries to build resilience to natural
disasters, specially floods and earthquakes to which they were particularly exposed, by expanding the operation
of the regional catastrophe risk insurance market created by SEE CRIF and strengthening the finances of the
principal reinsurance company Europa Re. The project met all of the output and outcome targets set for the
objectives to increase the access to affordable insurance covering losses to property and crops caused by
climate change and geological hazards in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia, to expand the offering of
catastrophe insurance products developed under SEE CRIF to Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to support the
future financial sustainability of Europa Re. There was no data to assess the economic efficiency of the project,
but the completion of all project activities within budget and on schedule was evidence of the operational
efficiency of the project. The outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this project is assessed to be moderate.

Political Risk. According to the ICR (page 29), frequent changes in the political leadership in the SEE
countries partly explained the lack of firm political commitment to mandating catastrophe risk insurance in the
SEE states. Moreover, the political preference was to offer aid to constituents in the aftermath of natural
disasters rather than to have the constituents take out catastrophe risk insurance. Hence, catastrophe risk
insurance mandates face considerable hurdles in such a political context.

Business Risk. Although this technical assistance project strengthened the supply side of the catastrophe
risk insurance market in the SEE, with the development of new products for the three SEE states and the
expansion of SEE CRIF to Bosnia and Herzegovina, much work remains on the demand side. The
problem pertains not only to the lack of national legislation mandating compulsory catastrophe risk insurance
but also to low levels of public awareness of catastrophe risk, low levels of public knowledge about insurance
products, and public perceptions that compulsory catastrophe insurance is yet another tax imposed by the
government.

COVID-19 Risk. As elsewhere globally, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted economic and business
activity in the SEE countries. There are both negative and positive risks. On the downside, the pandemic
and the attendant governmental focus on public health responses and on fiscal and monetary stimulus
measures to revive economic activity detract attention from other items in the public policy agenda, including
disaster risk reduction and catastrophe insurance. In Albania, for example, two big earthquakes in 2019,
with damages topping US$1 billion, prompted the government to consider introducing compulsory
catastrophe insurance, a move endorsed by the Bank and for which a catastrophe insurance law was drafted
by the Albanian Financial Supervisory Authority. According to the ICR (page 35), the pandemic stopped
further work on the legislation. On the upside, the pandemic has highlighted the possibility offered by
catastrophe risk insurance to cover pandemic risks as well. According to the ICR (page 27), Europa Re is
"exploring the opportunity of how to offer a regional insurance solution against future pandemics in the SEE
region."


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Although this technical assistance project would continue with the earlier first-phase development of SEE
  CRIF and Europa Re, the Bank conducted a full-pledged vetting of the project objectives, results
  framework, and implementation arrangements, according to the ICR (pages 32-33).

        A Project Concept Note and Grant Restructuring Paper (to extend the Grant Agreement with
         SECO, which was providing CHF3.95 million or US$4.23 million in financing, and to extend the
         project completion date to December 31, 2018) was prepared. A Project Appraisal Document
         was also prepared.
        This technical assistance project would use the project implementation arrangements, including
         for project management, procurement, financial management, audits, monitoring and evaluation,
         and information technology as had been used earlier in the first phase from 2009-15.
        It was concluded that the new activities did not change the environmental category of the project
         or trigger any Bank safeguard policies. Hence, there would be no changes to the safeguard
         arrangements for this project.

  In preparing this project, the Bank drew from lessons learned during the first-phase development of SEE
  CRIF and Europa Re. The Bank was also cognizant of lessons learned from other catastrophe insurance
  programs globally, including about the vital importance of mandatory systems to ensure the financial
  sustainability of the insurance programs. As can be gleaned from the ICR (pages 32-33), there were
  pros and cons to requiring the SEE states to legislate mandatory catastrophe risk insurance systems as a
  condition for this grant. The arguments in favor were:

        Demand for insurance products would arguably be spurred if: insurance were compulsory for all
         mortgage holders residing in disaster-prone areas; proof of catastrophe insurance coverage were
         required on all properties in disaster-prone areas upon the registration of real estate sales; and
         insurance of government-owned buildings or stock were mandatory to manage contingent fiscal
         liabilities due to natural disasters.
        Making catastrophe insurance mandatory would enhance the long-term viability of SEE CRIF and
         the financial sustainability of Europa Re, thus ensuring extensive catastrophe risk coverage in the
         SEE and protecting a greater number of people from financial harm due to natural disasters.
        In other catastrophe insurance programs like the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool and the
         Romanian Pool-ul de Asigurare Împotriva Dezastrelor Naturale, participating countries were
         expected to pass laws making property catastrophe insurance mandatory for homeowners and
         they did – Turkey in 2000 and Romania in 2010. Consumer demand for catastrophe insurance
         would have otherwise been low in Turkey and Romania in the absence of a mandatory
         catastrophe insurance system, according to the Project Appraisal Document (page 10).

  The arguments against requiring mandatory catastrophe risk insurance legislation as a condition for this
  grant were

        The project was small in size and a pilot undertaking.

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



        Europa Re, and not the SEE governments, was the project implementing agency, hence project
         covenants could not be imposed on the governments.
        The focus of the project was on the supply side of the catastrophe insurance market.
        The expectation was that the demand side could be addressed in due course and using other
         Bank instruments.
        Any demand for mandatory insurance would have political implications in the SEE states.

  Evidently, the arguments against a grant conditionality weighed on the Bank's decision. Nonetheless, the
  ICR (page 32) admits that the Bank, in hindsight, over-estimated the demand for catastrophe insurance
  based on the expectation that the SEE governments would enact the supporting legislation mandating
  catastrophe insurance. Had the SEE governments legislated compulsory insurance systems, demand for
  catastrophe insurance products would have been greater, premiums collected by Europa Re would have
  been higher, and the reinsurer would have focused on the SEE region rather than being driven to write
  reinsurance worldwide.

  The Bank assessed the operational risks to the project and recommended mitigation measures.

        Project design risk was assessed as moderate. The Bank acknowledged the low demand for
         catastrophe and weather risk insurance products. The Bank also noted that legal and regulatory
         actions that would raise demand had not yet been implemented by the SEE
         governments. However, the Bank also recognized that Europa Re has undertaken actions to
         increase demand: conducting ongoing dialogue with key policy makers on best international
         practices; addressing the lack of public awareness about disaster risk through marketing
         measures including the launch of CATMonitor (an Internet-based disaster risk information tool for
         homeowners); and working closely with local insurance partners to design new products and
         explore alternative distribution channels.
        Stakeholder risk was also assessed as moderate. The recommended mitigation measures
         included: (a) SEE government participation in Europa Re through the Policy Advisory Board; (b)
         technical assistance for regulatory policy and regulatory changes; and (c) technical assistance for
         public awareness campaigns.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (pages 33-34), the Bank met all the implementation supervision requirements for this
 project.

       The Bank carried out three project supervision missions, three technical missions, one financial
        management review mission, and one virtual procurement review.
       The Bank prepared four Implementation Status Results Reports (ISRs) over the five-year
        implementation period of the project.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



       The Bank maintained key staff in the region to provide implementation support to the project. The
        staff were not changed during the five-year period.


 The Bank conducted a restructuring of the project in 2017 to add a new activity – to raise Europa Re's
 capital reserve – to the project, in response to a FINMA requirement for higher statutory capital
 requirements on all Swiss reinsurers and in consideration of additional financing provided by SECO to
 Europa Re for this purpose.

 The Bank also conducted a Mid-Term Review of the project in February 2020. The Mid-Term Reviewed
 followed rather than preceded the restructuring in October 2017.

 Throughout project implementation, the Bank maintained continuing dialogue with Europa Re, SECO, and
 the SEE governments.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were three results indicators originally defined to measure the objectives to increase the access to
 affordable insurance for losses to property and crops in Albania, North Macedonia, and Serbia and to
 expand catastrophe insurance products developed under SEE CRIF to Bosnia and Herzegovina. At
 restructuring, one indicator was added for the foregoing objectives while two new results indicators were
 introduced for the objective to support the financial sustainability of Europa Re.

 According to the ICR (page 31), the results indicators were not difficult to define, since they followed from
 achievements in the first phase of SECO's technical assistance to SEE CRIF and Europa Re over 2009-
 15. Importantly, Europa Re, the grant recipient and project implementing agency, was familiar with M&E
 design and implementation arrangements. Europa Re, had also established a governance body, the Policy
 Advisory Board, which acted as the company's link to its SEE government shareholders and which,
 together with the Bank and SECO, would be a recipient of M&E reports.



b. M&E Implementation
  Europa Re collected all project implementation data from its partner insurance companies and third-party
  service providers under the project. Europa Re prepared semi-annual project implementation
  reports. These reports were discussed with company management and submitted to the Bank and


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



  SECO. Europa Re also prepared and submitted required periodic operational and financial reports to its
  regulator, FINMA.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 32), progress with the project was adequately documented and the progress
  reports were evaluated and used to inform decision-making on the project. M&E data from the ISR No.1
  and ISR No. 2 were used in the restructuring of the project in October 2017. According to ISR No. 2, to
  which the Restructuring Paper was appended, "It is expected that by the end of 2018, for the first time
  ever, Europa Re will break even. To advance progress toward this outcome, at the [end] of 2017, the
  project supervision team restructured the project to accept an additional US$3 million contribution from
  SECO toward increasing the capital reserves of Europa Re." M&E was rated satisfactory in ISR No. 4
  (the last ISR) of March 5, 2020.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The project was classified as an environmental category C project
   at appraisal. The project did not involve any activities that would impact the environment. It did not trigger
   any Bank environmental or social safeguard policies at appraisal. The restructuring did not change the
   environmental category of the project nor did it trigger any safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. According to the ICR (page 32), fiduciary requirements related to procurement were
   complied with. Procurement was rated satisfactory in the last ISR of March 5, 2020.

   Financial Management. According to the ICR (page 32), fiduciary requirements related to financial
   management were complied with. The project grant funds were fully disbursed. Internal controls were in
   place throughout project implementation. All financial statements and reports were filed in compliance with
   Bank requirements and on time. Financial management was rated satisfactory in the last ISR of March 5,
   2020.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Per IEG Guidelines, when the
                                                                                 ratings for Quality at Entry and
                                                                                 Supervision differ but are both in
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory   the Satisfactory range, the rating
                                                                                 of Overall Bank Performance is
                                                                                 the lower of the two former
                                                                                 ratings.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 36-37), with some adaptation.

Mandatory catastrophe insurance policies are essential to maintaining the financial
sustainability of a regional catastrophe reinsurance system. In this project, Europa Re had to
alter its business strategy after the SEE states failed to mandate compulsory catastrophe risk
insurance in their national markets. As evident in other regional insurance pools after which the
SEE CRIF was patterned, a mandatory system helps to ensure that an adequate volume of
insurance premium is generated and that the regional system remains commercially viable and
achieves economies of scale. The lack of national mandates would be associated with lower market
demand for catastrophe insurance products.

Unconditional government aid to uninsured homeowners and farmers in the aftermath of a
disaster dampens the incentive to secure catastrophe insurance. In this project, the
government in Albania continued to compensate uninsured homeowners and farmers without
mandating the purchase of catastrophe insurance after two earthquakes in 2019, and so did the
governments in North Macedonia and Serbia after major floods in 2014 and 2016
respectively. Governments typically consider post-disaster aid as a politically favorable approach,
and refrain from mandating compulsory catastrophe insurance which are viewed by voters as a
tax. Yet, unfettered disaster aid imposes fiscal costs on governments and discourages the transfer
of risks to insurers.

A strong reinsurance partner is essential in establishing and sustaining a disaster risk
insurance program. In this project, notwithstanding the lack of mandated compulsory catastrophe
insurance, Europa Re played a crucial role not only in acting as a reinsurer to private insurance
companies operating in national markets, but as an enabling institution that built the underlying

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)



disaster insurance infrastructure in the SEE region. In particular, Europa Re developed the
underlying automated online underwriting, pricing, and sales platform; designed the claims
management system based on remote sensing technologies; and carried out the advanced risk
mapping and modeling work that underpinned insurance operations. Europa Re also trained
hundreds of insurance agents working for local insurance companies and worked with national
regulators to ensure that the products could be sold in the SEE countries.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides an informative context for this project starting with a summary assessment of the SEE
countries' risk exposure to natural disasters and including the first phase in the development of SEE CRIF and
Europa Re over 2010-15. The ICR for the Loan to Albania for a Disaster Risk Mitigation and Adaptation Project
(P118045) and the ICR for the Loans to Serbia and FYR Macedonia for the SEE CRIF (P1190910) provide
additional useful information on SEE CRIF and Europa Re.

The assessment of the efficacy of the project was candid. While the project achieved all the output and
outcome targets, the inaction by the SEE governments on legislation to compel catastrophe risk insurance on
their citizens and residents left market demand for catastrophe insurance products lower than originally
expected (the Project Appraisal Document did not pin down expected demand to a numerical target, but stated
that "latent demand" for catastrophe risk insurance products was "significant," implying that prospective
demand would be high). Stronger market demand, within the context of a mandatory insurance system, would
have allowed Europa Re to focus on its original mission as a catastrophe risk reinsurer in the SEE region rather
than being driven to change its business model by beginning to write universal non-life reinsurance business
worldwide in 2017.

The ICR was written following OPCS/IEG guidelines. The analysis and the ratings are evidence-based and
results-oriented. The lessons are well founded and valuable to future catastrophe risk insurance operations,
specifically on the critical role of mandatory insurance in building up consumer demand for insurance products
and sustaining the financial viability of the insurance system and on the countervailing effect of unconditional
government aid to the uninsured.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SEE Catastrophe Insurance Facility TA (P156455)




                                                                               Page 18 of 18
