     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022590

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P148259                                    HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Haiti                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0226                                   30-Jun-2020                                           3,742,007.47

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2015                                30-Oct-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            5,000,000.00                                     5,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             5,000,000.00                                     3,742,007.47

 Actual                                         3,742,007.47                                     3,742,007.47




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 16),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to strengthen the Republic of Haiti’s institutional capacity to
   provide hydro-meteorological and climate information services customized to the needs of the civil protection
   and agriculture sectors, which contributes to increasing disaster and climate resilience.” This would be
   achieved by providing end users with online access to a central platform offering a comprehensive hydro-met
   data.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



   This review will assess project performance against this singular objective.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Institutional strengthening of hydro-meteorological services and development of data
   management tools (US$3.0 million at appraisal, US$1.75 million at the 2020 restructuring, US$0.54 million
   actual). This component would integrate the existing hydromet data collection networks into one national
   data platform based on an open data approach and accessible across end users in the government and
   beyond. In addition, the component would finance a long term strategy of a national entity and move from
   the current structure of six hydro-meteorological networks managed by five different entities to a structure
   with one national platform and shared standard operating procedures to operate and maintain all hydro-
   meteorological data collection devices. This component would finance a country-wide, geo-referenced
   baseline assessment of stations; define requirements for an optimal national network; repair and replace,
   where needed, existing data-collecting stations; and establish a data platform that gathers data from all
   existing stations. This component would also finance technical assistance to reform hydromet and climate
   services by sponsoring dialogue between the Ministere de l'Agriculture, Ressources Naturelles et
   Developpement Rural (Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development or MARNDR) and
   Ministere de l'Environnement (Ministry of the Environment or MDE) to better define their respective roles
   and responsibilities with regard to hydromet and climate services; dialogue with main end
   users implementing the institutional reform emerging from this process; and formulating and promoting data
   sharing procedures across government actors based on an open data approach. Finally, the component will
   support technical capacity building in MARNDR and the hydromet data end users through training and study
   tours.

   2. Identification of hydro-meteorological and climate services’ requirements for select end users
   and development of information services to support decision making (US$1.4 million at appraisal,
   US$2.36 million at 2020 restructuring, US$1.90 million actual). The focus of this component will be the
   definition of hydromet information requirements for end users. In line with recommendations from the Global
   Framework for Climate Services, this is expected to be a long-term process, with a continuous user
   feedback mechanism, including in the aftermath of major events. End users targeted by the proposed
   project include: civil protection (e.g. parametric thresholds for select high-risk zones, in order to enable use
   of the hydro-meteorological data platform as a decision support mechanism for the activation of warnings by
   the Direction de la Protection Civile (Civil Protection Directorate or DPC) and agriculture (e.g. leveraging the
   new data platform to improve existing information services for farmers and the national food security
   agency), and health (e.g. information service for warnings of water-borne diseases and contingency
   planning).

   3. Project implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and Pilot Program for Climate
   Resilience (PPCR) knowledge management (US$0.6 million at appraisal, US$0.9 million at 2020
   restructuring; US$0.80 million actual). This component would finance support to MARNDR to cover project
   management and implementation, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



   would also finance knowledge products to disseminate learning and knowledge from the project across
   those countries and regional partners participating in the US$1.2 billion multi-donor financed Pilot Program
   for Climate Resilience (PPCR). This sub-component was not mentioned in the ICR.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The actual project cost was US$3.7 million, lower than the original estimate of US$5.0
   million. The initial absence of a dedicated Project Implementation Unit (PIU), low capacity in procurement
   and contract management of the newly created Unite Hydrometeorologique d'Haiti (Hydro-meteorological
   Unit of Haiti or UHM), and stalled reforms in the MARNDR led to serious procurement delays (ICR,
   paragraph 21).

   Financing: The project was financed by a grant from the Climate Investment Fund (CIF) as part of the Pilot
   Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR). The CIF is a multi-donor program to increase investments in
   climate risk and resilience measures for highly vulnerable countries. The grant amount disbursed was
   US$3.7 million. The balance of US$1.03 million was cancelled

   Recipient Contribution: The government did not commit or disburse any funds.

   Dates. The grant was approved on June 26, 2015 and made effective on October 19, 2015. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was conducted on November 12, 2018. The original closing date was June 30, 2020. The
   actual closing date was October 30, 2020. On June 26, 2020 a level 2 restructuring extended the closing
   date by four months to complete shipment, delivery, and installation of the remaining hydro-met equipment
   and set up an alternative strategy for the remainder of the project activities. This restructuring also revised
   disbursement categories and reflected these as changes in the components above.

   Split Rating: The PDO was not changed. The outcome indicators or its target values were not changed. No
   split rating was applied to the project outcome.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO remained relevant to the country's plans and the World Bank's partnership strategy for the
country.

Country Context: Haiti, a country under Fragile, Conflict, and Violence context with a high poverty rate of
58.5 percent at appraisal, was ranked fifth in the world at risk from two or more natural hazards in a 2005
World Bank study. Seismic and weather-induced vulnerabilities brought about by climate change continued
to be felt even after the 2010 earthquake that destroyed equivalent of 120 percent of its Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) and the 18 hydro-met events over the course of the project (ICR, Annex 7). The government
pursued structural reform to prioritize response to climate change (PAD, paragraph 11) by streamlining the
institutional set up and operationalizing the hydro-met system into the newly created Unite
Hydrometeorologique d'Haiti (Hydro-meteorological Unit of Haiti or UHM) under MARNDR (ICR, paragraphs
14 and 16). In addition to MARNDR, the fragmented hydro-met services were also delivered by several

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



institutions collecting, storing, processing, and disseminating data (PAD, paragraph 7). These
included: Service National des Ressources en Eau (National Service for Water Resources or SNRE) and
Centre National de Meteorologie (National Meteorological Center or CNM) both under the
MARNDR Direction des Ressources en Eau (DRE or Water Resources Directorate); Observatoire National
de l'Environnement et de la Vulnerabilitie (National Observatory on environment and Vulnerability or
ONEV); Centre National de l'information Geo-Spatial (National Center for Geo-Spatial Information or
CNIGS); and Coordination Nationale de la Securite Alimentaire (National Coordination for Food Security or
CNSA). Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) also acquired, stored, and maintained hydro-met data
(PAD, Annex 2 Figure 1).

Alignment with Country Priorities: The government, led by the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Territorial
Planning (CIAT) undertook a Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR). In November 2013, the
Minister of Agriculture appointed an inter-ministerial commission to identify options for delivering hydro-met
services, as part of the agency's broader institutional reform. National technical-level consultations
identified the following priorities: (i) streamline national data collection and management system; (ii)
establish a mechanism to bring together data producers and main end users; provide feedback; increase
socio-economic value of data; and (iii) ensure a cost recoverable and sustainable financing model. Hydro-
met priorities in the 2020 Second National Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Plan for 2019-2030 identified
four strategies to align with international Sustainable Development Goals and regional Caribbean Disaster
Management Strategy commitments (ICR, paragraph 14). The PDO supported the legal and regulatory
framework of the 2020 DRM plan, a national system for disaster risk management, and the UHM National
Strategic Plan for 2020-2024. The project contributed to elements of the UHM strategy that called for (i)
anchoring hydro-met services in UHM; (ii) providing resources and developing skills; (iii) increasing capacity
to provide services in climate sensitive areas; (iv) securing research and development financing for priority
climate related disciplines; and (v) optimizing the integration with regional and global hydro-met programs.

Alignment with Bank Strategy: The milestones in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Haiti for
FY2016-2019 was extended until 2021 as a new CPF is under preparation at closing (ICR, footnote 5). The
PDO contributed to two of the three areas of focus: (i) resilience area, supported by enhanced
understanding of hydro-met and climate risks to assess social and economic impacts and to
develop adequate policy responses to support sustainable development, and (ii) the inclusive growth area
by improving agricultural productivity and resilience. The performance and learning review of the CPF in
2018 strengthened its approach to resilience by (i) increasing funding; (ii) improve targeting to high risk
areas; (iii) focus on local capacity to prepare for and respond to disasters; and (iv) mainstreaming disaster
risk management (DRM) in other sectors. The PDO outcome indicators also contributed to the Strategic
Climate Fund's (SCF) Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) core indicators.

Bank Sector Experience in the Country and the Region: The World Bank supports hydro-met
modernization through efforts of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery's (GFDRR) Hydro-
met Program, and hydro-met operations under the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR). The Bank
and GFDRR have collaborated with the World Meteorological Office (WMO) and other hydro-met agencies
around the world. In addition, the Bank has assisted Haiti in increasing its resilience in agriculture and
infrastructure sectors and in strengthening disaster management system included in ongoing Bank-financed
projects - Projet de Gestion des Risques et de Resilience aux Aleas Climatique (Disaster Risk Management
Project (PGRAC) P126346) and Projet de Renforcement des Services Publics Agricoles II (Re-launching
Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services II Project (RESEPAG II) P126744). Improved access
to reliable hydro-met and climate information would benefit World Bank infrastructure projects in Haiti by
updating probability of occurrence for selected hazards to better integrate climate resilience measures in

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



               infrastructure design and in the health sector by providing information for warning of water borne diseases
               and contingency planning. At appraisal, the team coordinated with other technical and financial partners to
               have a common approach to modernizing hydro-met services in Haiti (PAD, paragraph 12). In the region,
               the Bank is implementing hydro-met modernization efforts under PPCR and the multi-donor financed
               Climate Risk Early Warning Systems (CREWS) initiative in the 15 Caribbean community (CARICOM)
               member countries (ICR, paragraph 13).

               The customized interfaces for use by the civil protection and the agriculture sector were too ambitious in the
               face of a newly created organization, still establishing its footing and credibility (see Section 4, Efficacy
               below). Nonetheless, the relevance of objective is rated High because this was a pilot operation and based
               on addressing priorities identified by the country, by the sector strategy, and the World Bank's partnership
               framework.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the Republic of Haiti’s institutional capacity to provide hydro-meteorological and climate
                             information services customized to the needs of the civil protection and agriculture sectors, which contributes
                             to increasing disaster and climate resilience.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): The TOC is based on the results framework designed at appraisal. The two-
                             phased outputs - first, a centralized platform for hydro-met data, and second, customized interfaces for
                             policy decision making by selected sectors - showed a logical sequence to support the low level and broad
                             objective. However, input activities, such as repair, replace or upgrade equipment in hydro-met stations,
                             connecting existing networks to feed into the platform, and training to build capacity to report validate, store
                             data, were not sufficiently comprehensive to operate a central data platform. Other input activities, mostly
                             training in the use of data, would lead to customized hydro-met products for use in decision making by civil
                             protection and agriculture sectors. Output and target values were not well defined to attribute their
                             contribution to the broadly defined outcome, 'increasing disaster and climate resilience," expressed as access
                             to data and satisfaction with services provided.

                             Two critical assumptions were to be tested during implementation: (i) online access to the hydro-met platform;
                             and (ii) UHM as the focal point for delivering hydro-met services to end users. The nascent UHM had
                             difficulties in establishing a foothold as the focal point. Government commitment evident in initiating the
                             reform in the sector did not translate to resource support for UHM. This lack of support and continuing
                             instability in the political landscape were missing components of the assumptions in the TOC. In addition,
                             outcome indicators and target values did not specify how capacity was strengthened - e.g., a fully staffed

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



agency, adequate budget allocated, or training programs in place (see Sections 8, Assessment of Bank
Performance, and 9, Monitoring and Evaluation below).

OUTPUTS

      All hydro-met equipment for 62 stations (original target 50, revised 62) was procured, but was installed
         only in two stations - in Leogan, and Port-au-Prince. The delivery and installation was planned to be
         completed before the grant's closing date. However, due to travel restrictions linked to COVID-19
         (since the suppliers were based in Germany and Spain), the delivery was postponed to July 2021. The
         ICR notes that the installation of the procured equipment would be covered by another IDA-financed
         project, the Projet de Renforcement des Services Publics Agricoles II (RESEPAG II or Relaunching
         Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project) with technical support from the Projet
         de Gestion des Risques et de Resilience aux Aleas Climatiques (PGRAC or Strengthening Disaster
         Risk Management and Climate Resilience) (ICR, paragraph 17).
        A centralized open-source platform using the meteorological, climatological, and hydrological (MCH)
         database management system under the National Hydro-met Platform (NHP) software was installed,
         as targeted. The NHP was developed by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) that also
         provided the hardware, software, technical support, training, and capacity building. Thirty-four (34)
         stations from five sub-networks reported its data through this platform, as targeted. Historical hydro-
         met data since 1926 from 230 stations were also added to the platform (ICR, paragraph 17).
        The training program to develop data management capacity of producers and users of hydro-met data
         was initiated through remote support due to Covid 19 travel restrictions, and was not completed at
         closing, not achieving target.
        Nine (9) UHM users and instructors (baseline, 0; target 80) were trained in the use of the centralized
         data platform, an essential element of institutional capacity building, not achieving target. This was
         also due to Covid 19 travel restrictions and UHM's institutional weakness. There was also a lack of
         capacity on the producer's side. However, the program training for UHM staff to develop equipment
         management capacity was completed, as targeted.
        The project planned to analyze data collected by the networks, consolidate these in the platform, and
         develop software interfaces customized to meet the needs of the agriculture sector and the Civil
         Protection Directorate. None of the planned use of customized applications from the centralized data
         platform were achieved. A customized hydro-met agricultural sector product was only initiated, not
         achieving target. The planned outputs targets: use by 40 civil protection committees and 10
         departmental agricultural directorates (DDAs) were not achieved. In addition, a million beneficiaries
         were targeted but this was also not achieved.
        85 people (including 13 women) from Civil Protection committees and Departmental Agricultural
         Directions were trained in the use and interpretation of the hydro-met products but this indicator was
         not included in the results framework.

OUTCOMES

There were three original outcome indicators: The first was partially achieved. The second achieved its target,
although this was technically an output and reflected above. The third was not achieved.

      PDO indicator 1: Data was collected from hydro-met networks and was accessible on a centralized
         fully functional online hydro-met data management platform, with its own operating procedures for
         validation and storage. The project established the National Hydromet Platform (NHP) for data

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



                                   management. However, the online portal was not yet accessible to end-users although data was
                                   available upon request, indicating partial achievement of the target.
                                  PDO indicator 2: 34 sub-networks achieved the target of connecting to the centralized platform using
                                   standardized operating procedures. Note that this outcome was reported as an output above.
                                  PDO indicator 3: The outcome related to registering the satisfaction with the improved hydromet
                                   information services by end users, of whom 50 percent were women, was not achieved. The ICR
                                   (paragraphs 18, 48, and in the comments in Annex 1) reported a 52 percent satisfaction rate overall,
                                   not meeting the target of 100 percent. The centralized platform was operational and managed by UHM
                                   was only accessible upon request and not 100 percent accessible. After Hurricane Laura in August
                                   2020, stakeholders recognized UHM as the hydro-met focal point and service provider in the country.
                                   A UHM National Strategic Plan 2020-2024 was formulated (see Section 3 Relevance of Objectives
                                   above) but did not form part of the results framework.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The indicators were poorly defined, and target values were overly optimistic. The project achieved only one of
                            the three outcome indicators. A centralized platform was in place, but data was only accessible upon request,
                            hence only partially achieving its intended 100 percent accessibility. Most of the output targets were also not
                            achieved, including the targets associated with customized interfaces using the centralized platform.
                            However, all the equipment for the planned stations has been procured. Its installation was interrupted by the
                            pandemic. Arrangements have been adopted (under the IDA financed Second Relaunching Agriculture
                            Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project (RESEPAG II) with technical support from the
                            Strengthening Disaster Risk Management and Climate Resilience (PGRAC)) to ensure that the
                            procured equipment would be subsequently delivered, installed, and tested to
                            successfully operationalize the system. These actions contributed the overall rating of the efficacy of the
                            project to achieve the objective as modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. At appraisal, a comprehensive economic analysis reported a positive return on
   investment, with a benefit/cost ratio between 1.6 and 33 over a 15-year timeframe (PAD, paragraph 39).
   Benefits were derived from the simultaneous implementation of complementary projects financed by the Bank
   and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The US$5.13 million WMO "Climate Services to Reduce
   Vulnerability in Haiti" included US$ 1.7 million in capital investments (including office buildings), US$3.0 million

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



for capacity development and US$0.43 million for project management. The project’s ex-ante economic analysis
was based on a World Bank report on the use of international benchmarks to derive potential benefits
associated with well-functioning, modern early warning systems that could reduce disaster-related asset losses
and improve agricultural productivity (ICR, paragraph 20).

At closing, since the hydro-met system was not yet fully operational, no comparative economic analysis was
conducted (ICR, paragraph 20). However, use of 74 percent of resources accomplished a fully functional online
hydro-met data management platform and completed all planned procurement of the hydro-met equipment for
the future operation of the hydro-met system and achieve the expected outcomes in the future. These reflected
modest efficiency in the use of financial resources (see also Section 8 Quality of Bank Supervision and Section
13 Assessment Recommended below). Despite the additional cost to project management because of COVID19
and contract renegotiation owing to force majeure, the anticipated ex-ante benefits would be realized when the
hydromet system becomes operational.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency. Implementation was delayed due to: (i) low technical and project
management capacity; (ii) institutional weaknesses of the UHM and MARNDR; (iii) sociopolitical unrest and
increased violence between October 2019 and January 2020, and (iv) the COVID-19 pandemic since March
2020. The government provided early commitment, but this wavered as the project progressed. In 2016, the
government combined hydrological and meteorological services into the UHM but the unit only became
operational in 2018 (ICR, Annex 5). After the Mid Term Review, a separate Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
was established. The project experienced delays due to: Initial mis-procurement, the socio-political unrest in
2019, and travel restrictions in response to the COVID - 19 pandemic all negatively affected project
efficiency. The project was extended, but only by four months to complete the delivery of equipment under the
project. The installation and operationalization of the 60 other stations were transferred to the Relaunching
Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services (RESEPAG II) Project with technical assistance under
"Strengthening Disaster Risk Management and Climate Resilience Project" (PGRAC) (ICR, paragraph 17).
Administrative expenses reached more than one third of the project disbursement (ICR, paragraph) and
21 percent of grant was cancelled because of lack of time.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated high. The efficacy of the project is rated modest because of the low or partial
achievement of the outcomes. Most of the output targets were not achieved including the targets associated
with customized interfaces using the centralized platform. Efficiency is rated modest because of operational
inefficiencies. As a result, the overall outcome of the project is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following conditions pose risks to development outcome:

      Continued instability. There remains a substantial risk from continuing fragility brought by the
       dire economic outlook, the COVID-19 pandemic, and social unrest. Ongoing operations financed by
       the World Bank and other donor partners are expected to mitigate this risk.

      Wavering Political Commitment. There was no evidence during implementation that the authorities
       would provide budgetary support to sustain the implementation of the 2020-2024 UHM Strategic
       Plan. The MARDNR has yet to introduce a hydro-met budgetary line to sustain the centralized
       platform (ICR, paragraph 40). Considering that the initial government commitment to this project was
       not sustained because of the small size of the grant (ICR, paragraph 31), completing the remainder of
       the project as part of bigger ongoing projects is an appropriate mitigating measure. This risk is
       assessed as moderate.

      Exposure to natural hazards and climate change. Haiti's continuing vulnerability to seismic and
       extreme weather hazards were evident in the 7 events that occurred during the life of the project
       (ICR, Annex 7). Mitigating measures would be provided under ongoing projects in the sector financed
       by the World Bank and other donor partners. Meanwhile, extreme meteorological events may happen
       before all the equipment are installed and operational. The project team added that the government
       implements a post-emergency protocol that includes a financing mechanism according to the level of
       emergency. This Emergency Fund (Fonds d’Urgence or FDU) is the major national conduit for
       medium frequency/medium severity disaster response. This risk is assessed as substantial.

      COVID-19 pandemic. With the unabated spread of COVID-19, the country remains at substantial
       risk. Vaccination efforts are slowly implemented. Lock-downs continue. Risk mitigation measures
       include virtually delivered technical assistance and presence on the ground of the firm to install the
       hydromet equipment once COVID-related restrictions are lifted. The installation and training of staff to
       handle the equipment were incorporated into the ongoing operations financed by the International
       Development Association (IDA) - the RESEPAG II and the PGRAC. In addition, although the nascent
       UHM is operational with a strategy for open access to its services - but there remains a substantial
       risk that there may not be sufficient resources to disseminate information on services it



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



      provides and capture a wider array of end users, including Non-Governmental Organizations
      (NGOs).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was relevant to the World Bank's priority for engagement in the county. It was a strategic
  opportunity to complement the ambitious institutional reforms the government adopted following the
  catastrophic 2010 earthquake. The government reform focused on strengthening institutions related to
  hydro-met services, disaster risk management, and agriculture. Technical, financial, and economic
  aspects of the project focused on three components to be implemented in two phases over an unstable
  political landscape (see Section 4 Efficacy above). Design was informed by lessons from similar projects
  implemented elsewhere and in the Caribbean such as maintaining policy dialogue with the government,
  simplifying design and implementation arrangements, and coordinating with donors and providing
  adequate resources for investments and capacity building (PAD, paragraphs 26-29). However, according
  to the ICR, the team did not include lessons from two projects - Emergency Bridge Reconstruction and
  Vulnerability Reduction Project (PROReV, 2009-2015) where Comité Interministériel d’Aménagement du
  Territoire (CIAT or Inter-ministerial Committee for Territorial Planning) produced the National Multi-hazard
  Atlas, and the Disaster Risk Management and Reconstruction Project (PRGRD, 2012-2020) that installed
  early warning communication systems and capitalized on the ongoing dialogue with the government
  regarding disaster risk management and climate change (ICR, paragraph 57). The lesson from these
  projects (see Section 12 Lessons Learned below) pointed to the use of contractual arrangements with
  clear scopes, timelines, and judicious technical choices.

  The design was built on the World Bank’s global hydromet experience and was considered appropriate
  for a poor, fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) affected country. However, risks were not adequately
  assessed. For example, transparency measures and community participation were incorporated in design
  but there was no stakeholders' grievance redress mechanism installed (ICR, paragraph 36). Design of
  the hydro-met platform was sequenced appropriately but implementation revealed that it was overly
  ambitious. Capacity of the implementing agency, MARNDR, and the newly formed central hydro-met
  agency, UHM, was overly optimistic, as borne out at implementation (see Section 5 Efficiency above and
  Quality of Supervision below). Design called for increasing ownership and avoiding a project-based, ring-
  fenced Project Implementation Unit (PIU). An existing unit was assigned initial fiduciary and monitoring
  and evaluation (M&E) support while strengthening implementing capacity. However, the approach meant
  substantial capacity support not matched by resources and required revisions in disbursement categories
  during the restructuring (see below). Initial commitment by the government to support the reform was not
  sustained because of the small size of the operations (ICR, paragraph 31). In addition, the government's
  own internal stakeholders lacked commitment to the project and held-up the process of integrating the
  centralized platform under UHM (ICR, paragraph 35). The indicators in the results framework were not
  sufficient to monitor achievement of the PDO and were selected to simplify data collection (see Section 9
  Monitoring and Evaluation below).

  Overall, the design was strategically relevant and appropriate for an FCV situation but was ambitious
  compared to existing capacity and against meager resources. The optimistic design rested on the
  opportunity offered by the government's commitment to institutional reform as a means of strengthening

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



  the country's resilience to inevitable recurring meteorological events. The quality of the Bank's
  performance at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory because of the significant shortcomings at
  appraisal.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted ten implementation support missions over the five year implementation period.
 A Task Team Leader was based in Haiti from 2016 to 2019 and was replaced by another for the remainder
 of the project based at headquarters. Due to the Covid 19 pandemic, the last implementation support
 mission was conducted virtually. According to the ICR, the implementation results and support mission
 reports were candid as reflected in the corrective measures adopted after the 2018 Mid Term Review
 (MTR) and the June 2020 restructuring. After the MTR, a separate PIU was belatedly installed as a
 mitigating measure to address capacity weaknesses in project implementation. The Bank team provided
 capacity training and procurement support (ICR, paragraphs 37,38, and 59). MARNDR's lack of political
 commitment and budget support to the newly created centralized hydro-met service unit, UHM reflected
 wavering government support. The leadership of MARNDR changed six times over the course of
 implementation (ICR, Annex 7) and may have affected this commitment. The Bank team re-started
 dialogue with the new leadership at MARNDR to gain support for UHM consolidation and platform
 integration (ICR, paragraph 35). According to the ICR, the Bank team provided candid assessments of the
 project progress and reflected this in the implementation status reports, the 2018 MTR, and the June 2020
 restructuring.

 The Bank team did not use the June 2020 restructuring to revise the scope of the project, or to revise the
 indicators in the results framework to better reflect achievement of the PDO, or deliverables. Instead the
 restructuring extended the project closing date by four months and arranged for another project to
 complete the remaining activities of the project as a more realistic option to ensure achievement of the
 PDOs in the near future.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory because of significant shortcomings.
 The impact from the social unrest in 2019 and the disruption in delivering hydro-met equipment for 62
 stations caused by the Covid 19 lockdowns as the pandemic was spreading were outside the control of the
 Bank team. However, the mismatch between resources, both in design of the centralized hydro-met
 platform and resources to address weak institutional capacity required constant capacity support. The PIU
 was a belated response but a strategic corrective measure nevertheless. Restructuring was used to adopt
 the short extension and arrange to achieve expected project outcomes under a larger operation. This
 strategy recognized that using a larger operation heightened government engagement.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) would be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural
 Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR). An M&E specialist would be recruited. The Project
 Coordinator would have the overall responsibility for monitoring project performance indicators and would
 also provide timely input on the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) implementation to the
 national Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) focal point. Indicators to be monitored were identified
 in the Results Framework (PAD, Annex 1). All indicators were reviewed against core indicators of the Pilot
 Program for Climate Resilience and MARNDR’s monitoring and evaluation unit would liaise with the PPCR
 focal point in Haiti to report progress on the SPCR implementation and share lessons learnt (PAD,
 paragraph 34).

 The Results Framework that supported the Theory of Change showed some links along a causal chain
 between some inputs and some outputs although these were not tested because some activities were not
 implemented. Indicators were chosen to simplify M&E data collection and build on data already collected by
 MARNDR to avoid duplication of efforts or overburdening a yet to be strengthened staff. Indicators followed
 PPCR Core Indicators to ensure coordination with other participants in the pilot program. It was difficult to
 attribute outcome (access) to the project interventions since the outcome indicator was not specific. There
 was no evidence in design that indicators would be used to evaluate outputs since it was difficult to
 attribute the outcome to the objective (strengthened capacity). Indicators were also lacking (no indicators
 for the completion of the UHM National Strategic Plan, or the installation of the NHP as the platform to be
 used in hydro-met database design, measures of the institutional stability financial sustainability of the
 UHM) and not comprehensive (e.g., a designated training session for 85 end users, including 13 women,
 from CCPCs and DDAs in the interpretation and the use of UHM’s hydromet products were carried out and
 was not captured by an indicator (ICR, paragraph 18)). How the hydro-met institutions would be
 strengthened were not evident from the indicators provided in the results framework. In addition, the results
 framework added indicators related to fiduciary and procurement reporting to mitigate against procurement
 and financial management risks.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was not implemented until 2019 when activities started to pick up. Planned baselines
  were collected. Progress reports did not update all the indicators. Indicators of the Results Framework
  that corresponded to activities under the first component were collected, measured, recorded, verified
  and stored, including gender disaggregated data. However, those that applied to activities under the
  second component were not collected because these components were not implemented. A new end
  target of 100 percent satisfaction with hydro-met services was reported in 2017 but with no explanation.
  Weaknesses in M&E design, including indicators, were not corrected during implementation, MARNDR
  was only able to attend to M&E implementation after the PIU was created, and even then, with constant
  capacity support from the Bank team (ICR, paragraph 37). There was no information if the M&E function
  and processes would continue after project closing since the remainder of the project would be

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



  completed under another ongoing operation. Achieving the indicators related to fiduciary and
  procurement reporting to mitigate against procurement and financial management risks were reported at
  project closing (ICR, Table 4).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was not used prior to 2019 to communicate project progress to various stakeholders.
  MARDNR supplemented reports outside of the M&E system to inform the 2018 Mid Term Review. The
  PIU created after the MTR generated reports and findings to inform progress and inform the June 2020
  restructuring. By then Covid 19 pandemic was spreading globally and delayed the delivery of equipment
  to be used for all 62 stations and the achievement of outcomes. There was minimal use of the M&E
  system to provide evidence of outcome since most of the activities were delayed and some cancelled as
  part of the response to Covid 19 restrictions. After the establishment of the PIU, M&E findings were used
  to report achievements of inputs and outputs.

  Overall, the weak M&E design, including lack of appropriate results indicators, was a significant
  shortcoming. The weaknesses were also reflected in the quality of Bank performance at entry. M&E
  implementation was hampered by delays due to weak institutional capacity. Training and support were
  not sufficient until after 2019. By then the M&E system served to inform achievement of inputs and
  outputs and not outcome as the unprecedented impact of Covid 19 restrictions came into focus. Impact
  from the delayed M&E implementation were also noted in the rating of the Bank performance at
  supervision. M&E quality is rated modest because part of the system managed to report on inputs and
  outputs and a strategy to complete the project using other ongoing operations in the country.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was assigned an environmental risk category "B" requiring a
   Partial Assessment under the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment. The project
   triggered only OP/BP 4.01, Environmental Assessment. MARNDR prepared an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF), which specified that the sites selected for installing instruments would not
   require involuntary resettlement as defined by OP/BP 4.12. (PAD, paragraph 47) (see Social Safeguards
   below). According to the ICR, the project effectively implemented the environmental safeguards (ICR,
   paragraph 52) as evidence from: (i) updating of the ESMF to include social safeguard issues (see below)
   after the setting up of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU); (ii) maintaining the safety of workers who
   repaired or removed equipment; and (iii) avoiding exposure to minor electromagnetic fields. The Bank was
   satisfied with environmental and social impact work of the firm hired to screen the location of the 50
   stations. The screening would be used to install the remaining stations. At project closure, Projet de Gestion
   des Risques et de Résilience aux Aléas Climatique (PGRAC or Strengthening Disaster Risk Management
   and Climate Resilience Project) was tasked to ensure safeguard compliance for the deferred installation of


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



  the remaining stations now covered under the Re-launching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public
  Services Project (RESEPAG II) (ICR, paragraph 51).

  Social Safeguards. The project, composed of a series of technical assistance activities and replacement or
  upgrading of instrument installed on government-owned sites, and was not expected to have negative
  social impacts or risks related to social safeguards. The project did not trigger OP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples
  or OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The project did not require a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
  (ICR, paragraph 53). Where new construction was required to install new hydro-met equipment, sites were
  limited to public lands or buildings that did not affect users’ livelihoods. When the PIU updated the ESMF,
  they included social issues such as rights of way. Social safeguard policies were satisfactorily implemented
  (ICR, paragraph 53).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project initially relied on the Financial Management (FM) capacities of the
  "Re-launching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project" (RESEPAG II or P126744)
  and eventually transferred the functions to a centralized FM unit of MARNDR with a part-time FM
  consultant (PAD, paragraph 43). This was in line with the Bank's strategy to use and strengthen MARNDR
  institutional capacity, increase ownership, and move away from a project-based approach.

  Satisfactory compliance with financial management was noted in the ICR (paragraph 54). Interim financial
  reports and financial audits were provided on time and were acceptable to the Bank. The Theory of
  Change included an intermediate outcome indicator that was reported in the ICR (paragraph
  56) referring to timely submission of financial management reports to mitigate the risk associated with low
  capacity (see Section 9, Monitoring and Evaluation Design above).

  Procurement. MARDNR’s central unit established in 2014, the Unite de Passation des Marches
  Publics (Centralized Procurement Unit or UPMP) managed procurement. Delays were encountered due to
  low capacity and poor contract implementation management. Some contracts were cancelled at closing.
  There were also early mis-procurements that required a relaunching of the tendering process. The PIU
  was established after the 2018 Mid Term Review (MTR). A Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP) was adopted. Five contracts, including for the supply of hydro-met equipment was
  signed in February 2020. The security issue in the country and the government response to the COVID 19
  pandemic delayed execution. After the first case of COVID in March 2020, Haitian authorities closed its
  borders including the airport. The contracted firm delivered the equipment after the country
  reopened. Customs clearance took more time than expected and the firm installed equipment starting in
  October 2020 as the project was closing. The unfinished installation, and remaining procurement functions
  were transferred to an active project, the RESEPAG II. The Theory of Change included an intermediate
  outcome indicator that was reported in the ICR (paragraph 56) referring to timely submission of
  procurement-related reports to mitigate the risk associated with low capacity (see Section 9, Monitoring
  and Evaluation Design above).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                  Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                    ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR offered six lessons to be considered by teams in preparing future similar operations (ICR,
paragraphs 64-69). Three of these, slightly edited, are noted below:

      A small size stand-alone grant may not attract political commitment needed to achieve
         development outcome. This project was meager compared to the magnitude of the problem
         being addressed. The targets were overly optimistic considering the capacity needs that it
         was designed to simultaneously strengthen. The project experience shows that close
         monitoring and strong World Bank technical support to the PIU were needed to compensate
         for the low technical and contract management capacity.

      FCV countries may be best served by a separate implementation unit that could then
         be woven into strengthened institutions to sustain outcome. This project aimed to
         strengthen a weak institution in an effort to gain ownership with project design supporting the
         effort with capacity support. The PIU was belatedly activated and constant support provided
         but the measure was not undertaken in time to help address implementation delays.
         Considering the volatility of conditions in FCV countries, consistency in implementation may
         be offered by a PIU separated from an implementing institution that may undergo leadership
         changes or nascent ones that would still be establishing a foothold and negotiating support
         for its remit.

      The sustainability of a centralized hydromet entity such as UHM in a country prone to
         extreme meteorological events caused by climate change requires long-term
         commitment from all partners. An efficient hydro-met system is an essential building block
         of a disaster risk management strategy. This requires time and resources. Anchoring an
         effective hydromet system in the appropriate institution requires careful assessment of needs
         and available resources. For example, the newly created UHM under MARNDR requires
         long-term strengthening and support. In this project, UHM lacked the necessary government
         buy-in to support its function as the country's focal point for hydro-met services. Its financial

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)



        sustainability depended on budgetary appropriations. Grants from development partners
        supplemented this. Introducing a fee-based hydromet services would help address its
        financial needs. By aiming to sustain a viable UHM provides the agency with the incentives
        to deliver accurate early warnings against impending disasters and fosters resilience in a
        fragile conflict, and violence (FCV) afflicted country highly vulnerable to natural hazards.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  A follow up assessment of the project may be useful to review how the project achieved the expected
  outcomes, since the hydro-met equipment purchased under this project was to be installed under another IDA
  financed project. The project team agreed. Noting that the original design was built on the World Bank’s global
  hydromet experience and was considered appropriate for a poor, fragile, conflict and violence (FCV) affected
  country, there may also be an opportunity to collect evidence on establishing standardized components for
  FCV and non FCV conditions. The project team added that other circumstances that applied only to this
  project may be noted - such as the size of the grant, delay in adopting corrective measures to achieve
  intended targets, and lack of government commitment to support the implementing entity. Assessing the
  strategy to rely on a different operation to achieve the expected outcomes of this project rather than extending
  it may also inform the parameters or benchmarks for evaluating impact for future hydro-met project design
  considerations. The project team added that the four-month extension to transfer the completion of the project
  to better define benchmarks may be a useful consideration in the design and evaluation of future hydro-met
  projects



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was outcome oriented and candid, particularly in discussing the shortcomings of the project
design that were borne out at implementation. The ICR provided a detailed overview of the project and followed
OPCS guidelines, particularly with regard to ratings and narrative, and is relatively concise at 23 pages. The
narrative supported the ratings using evidence from the operations even as the modest M&E system was
implemented belatedly. The delay in implementation and the onset of the pandemic proved difficult to overcome
the limited focus on outcome. The annexes provided additional arguments supporting the limited outcome.
Lessons were based on project experience, such as the need to ring fence a PIU when dealing with weakened
institutions in an FCV context. The report was internally consistent and integrated various factors in weak
design that reappeared in discussing the Theory of Change, efficacy, efficiency, and quality at entry.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)




                                                                             Page 17 of 17
