     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022596

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P152241                                   Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Somalia                                   Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A1688,TF-A1698,TF-A8094                30-Jun-2020                                          11,163,579.12

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jan-2016                               30-Sep-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            14,250,000.00                                   14,250,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             11,163,579.12                                   11,163,579.12

 Actual                                         11,163,579.12                                   11,163,579.12




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Christopher David            Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (page 4) and the Grant Agreement (page 5), the project
   development objective of the Somalia Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Program (SCORE)
   Series of Projects – Phase 1 was "to (a) improve the enabling environment for private and financial sector
   development; and (b) catalyze private investment and job creation."




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components.

   Strengthening Core Economic Institutions (US$8.00 million approved, US$9.89 revised cost,
   US$8.99 disbursed) aimed to: strengthen Central Bank supervision and regulation at the Federal level;
   strengthen Central Bank supervision and regulation in the Puntland State of Somalia; improve the
   investment climate; and develop the port sector.

         Subcomponent 1A – Strengthening Central Bank Supervision and Regulation (US$4.0 million)
          aimed to lay the foundations for financial sector development by strengthening central bank capacity
          for financial institution supervision in Somalia, Somaliland, and, by extension, Puntland. The
          interventions would also serve as a platform tor policy dialogue and stakeholder coordination related
          to: (a) conventional and Islamic finance (in Somaliland); (b) changes to prudential rules, possibly
          including capital adequacy requirements; and (c) intergovernmental cooperation regionally, with
          an initial focus on anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)
          matters. In Mogadishu, the focus would be on the regulation and supervision of nonbank financial
          service providers (money transfer businesses, mobile money, microfinance institutions, and payment
          services).
         Subcomponent 1B – Improving the Investment Climate (US$1.5 million) aimed to improve the
          business environment by reducing transaction costs associated with operating a formal business
          and setting a legislative framework for contractual arrangements and licensing in Somalia and
          Somaliland. In Mogadishu, the project would finance: (a) technical assistance to the Ministry of
          Commerce and Industry to update the basic legal and regulatory framework in which private
          enterprises operated, particularly providing support for the modernization and revision of the
          Companies Act, the Licensing Act, and related bylaws; (b) peer-to-peer learning and activities linked
          to capacity building; and (c) information and communication technology for the business registration
          system. In Hargeisa, the project would finance technical assistance and training to support the
          implementation of the new Companies Act, the drafting of bylaws and regulations, and the launch of
          the three fully-equipped One-Stop Business Facilitation Centers in Hargeisa, Berbera, and Burao.
         Subcomponent 1C– Developing the Port Sector (US$2.5 million) aimed to build capacity in the
          selected Somali ports through technical assistance, training, and the provision of equipment. The
          project would provide advisory and analytical services to: (a) review the sector strategy, objectives,
          and roles of the port sector and subsectors; (b) assess the Mogadishu Port for private sector
          participation and prevailing arrangements; and (c) draw optimal institutional arrangements and
          options for private participation, with the aim of advising on prospective public-private partnership
          (PPP) transactions.

   Expanding Economic Opportunities (US$18.50 million approved, US$16.41 million revised cost,
   US$14.25 million disbursed and US$2.16 million refunded) aimed to directly support to the private sector
   through grants and technical assistance that would expand investment by SMEs.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



        Subcomponent 2A – Somali Business Catalytic Fund (SBCF) (US$13 million) aimed to support
         the recovery of the private sector by providing matching grants for new investments by SMEs.
         The purpose of the SBCF was to catalyze private investment and incentivize productivity-increasing
         activities and services. The SBCF would operate two separate windows – a small grants window
         (US$10,000-50,000) and a large grants window (US$50,000-150,000) – which would be open to all
         commercially-oriented sectors.
        Subcomponent 2B – Small and Medium Enterprise Service Facility (SMEF) (US$5.5 million)
         aimed to provide technical assistance, training, and coaching services to: (a) entrepreneurs and
         investors, including prospective and selected applicants to the SBCF and other sources of
         commercial market finance, and (b) business development services providers (BDSPs) and
         technical and vocational education and training (TVET) providers. The SMEF would manage a pilot,
         the Skills Training and Entrepreneurship Project (STEP), that would scale-up viable approaches to
         developing sustainable self-employment and market access for female youth.

  Program Management (US$2.00 million approved, US$2.42 million revised cost, US$2.17 million
  disbursed) aimed to strengthen the capacity for project management at the Federal level and to
  strengthen the capacity for project management at the Puntland State of Somalia. The component would
  provide financial support for project implementation using the following organizational arrangements:

        SCORE would be implemented by the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS), the Government of
         Somaliland, and the Government of Puntland using three small project implementation units (PIUs)
         established and embedded within the administrations in Mogadishu (Ministry of Finance), Hargeisa
         (Ministry of Planning and Development), and Garowe (Puntland President Office).
        Three Project Steering Committees (PSCs) – one each for the FGS, the Government of Somaliland,
         and the Government of Puntland – would oversee the implementation of Component 1 -
         Strengthening Core Economic Institutions.
        In addition, SME Advisory Panels (SAPs) covering the SBCF and the SMEF would advise oversee
         the implementation of Component 2 - Expanding Economic Opportunities and advice on operating
         policy and strategy. There would be separate SAPs in Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Garowe.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost US$28.5 million at appraisal. Although costs were
  reallocated among components, the total project cost did not change through three restructuring episodes.

  Financing. The project was financed by grants from the Somalia Multi-Partner Trust Fund (MPF),
  administered by the Bank, in the total amount of US$28.5 million using a combination of recipient- and
  Bank-executed grants. Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) grants supported Component 1 -
   Strengthening Core Economic Institutions and Component 3 - Program Management activities
  and comprised of TF0A1688/TF0A8094 for the FGS and TF0A1698 for the Government of
  Somaliland. Bank-Executed-on Behalf-of-the-Recipient (BEBR) grants supported Component 2 -
   Expanding Economic Opportunities activities and comprised of TF0A8095/TF0A1711 for the FGS and
  TF0A1709 for the Government of Somaliland. The total amount of US$25.4 million was disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution. The government did not provide any financial contribution to the project.



                                                                                                Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



   Dates. The project was approved on January 20, 2016, became effective on May 16, 2016, was subject to
   a Mid-Term Review on December 18, 2017, and closed on September 30, 2020, seventeen months after
   the original closing date of April 30, 2019.

   Restructuring. The project was restructured thrice – all were Level-2 restructurings (did not require
   approval by the Board) and the project development objective was not revised at any time. The first
   restructuring on April 30, 2018, with US$3.62 million disbursed (12.7 percent of total financing), changed
   the results framework and extended the closing date by 14 months from April 30, 2019 to June 30,
   2020. Following the Mid-Term Review, the second restructuring on August 8, 2018, with US$4.39 million
   disbursed (15.4 percent of total financing) changed the results framework, changed the project component
   costs, reallocated financing between disbursement categories, and changed the disbursement
   arrangements. The third restructuring on April 15, 2020, with US$7.60 million disbursed (26.7 percent of
   total financing), changed the project component costs and extended the closing date by another three
   months from June 30, 2020 to September 30, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project development objectives were relevant to the economic and political challenges faced by
Somalia following the installation of a new internationally-backed unity government in 2012, more than
two decades after the fall of the military regime in 1991, the breakaway of the northern regions of
Somaliland in 1991 (the self-declaration of independence by the Republic of Somaliland) and Puntland in
1998 (the self-declaration on an autonomous Puntland State of Somalia), and the seizure of Mogadishu and
much of the south by militants in 2006.

      The Somali Compact, endorsed by the Brussels Conference on a New Deal for Somalia co-hosted
       by the FGS and the European Union in 2013, aimed to promote political reconciliation,
       establish peace, and pursue sustainable development by focusing on the country's most vital
       political, economic, and social priorities – building inclusive politics, security, justice, the country's
       economic foundations, revenue collection, and the provision of services.
      Twenty bilateral and multilateral donors including the Bank pledged Euro 1.8 billion (US$2.4 billion)
       to implement the compact. The Somalia Development and Reconstruction Facility (SDRF) would
       serve as the framework guiding the implementation of the compact. Established as one of the
       funding windows under the SDRF, the MPF would provide a platform for coordinated financing
       of reconstruction and development in Somalia with a focus on core state functions and socio-
       economic recovery. Activated in 2014 with 11 donors and administered by the Bank, the MPF would
       also facilitate the normalization of Somalia's relations with international financial institutions (Somalia
       had been in non-accrual status since 1991. It would finally clear its arrears with the Bank a year
       after the closing of this project, in March 2020).
      This project would aim to improving enabling environment for private and financial sector
       development and catalyze private investment and job creation and be funded by an MPF grant to
       the FGS, part of which would be executed by Somalia and part by the Bank.




                                                                                                       Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



The project objectives were aligned with the development priorities of Somalia at appraisal and at closing.

                        The Federal Republic of Somalia Economic Recovery Plan 2014-2015 defined four priority areas for
                         the country's transition from emergency relief to economic recovery: (a) Core State Functions –
                          aimed to ensure salary payments, set appropriate standards for employment of externally-funded
                         national consultants, identify core state functions, responsibilities and required administrative
                         capacity, increase and enhance revenue generation, quickly rehabilitate government buildings, and
                         revitalize public financial management; (b) Natural Resources – aimed to implement infrastructure
                         projects supporting productive sectors, intensify and diversify agriculture, fisheries and livestock, lay
                         the foundations for sustainable development and management of natural resources, and lay the
                         foundations for an enabling environment for business; (c) Infrastructure – aimed to rehabilitate
                         infrastructure for transport, market access, trade, and energy, rapidly provide urban infrastructure for
                         stabilization (water and sanitation, waste management, and lighting), support infrastructure
                         assessment and planning, and support feasibility studies for key large infrastructure for transport,
                         market access, trade, and energy; and (d) the Social Sector – aimed to increase the provision of
                         equitable, accessible, and affordable social services, rehabilitate infrastructure for health, education
                         and water, provide for youth employment, and lay the foundation for service delivery
                         regulation, standards and guidelines.

The project objectives were aligned with the strategy of the World Bank Group in Somalia at appraisal and
at closing.

                        The Interim Strategy Note (FY14-FY16) for the Federal Republic of Somalia identified the
                         foundations for poverty reduction and shared prosperity and stresses the need to deliver on the two
                         key priorities from the peace and state building goals of the Somali Compact: (a) strengthening core
                         economic institutions; and (b) expanding economic activity. The project development objectives
                         directly contribute to these priorities by supporting a component for each of the two pillars. First, the
                         project would provide technical assistance to strengthen the legal, regulatory, and policy frameworks
                         that support core economic institutions linked to central banking and finance, private sector
                         development, and trade infrastructure in order to catalyze private investment. Second, the project
                         would help expand economic activity directly through a Small Business Catalytic Fund that would
                         incentivize private investment and job creation and an MSME Service Facility that would provide
                         market-driven skills training and strengthen the supply of small business development services that
                         would enhance the productivity of medium and small enterprises.
                        The Country Partnership Strategy for the Republic of Somalia for the Period FY19-22 supported the
                         Bank assistance organized around two focus areas: (a) Strengthening Institutions to Deliver
                         Services, which aimed to strengthening public finance accountability and institutional development,
                         enhance domestic revenue mobilization and resource sharing, improve the delivery systems for
                         more inclusive social services, and build the capacity of municipalities for urban resilience; and
                         (b) Restoring Economic Resilience and Opportunities, which aimed to improve the business
                         environment and lower barriers to entry, increase access to finance for inclusion and digital
                         development, Increase access to renewable energy, and increase access to water for rural
                         resilience and productivity. The project objectives were aligned with the second focus area, in
                         particular, with efforts to improve the business environment.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 19
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve the enabling environment for private and financial sector development.

                Rationale
                Outputs. The project achieved the five output targets set for the objective to improve the enabling
                environment for private and financial sector development.

                      The interbank payment, clearing, and settlement system went live and was operational by the project
                       closing date, meeting the target.
                      The total number of diagnostic reports on legal, regulatory, institutional, and infrastructure setting
                       aimed at supporting business registration and operations was two, meeting the target
                      The total number of diagnostic reports on the port sector was two, meeting the target (revised
                       downwardly from 12 to two in 2018).
                      The number of FGS/Ports Authority officials trained on the management of ports concession
                       agreements was five, meeting the target.
                      The total annual number of actionable on-site and off-site examination reports issued was 21,
                       exceeding the target of 15.

                Outcomes. The project met the two outcome targets set for the objective to improve the enabling
                environment for private and financial sector development.

                      The number of recommended laws, regulations, amendments, codes enacted or policies adopted was
                       five, meeting the target (downwardly revised from 15 to five in 2018). The FGS enacted the Company
                       Law in December 2019 enabling the full functioning of the Business Registration System under
                       the Somalia Capacity Advancement, Livelihoods and Entrepreneurship through Digital Uplift Project
                       (SCALED-UP) (P168115), the successor project to SCORE, in February 2020.
                      The number of recommended laws, regulations, amendments, codes enacted in Somaliland was one,
                       meeting the target (revised downward from nine to one in 2018).



                Rating
                Substantial


                OBJECTIVE 2
                Objective
                To catalyze private investment and job creation.

                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)




                            Rationale
                            Outputs. The project met five of the seven output targets set for the objective to catalyze private investment
                            and job creation.

                                  The core-banking and accounting system at CBS went live and was operational by the project closing
                                     date, meeting the target.
                                  Total annual increase in revenue of firms supported by SBCF and SMEF that received training and
                                     advisory services was 194, exceeding the target of 25.
                                    The number of individuals receiving subsidized TVET or other forms of training financed by the SMEF
                                     was 1,175, failing to meet the target of 1,200.
                                    The proportion of STEP beneficiaries who consider that design and/or implementation of project
                                     subjected to consultation was responsive to their view was 99, exceeding the target of 60.
                                    The number of individuals receiving subsidized BDS or advice financed by the SMEF was 861,
                                     exceeding the target of 850.
                                    The percentage of Business Development Services (BDS) providers with repeat clientele and/or new
                                     clientele because of SMEF TA support disaggregated to show female workers and women enter was
                                     26, failing to meet the target of 50.
                                    The percentage of businesses incorporating [with] improved business practices or processes because
                                     of SMEF TA support was 91, exceeding the target of 60.

                            Outcomes. The project achieved three of the five outcome targets set for the objective to catalyze private
                            investment and job creation.

                                  The amount of private capital mobilized was US$6.539 million, failing to meet the target of
                                     US$7 million (revised downward from US$10 million in 2018).
                                    The additional number of direct jobs created in enterprises supported by the SBCF was 2,217,
                                     exceeding the target of 2,000.
                                    The total number of additional direct jobs created in enterprises supported by the project was 2,217,
                                     exceeding the target of 2,000.
                                    The total number of direct jobs for women was 634, failing to meet the target of 650.
                                    The total number of direct jobs for the youth was 1.343, exceeding the target of 800.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the project development objectives is rated substantial. The project met all five
                            output targets and the two outcome targets for the objective to improve the enabling environment for private


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



  and financial sector development. The project met five of the seven output targets and three of the five
  outcome targets for the objective to catalyze private investment and job creation.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. Only Subcomponent 2A – Somali Business Catalytic Fund (SBCF), with US$10 million
in enterprise support (matching grants) out of an outlay of US$13 million for the subcomponent, was subject to a
formal cost-benefit analysis at appraisal. According to the PAD (pages 19-23), the economic rate of return
(ERR) was estimated at 100 percent in the base case, assuming that 200 clients would be supported by the
matching
grant fund with 150 small grants at an average grant size of US$40,000 each and 50 large grants at an average
grant size of US$100,000 each. The economic benefits would be derived through increased access to business
support services leading to increased productivity, increased employment opportunities and increased incomes,
increased investments in enterprises, and increased sales.

According to the ICR (page 62), a replication of the original economic analysis carried out during project
appraisal, yielded an ERR of 76.3 percent over five years. The analysis used actual data – US$5.3 million of
matching grants (vs. US$10 million assumed at appraisal) were extended over one round of financing (vs. two
rounds estimated at appraisal) to 101 beneficiary firms (vs. 200 estimated at appraisal), of which 67 completed
their projects. The number of jobs created was 2,217 (vs. 2,000 estimated at appraisal).

Operational Efficiency. All project activities, set after three restructuring episodes, were completed (the
adoption of the financial sector laws and the payment systems that were not fully implemented were folded into
the successor project, SCALED-UP). Approximately 89 percent of the grant funds was disbursed (US$25.4
million of the US$28.5 million project financing). The project was implemented over four years and seven
months, with the project closing 17 months after the original closing date, following three restructuring episodes.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      35.00
 Appraisal                                                  100.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



                                                                                      35.00
ICR Estimate                                               76.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome of the project is rated satisfactory. The relevance of objectives is assessed as substantial – the
project objective was relevant to the development priorities of Somalia at appraisal and was aligned with
strategy of the Bank Group in Somalia at appraisal and at closing. The overall efficacy of the project is
assessed as substantial – the project met all five output targets and the two outcome targets for the objective
to improve the enabling environment for private and financial sector development; and the project met five of the
seven output targets and three of the five outcome targets for the objective to catalyze private investment and
job creation. The efficiency of the project is assessed as substantial – the economic rate of return was
computed at 76.3 percent, using actual project data, and all project activities, set after three restructuring
episodes, were completed. Close to 90 percent of project grant was disbursed and the project closed 17 months
after original schedule, reset after the restructuring.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcome of this project are assessed as mostly high.

Security Risk. Somalia remains a "high-intensity conflict" state (one of four) in the Bank's FY21 List of
Fragile and Conflict-affected Situations. It has been listed in that category (or equivalent category) since the
list was first compiled 15 years ago (under "severe" stress in the Bank's FY06 List of Low-Income Countries
Under Stress). The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISON) is formally scheduled to turnover security
responsibilities over the country to Somali forces in December 2021. But, Somalia's security forces are still
fighting one another in the capital at mid-year 2021. Meanwhile, Somalia continues to face an entrenched
insurgency from al-Shabab, aligned with al-Qaida, which has made territorial gains.

Political Risk. Somalia failed to select a new president when the term of the incumbent expired in February
2021. Lacking a "one person, one vote" electoral system, Somalia has to fall back on its old system of
indirect elections, under which tribal elders nominate 27,775 electoral delegates to pick the country's
parliament, which then selects the president. The prime minister will now oversee the organization of an
indirect national election process, the implementation of which will be tested by the country's byzantine clan
politics. The previous president remains the de facto interim president in the meantime, but his authority is
reportedly not recognized by large parts of the political class.

Institutional Capacity Risk. Capacity constraints remain critical in Somalia across a wide range of
agencies and functions. A broad-based capacity development program, informed by a skills gap analysis, is
evidently necessary to enable the effective and efficient the implementation of the National Development
Plan.

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)




Macroeconomic Risk. Somalia was hit by a triple shock of flooding, desert locusts, and the COVID-
19 pandemic in 2020. Prompt action by the authorities, with support from the international community,
helped mitigate the impact on lives and livelihoods. Despite the shocks, implementation of the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Credit Facility-supported program (ECF), approved in March 2020 for SDR
292.4 million (US$395.5 million) to support the National Development Plan, was broadly satisfactory,
according to the IMF, which reviewed the program in November 2020. Meanwhile, Somalia has taken
significant action to reach agreement with external creditors on debt relief consistent with the heavily-
indebted poor countries (HIPC) framework, although sustained efforts are still needed to ensure debt
sustainability on reaching the HIPC completion point, according to the IMF. These efforts follow Somalia's
clearance of its arrears with the World Bank Group in March 2020, which reestablished the country's access
to new resources from the Bank Group.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Prior Experience and Lessons Learned. The design of this project reflected the lessons learned from
  prior Bank experience in Somalia and in other FCV countries.

         The project built on the achievements of Somalia Private Sector Development Reengagement
          Program Phase I (SOMPREP1) and Phase II (SOMPREP2). Based on the experience in
          SOMPREP2, Subcomponent 1A - Strengthening Central Bank Supervision and Regulation
          would: (a) encourage step-wise improvements in capacity and operational effectiveness;
          (b) strengthen the central banks’ dialogue with unregulated and unsupervised informal financial
          institutions; and (c) work to resolve legal and regulatory deficiencies with existing players in the
          financial sector. Similarly, based on the experience in SOMPREP2, Subcomponent 1B -
          Improving the Investment Climate would sequence activities in support of the investment climate
          by starting with the legal and regulatory framework before proceeding to training and IT systems.
         The Bank considered its experience with security risks, implementation restrictions, capacity
          restraints, and ethnic-based divisions in Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, and Yemen to design this
          project for Somalia. According to the PAD (page 15), the project: (a) kept activities focused on a
          few priorities; (b) considered the high turn-over of government staff in capacity building efforts; (c)
          strove to provide the right incentives to dedicated staff members to work as part of the project
          team; and (d) tapped fiduciary agents to monitor procurement and financial management in
          security-risk areas.
         Moreover, the Bank expanded the geographic coverage of interventions beyond Somaliland and
          Puntland to cover the entire Somali peninsula and extended the scope of the project to support
          entrepreneurship and sustainable livelihoods across the country.

  Link to other Bank Operations. This project was related to other Bank and development partner
  operations in Somalia.

         Subcomponent 1A - Strengthening Central Bank Supervision and Regulation would be delivered
          in collaboration with complementary operations – the Somalia Public Financial Management

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



      Capacity Strengthening Project II (P151492) which aimed to strengthen systems of domestic
      revenue mobilization, expenditure control and accountability in the FGS, the Government of
      Somaliland, and the Government of Puntland, and the Somalia Capacity Injection Project
      (P149971) which aimed to strengthen the staffing and institutional capacity of selected line
      ministries and central agencies to perform core government functions.
     In Mogadishu, Subcomponent 1A - Strengthening Central Bank Supervision and Regulation would
      complement structural measures under the IMF Staff Monitored Program for the Federal Republic
      of Somalia for the Period May 2016-April 2017, specifically with enhancements to the licensing
      and supervision functions of the Central Bank of Somalia.
     Subcomponent 1B - Improving the Investment Climate would complement the Somali Investment
      Climate Reform Program, implemented by the International Finance Corporation (IFC), which
      aimed to unlock private investment by removing selected barriers to doing business and to
      support government and the private sector to create a conducive investment climate regime in
      Somalia.

Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures. The Bank examined the operational risks to the project
and assessed them to be high across practically all risk categories.

     Political risk was assessed as high. Changes in political leadership were common in Somalia and
      could undermine government ownership of the project. General elections were scheduled during
      the course of the project and might result in a change of political parties and a re-shuffling of the
      Cabinet. To mitigate the risk, the Bank would engage with multiple levels of leadership in various
      ministries to ensure broad ownership of the project.
     Governance risk was considered high, with low levels of accountability. Somalia was ranked at
      the bottom (174 out of 175 countries) in Transparency International’s corruption perception index.,
      with information often unavailable, inaccurate, or inaccessible, and with fraud and corruption
      commonplace. To mitigate the risk, the second project component would be executed by the Bank
      on behalf of the government. Moreover, the Bank would hire an inspection firm that would
      review the operations of the SBCF and ensure compliance with principles of fairness and
      transparency. The first component would be executed by the government, but with appropriate
      controls overseen by the MPF to ensure that finances were appropriately managed (with audits in
      addition to monitoring agents who would monitor transactions). Moreover, the PIUs would be
      provided with technical assistance and training.
     External and domestic economic risks were considered high. Somalia’s economy was vulnerable
      to domestic and external shocks; the country’s economic policies were inadequate to safeguard
      against economic risks; and economic downturns and policy shifts by trading partners could have
      a significant impact on the economy. To mitigate the risks, the Bank designed the project as a
      series-of-projects (SOP) wherein activities could be adjusted in the event of an external
      shock. Several project interventions were phased, with the goal of starting activities on a small-
      scale and scaling them up over time. Moreover, the project was designed to strengthen the core
      institutions that would help safeguard against domestic and external shocks in the medium- to
      long-term.
     Institutional capacity risk was considered high. The capacity in the public service sector, including
      in the Central Bank, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Finance, and Port Authorities, was limited,
      with many government agencies staffed with unskilled, aged, or absentee employees and lacking
      the critical skills necessary to implement reforms. To mitigate the risk, the Bank planned for the
      government to receive substantial technical assistance. Consultants would be hired and advisors


                                                                                                Page 11 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



         would be embedded in government agencies to support and guide the agencies through the
         project implementation process.
        Fiduciary risk was considered high. There was a lack of key financial management
         competencies; internal controls and oversight were weak; accounting and reporting systems were
         rudimentary; there was an over-reliance on external technical assistance; banking arrangements
         were non-existent, and internal and external audit arrangements were inadequate. The
         government also lacked public procurement regulations and guidelines, as well as experience and
         skills, which could create opportunities for corruption and fraud. To mitigate the risk, the Bank
         planned that each PIU would be supported by a procurement specialist. Moreover, the
         government would not be required to engage in complex procurement processes for large goods
         or services.
        Risk of fraud and corruption was considered high. The lack of internal controls could expose the
         project to fraud and corruption, which could be reflected in the: (a) late submission of
         operational documents; (b) poor record filing systems and absence of minimum standards in the
         maintenance of accounting data; (c) non-compliance with approved project work plans
         and budgets; (d) unauthorized engagement with suppliers; (e) bypassing of oversight
         arrangements over management expenses; (f) poor cash handling in a dollarized economy; (g)
         denial of access to information or limiting the scope of external monitoring arrangements. To
         mitigate the risk, the Bank decided that the project would be part Recipient-executed and part
         Bank-executed Bank. Controls would be established through monitoring and through audits.
        Security risk was considered high. To mitigate the risk, the Bank planned that the project team
         would operate in close consultation with the corporate security unit in the Bank’s General Services
         Department (GSD) and under the umbrella of the Department of Safety and Security at the United
         Nations (UN). The GSD had previously conducted assessment missions in the three
         regions. A follow-up would update the information, review the behavior of other agencies, and
         assess the prospects for longer-term Bank presence on the ground. An arrangement was
         explored with a third party firm to which risks could be transferred when hiring Bank
         consultants. The Bank would monitor the political and security environment, in collaboration with
         the UN, and would discontinue or put the project on hold if there was an acute political crisis or a
         security breakdown.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision and Implementation Support. The Bank provided regular implementation support to the
 project.

       The Bank conducted 10 regular implementation supervision missions to take stock of progress with
        the project activities; the last one in June 2020 was organized as a virtual mission because of
        mobility restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
       The Bank prepared eight Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) over the four-year
        duration of the project, or two per year, the average for investment project financing


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



          operations. The ISRs were candid and detailed, and their messages were well-targeted, according
          to the ICR.
         The Bank filed 10 Aide Memoires from March 2016 to July 2020 covering various aspect of project
          implementation and supervision. The documents were clear and detailed.
         The Bank conducted a mid-term review of the project and filed the Mid-Term Review Report in
          December 2017. The mid-term review produced recommendations to reorient some aspects of the
          project; these served as the basis for project restructuring.
         Bank procurement and financial management teams conducted assessments of procurement and
          management activities to gauge performance against plans.
         Internal and external audits were conducted annually.


 Adaptation. The Bank recognized the challenges in implementing structural reforms in an FCV setting,
 including enacting legislation in a difficult political environment, and re-scaled some activities and adjusted
 the associated results targets to more realistic levels.

       The Bank restructured the project thrice to change the project components and component costs,
        results framework (results indicators and targets), disbursement categories, and closing date. The
        Bank prepared three Restructuring Papers.
       Recognizing the slow progress with the enactment of "parent" legislation that would set the
        framework for the issuance of "subsidiary" regulations, the Bank adjusted the targets for
        Component 1 - Strengthening Core Economic Institutions downward. Specifically, the target for the
        number of recommended laws/regulations/amendments/codes enacted or policies adopted in the
        FGS was adjusted from 15 to 5; the equivalent target for Somaliland was adjusted from 9 to 1. The
        targets would not abandoned altogether, however, as they would be subsequently subsumed under
        the successor project, SCALED-UP, approved in 2019.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document (pages 27-33) listed 11 output (intermediate results) indicators and six
 outcome (PDO-level results) indicators to measure the achievement of the project objectives. The results
 indicators were clearly defined, had final targets and indicative targets for each end-year (years 1, 2, and 3)
 of project implementation, identified sources of data and information, and specified reporting periods (semi-
 annual) and responsibilities (the PIUs for the recipient-executed components and the Bank task team for


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



 the Bank-executed components). Since the project was initiating new activities, all baseline numbers were
 zero.

 The M&E design defined the M&E responsibilities clearly.

       The PIUs would be overall responsible for M&E. In addition, each of the project organizations – the
        three PIUs, the three PSCs (which would oversee implementation of Component 1 - Strengthening
        Core Economic Institutions), and thee SAPs (which would provide oversight for Component 2 -
        Expanding Economic Opportunities) – would be tasked to track and evaluate progress with the
        results indicators. Because local capacity to conduct M&E was limited and there was no statistics
        office, the PIUs would be assisted by M&E specialists who would provide capacity support and
        training. The PIUs would also coordinate with relevant ministries to collect and report data.
       The Bank would field implementation support missions which would track and assess the project
        results on a semi-annual basis. For the Bank-executed subcomponents (Subcomponent 2A -
         Somali Business Catalytic Fund and Subcomponent 2B - Small and Medium Enterprise Service
        Facility), the Bank task team would have overall responsibility for tracking and evaluating the
        progress with the results indicators. In areas where Bank staff could not travel due to security
        restrictions, the Bank task team would rely on its implementation partners – the SBCF Fund
        Management Company and the SMEF Operator – to collect data, and on fiduciary monitoring
        agents to conduct results assessments.
       For the PIUs and the Bank task team, the M&E tasks would include: (a) preparing semi-annual and
        annual project monitoring reports, containing summary data on overall performance against targets;
        (b) organizing the annual and semi-annual M&E reviews; and (c) developing the Impact Evaluation
        Design and Implementation Plan.



b. M&E Implementation
  Introducing changes to the results framework at the first two restructuring episodes, the Bank revised
  several results indicators and targets.

        For Subcomponent 1A - Strengthening Central Bank Supervision and Regulation: (a) two
         indicators were added – Core-banking and accounting system at the CBS to go live and
         operational and Interbank payment, clearing, and settlement system live and operational; (b) two
         indicators were removed – Total annual number of actionable on-site and off-site examination
         reports issued by the Bank of Somaliland, and Annual number of diagnostic reports on legal,
         regulatory, institutional and infrastructure setting aimed at supporting orderly financial sector
         development issued by Bank of Somaliland; and (c) two targets were revised – for Annual number
         of actionable on-site and off-site examination reports issued (from 12 to 15), and for Annual
         diagnostic reports on legal, regulatory, institutional, and infrastructure to support orderly financial
         sector development (from 12 to 5).
        For Subcomponent 1B - Improving the Investment Climate: (a) three indicators were added –
          Diagnostic reports on legal, regulatory, institutional, infrastructure setting to support business
         registration and operations, Business registry live and operational in Mogadishu, and Business
         registry live and operational in Somaliland; and (b) two indicators were removed – New business
         licenses issued under the Licensing Act, and New business licenses issued under Licensing Act in
         Somaliland.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



        For Subcomponent 1C - Developing the Port Sector: (a) two indicators were added – Total
         number of diagnostic reports on port sector, and Officials trained on management of ports
         concession agreements; and (b) one indicator was removed – Implementation of a Management
         Information System in Mogadishu Port.
        For Subcomponent 2B – Small and Medium Enterprise Service Facility: (a) two indicators were
         added - Percentage of businesses incorporating improved business practices because of the
         SMEF, and Percentage of BDSPs with repeat clientele or new clientele because of SMEF TA
         support disaggregated to show female workers and women enterprisers; and (b) two targets were
         revised - for Individuals receiving subsidized BDS or advice financed by the SMEF (from 1000 to
         850), and for Individuals receiving subsidized TVET or other forms of training financed by the
         SMEF.

  According to the ICR (page 37), the PIUs and their fiduciary monitoring agents conducted M&E
  regularly. They benefitted from receiving continuous guidance on data collection and reporting and from
  having templates previously developed for monthly, quarterly, and annual reporting. Similarly, the Bank
  task team regularly collected data, updated progress against the baseline, and highlighted issues for
  the Bank management’s attention about the Bank-executed Subcomponent 2 - Expanding Economic
  Opportunities.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 37), M&E data were evaluated and used to inform decisions made with the
  project. The government and the Bank used M&E data from supervision mission reports, Aide
  Memoires, and the MTR to restructure the project thrice, changing the scope of some subcomponent
  activities (the SBCF and SMEF were scaled down but no activities were cancelled), the subcomponent
  costs (see Section 2.D), the results indicators and targets (see Section 9.B), and the project closing date
  (see Section 2.E). Modifications were also made with procurement plans and on the basis of M&E
  information.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified an Environmental Assessment category B project
   at appraisal (some type of environmental assessment/review/plan is required, but limited in scope and
   flexible in structure, reflecting corresponding the limited environmental impacts of the project and the
   anticipated relatively straightforward mitigation) and triggered Bank Safeguard Policy OP 4.01 -
   Environmental Assessment. To mitigate and manage the associated risks or to generally enhance
   environmental and social (E&S) standards (where no safeguard policies were triggered), the PAD (pages
   24-25) stated that: (a) Subcomponent 1B - Improving the Investment Climate and Subcomponent 1C -
   Developing the Port Sector would introduce modern E&S standards and management processes (e.g. ISO
   14,100 and IFC ESPS); (b) for Subcomponent 2A - SBCF, an E&S due-diligence mechanism would be

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



  implemented to screen for possible impacts, offer guidance on assessments, provide management and
  mitigation requirements, and set boundaries for financing activities (e.g. a negative list of environmentally
  risky entrepreneurial activities); and for (c) Subcomponent 2C - MSEF, part of the training, coaching and
  capacity building activities for SMEs would be directed at basic principles of environmental management,
  and workplace and community health and safety – in the absence of national legislation and specific
  regulations, current models for environmental management systems and performance standards would be
  used and adapted for the project.

  According to the ICR (page 38), the project complied with all Bank environmental and social (E&S) policies.
  The project included appropriate E&S studies, assessments, and recommendations, as well as capacity-
  building and training activities. Subcomponent 2A - SBCF, which had some activities with E&S risk
  implications, was managed through the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which
  provided guidance for managing and mitigating relevant E&S impacts. The ESMF also set boundaries for
  the scope of financing in the form of a negative list of undesirable entrepreneurial activities and considered
  project-level E&S screening and assignment of E&S instruments. Compliance with overall safeguards was
  rated satisfactory in the last ISR (June 1, 2020). Compliance with OP 4.01 was also rated satisfactory in the
  last ISR.

  Social Safeguards. The project provided for a grievance redress mechanism. The PAD (pages 25-26)
  stated that individuals and communities who thought they were adversely affected by the project
  could submit complaints to through existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or directly to the
  Bank's Grievance Redress Service (GRS).

  According to the ICR (page 38), the SBCF had a grievance redress mechanism that received complaints
  from unsuccessful grant applicants or from third parties (persons who were not applicants) and
  differentiated between precautionary and remedial measures. The project grant selection process and
  criteria were publicized in the SBCF website, circulated in SBCF promotional materials, and discussed
  thoroughly at public information sessions. The SBCF received seven complaints, the majority from
  aggrieved applicants who were deemed unfit, did not progress to the business proposal stage, or
  were cancelled for funding during the due-diligence process.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The Bank determined that procurement for the project would follow the Bank’s Guidelines:
  Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grant
  by the World Bank Borrowers (revised July 2014); Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants
  under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grant by the World Bank Borrowers (revised July 2014), including
  provisions dealing with emergency and fragile situations in Bank-financed projects and recipient-executed
  trust funds; Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD
  Loans and IDA Credits and
  Grants (revised January 2011); and the provisions of the Grant Agreement. With Somalia in a fragility,
  conflict and violence (FCV) setting, procurement would follow special arrangements allowed
  under paragraph 20 of OP 11.00 - Procurement (revised July 2014).

  According to the ICR (pages 38-39), procurement was conducted in accordance with Bank


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



   procurement guidelines and following the approved project procurement plan. Since the national
   procurement law was not fully operational, the Bank’s standard procurement documents were used. There
   were delays in procurement, mostly due to the difficult operating environment, weak capacity of the
   procurement staff, and unfamiliarity with the Bank’s procurement requirements. As project implementation
   progressed, however, additional support was provided including through a procurement specialist in the
   PIU, technical assistance by the Bank, capacity building of the PIU staff, and prior review of all
   procurement transactions. The implementation of recommendations made at the MTR, combined with
   staff training, improved the procurement process, reducing transaction processing periods. Procurement
   delays were experienced due to COVID-19 pandemic. However, mitigation measures were taken that
   included contract/bid extensions, the submission of bids/proposals electronically using secure passwords,
   and the online opening of bids/proposals. Procurement was rated moderately satisfactory in the last ISR.

   Financial Management. The Bank determined that Use of Country Systems (UCS) arrangements would
   be deployed for various aspects of project financial management, including financial planning
   and budgeting, funds flow and banking, internal controls, accounting and reporting, internal and external
   audits, and staffing and capacity building. Considering that the financial management risk was high, the
   mitigation measures included: (a) the centralization of the financial management function in the EAFS units
   at the Ministry of Finance at the federal and regional levels; (b) the deployment of experienced financial
   management specialists to support the PIUs in the FGS, the Government of Somaliland, and the
   Government of Puntland; (c) the use of the Federal Member State (FMS) services to help enhance
   capacity of the government to perform financial management activities in the future; and (d) the
   requirement that consultants' terms of references include knowledge transfer activities.

   According to the ICR (page 38), financial management arrangements were adequate during project
   implementation and across all functions - planning and budgeting, flow of funds, accounting and reporting,
   internal control procedures, and external auditing. All interim financial reports were submitted within the
   set deadline (45 days after the end of each reporting quarter). All external audit reports were submitted to
   the Bank on time, except for the last two years (FY18 and FY19). All audit opinions were unqualified and
   all audit recommendations were addressed (FY19 audits were ongoing at ICR preparation). There were
   two incidents of double payment to the project staff involving previously-employed civil servants; remedial
   actions were taken by the government. Financial management was rated moderately satisfactory in the
   last ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 42-42), with some adaptation.

Structuring complex and long-term reform programs as a series of gradual and carefully
sequenced operations raises their chances of success in FCV settings. In Somalia,
SOMPREP1 (which aimed to strengthen public-private dialogue and build public sector capacity for
private and financial sector development), SOMPREP2 (which aimed to improve the investment
climate in the fisheries and gums and resins value chains and in seaport and solid waste
infrastructure), this SCORE-Phase 1 Project, which aimed to improve the enabling environment for
private and financial sector development and catalyze private investment and job creation, and
SCALED-UP (which aimed to provide access to digital financial and government services targeting
entrepreneurship and employment) comprised a series of structural reform operations to develop
public institutions and encourage private activity. The parsing out of structural reform plans into
manageable operations helps address constraints to program implementation in FCV settings, as in
Somalia, where security risk is high, political commitment to reform can be fragile, the
macroeconomic environment is volatile, institutional capacity is weak, and reform implementation
can be upended by any number of unexpected shocks.

A multi-faceted approach to stakeholder engagement helps secure political commitment to
reform measures. This project employed confidential discussions and inclusive forums to conduct
policy dialogue and to obtain the commitment of stakeholders to the reforms measures. According
to the ICR, this "multi-faceted approach" to stakeholder engagement was instrumental in improving
decision-making and facilitating the completion of project activities related to the development of
selected Somali ports. Specifically, the consultations and negotiations involved the FGS authorities,
the Ministry of Transport and Ports, the Mogadishu Port Authority, and the Federal Governance
Committee, the hybrid Somali-international body established in 2014 by the FGS, donors, and
international financial institutions to provide a forum for dialogue on strategic financial governance
issues. With Federal Governance Committee providing political and diplomatic oversight, the
consultations paved the way for the FGS to sign a revised 14-year agreement to manage the port
with the same concessionaire in October 2020

Leveraging pubic grants to mobilize private financing help enhance the sustainability of
private sector development efforts. In this project, the SBCF grant matching scheme mobilized
US$6.5 million in investments from beneficiary SMEs and US$2.1 million from families and friends of
the SME owners, as well as US$1 million from domestic financial institutions, raising US$9.6 million
in private sector resources on an 1.8X leveraging of US$5.3 million in public grants extended by the
SBCF to some 101 beneficiary firms. Private financing (or financing that doesn't come from
an institutional source, whether a public agency or a private sector bank) by grant beneficiaries and




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Somali Core Economic Institutions SCORE (P152241)



their families and their friends are important sources of enterprise funding in many business settings
and help align private incentives with the public purpose of matching grant schemes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was written following OPCS/IEG guidelines. The document presents a cohesive and detailed
overview of the progress made towards the PDO. The analysis and the ratings are evidence-based and results-
oriented. In addition, the ICR assessed the efficacy of the project based on the degree of achievement of the
output and outcome indicators.

The lessons are well founded and valuable to future operations in Somalia (with Somalia having reestablished
access to Bank resources) and to other Bank operations in FCV settings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
