     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022384

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P133780                                   UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17702                                  30-Jun-2018                                         98,470,076.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Aug-2014                               31-Mar-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                 100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            98,470,076.00                                   98,470,076.00

 Actual                                        98,470,076.00                                   98,470,076.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. vii) and the Financing Agreement of August 19, 2014
   (p. 6), the objective of the project was to “improve teacher and school effectiveness in the public primary
   education system.”

   One outcome target under the second objective (to improve school effectiveness) was revised downward at a
   February 2018 restructuring. Following IEG/OPCS guidelines, this review performs a split rating accordingly.


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-Feb-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included three components:



   Component 1: Effective Teachers (appraisal estimate US$31.4 million, actual US$45.3 million). This
   component was to include three sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Improving teacher competencies: This sub-component was to finance: a) scaling up of
   grade reading programs for grades 1-3; b) strengthening in-service teacher training through conducting a
   national assessment of progress in education among in-service teachers and graduate teacher trainees,
   and implementing activities designed to improve in-service tutors’ performance such as: i) scaling up of the
   certification for teacher education proficiency program for 400 tutors: ii) development of a strategic plan for
   the rollout of a continuous assessment framework for teacher trainees; iii) alignment of coordinating centers
   with administrative and primary teacher college zoning systems, and strengthening capacities of
   coordinating centers; and c) rolling out a Community Child Care Program (CCCP) targeting 4,000 in-service
   early childhood education (ECE) caregivers and preparing of an ECE instructors’ proficiency program.

   Disbursement was linked to pre-defined targets for the number of early grade reading (EGR) teachers
   trained, tutors certified, and ECE instructors trained (DLI1).

   Sub-component 1.2: Providing equipment and instructional materials: This sub-component was to finance
   the provision of approximately 6.5 million pieces of instructional material including: i) instructional materials
   and teacher guides for the EGR program; ii) literacy and numerical instructional materials and teacher
   reference materials; iii) copies of curricula and teacher guides for public and private schools; and iv) Braille
   and other learning materials for children with disabilities.

   The expected result linked to disbursement was the number of verified delivered pieces of instructional
   materials (DLI2).

   Sub-component 1.3: Enhancing teacher supervision: This sub-component was to finance the strengthening
   of the Directorate of Education Standards for teacher supervision with a view of enhancing accountability,
   especially: i) design, development, and implementation of an appropriate information and communication

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



technology (ICT)-based teacher inspection reporting system; ii) strengthening the capacities of district
inspectors for carrying out school inspections; and iii) scaling up the associate assessors’ school inspection
model in selected districts.

The expected result linked to disbursement was the number of schools inspected at least once per term
with reports filed in the real-time system (DLI3).



Component 2: Effective Schools (appraisal estimate US$45.8 million, actual US$37.99 million). This
component was to finance three sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1: Enhancing school leadership, management, and accountability: This sub-component
was to finance the carrying out of a program of activities designed to strengthen school governance,
leadership, management, and accountability, especially: i) implementation of a comprehensive training
program targeting head teachers; and ii) strengthening the capacity and effectiveness of school
management committees (SMCs) though providing training and purchasing goods.

The expected results linked to disbursement were the number of schools with trained head teachers and
SMCs (year 1) and the number of schools with information on usage of school funding publicly displayed
(years 2 and 3) (DLI4).

Sub-component 2.2: Providing need-based, performance-linked school grants for school facilities
improvements: This sub-component was to finance the provision of performance and need-based school
facility grants to local governments for the implementation of sub-projects designed to enhance the quality
of learning environments in priority schools. The sub-projects were to finance construction of classrooms,
functioning toilets, and access to water in the needy schools.

The expected results linked to disbursement were the number of schools where procurement is concluded
(year 1), construction is completed (year 2), and finished construction meets pre-defined quality standards
(year 3) (DLI 5), and timely and accurate financial management information (DLI 6).



Component 3: Implementation Support and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$14.9 million,
actual US$15.05 million). This component was to include six sub-components:

Sub-component 3.1: ECE policy review: This sub-component was to support the Ministry of Education
(MoES) in reviewing/revising existing ECE policy.

Sub-component 3.2: Integrated ICT-based school inspection system: This sub-component was to provide
financing for technical advisory services and training for the development of an ICT-based inspection
system.

Sub-component 3.3: Support to teacher payroll and information management: This sub-component was to
provide financing, technical advisory services, and training to streamline management and transparency of
the teacher payroll system.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



   Sub-component 3.4: Support to monitoring and evaluation (M&E): This sub-component was to provide
   financing, technical advisory services, and training for M&E of project and sector activities.

   Sub-component 3.5: Strengthening the MoES’ capacity for day-to-day implementation, coordination, and
   management of project activities.

   Sub-component 3.6: Technical assistance for generating the next cycle of the Education Sector Strategic
   Plan (ESSP).



   Unallocated: US$7.9 million remained unallocated at appraisal and was planned to be allocated to
   compensate for price contingencies, implement project activities that were downscaled during project
   appraisal, expand well-performing activities, and add activities to the project’s scope to positively impact the
   PDO.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$100 million. The actual cost was US$98.47 million.

   Financing: The project was financed by a Bank Trust Fund of US$100.0 million, of which US$98.47 million
   was disbursed. In August 2019, US$1.53 million of the grant amount was canceled due to a declared
   misprocurement of furniture for 84 schools (see Section 10b).

   Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contributions.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

   • On February 26, 2018 the project was restructured to: i) introduce a new DLI on improving teacher
   attendance within the 2,700 public primary schools under the EGR component of the project (DLI7); ii)
   revise unit costs for construction-related DLI 5 (provision of performance and need-based school facility
   grants to help meet prioritized basic input standards at the school level) and DLI 6 (strengthened financial
   management and timely reporting); iii) change the loan closing date from June 30, 2018 to June 30, 2019 to
   allow activities to be completed and the revised targets to be met; iv) revise the results framework to replace
   one outcome indicator and revise the target for another; and v) reallocate funds between disbursement
   categories.

   • On May 6, 2019 the project was restructured to: i) change the loan closing date from June 30, 2019 to
   March 31, 2020 to allow for the full utilization of project funds and to validate DLI results; and ii) reallocate
   funds between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 22
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



At appraisal, Uganda had made progress in expanding access to primary education, with primary
enrollment increasing from approximately three million students in 1998 to 8.4 million by 2010. In 2011, net
enrollment was at 94 percent, with parity between boys and girls. However, a significant percentage of the
pupils who entered primary school did not reach the final primary grade. In 2011, the primary completion
rate (measured by the international definition of survival to the start of the last grade in primary) was at 55
percent. Also, Uganda experienced high repetition rates ranging from 10 to 12 percent per year, which were
linked to high drop-out rates at the primary school level. Those pupils who stayed in school experienced
sub-standard learning outcomes. Results from the 2012 National Assessment of Progress in Education
showed that fewer than half of grade six pupils could read or access, use, and interpret and communicate
mathematical information and ideas.

According to the PAD (p. 2), plausible explanations for low completion rates and low learning outcomes
were related to shortcomings at all levels of the education system and included: i) inadequate
teacher competencies; ii) low teacher time on task and high absenteeism; iii) low motivation by teachers
and poor teacher management/supervision; iv) insufficient teaching and learning materials; v) weak
accountability levels at schools; vi) weak governance and support system at school level; vii) lack of
facilities at school level; viii) varied parental involvement in school management; and iv) low learning budget
issues at the system level. The project's objectives were aligned with this country context.

The project's objectives were also in line with the third objective of the Bank’s most recent Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) (2016-2021), which aimed to strengthen human capital. Outcome 3.1 under
the CPF focused on improved access to and quality of primary and post-primary education. The Bank team
(December 7, 2020) noted that the objectives were relevant to Uganda’s 2007-2015 ESSP, which focused
on the primary level and helping pupils in primary school learn basic reading, math, and life skills.

There were shortcomings in the extent to which the objectives addressed key issues and constraints in
primary education. According to the ICR (p. 6), the most significant bottleneck to improving primary-
grade learning outcomes and primary school completion rates was insufficient preparation of students
entering primary school. In 2011, the net enrollment rate for ECE (ages three to five) was only 14 percent,
due primarily to pre-primary education being provided by the private sector and having to be paid for by
families. The 2016-2021 CPF did not address ECE. In keeping with the CPF, the project
objectives addressed only primary education. However, although the PDO statement did not address ECE,
planned project activities recognized country needs and supported training of ECE caregivers. These
ECE activities were in line with the objectives of the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), which include:
i) quality ECE for better learning outcomes and reduced repetition and drop-out rates in primary school; and
ii) improved, more equitable student learning outcomes in the early year grades made possible through
providing teacher training and adequate learning materials.

Given these shortcomings, relevance of objectives is rated Substantial rather than High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                         Page 5 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve teacher effectiveness in the public primary education system

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The PAD (p. 8) associated teaching effectiveness with improved quality and
               performance, specifically related to the pedagogical approach for early reading, use of instructional material
               for teaching, and presence in school, all of which were assumed to be "highly predictive" of student
               achievement. The project's theory of change envisioned that training P1 to P3 teachers and ECE caregivers,
               providing instructional materials, and designing and piloting a school inspection system would lead to
               improved teacher effectiveness. The ICR left some connections in the theory of change implicit. However, an
               unstated assumption might be that the training provision of materials, and inspections would together result in
               better-skilled teachers and caregivers using the more abundant learning materials to teach students the
               appropriate knowledge and skills. Inspections could theoretically incentivize better teacher attendance and
               other aspects of teaching quality. The selected DLIs were the connection between project outputs and
               intermediate outcomes, such as Terms of Reference being developed for a Certificate for Teacher Education
               Proficiency (C-TEP) and training plans finalized for EGR and ECD caregivers, contributing to achievement of
               the outcome indicator "enhanced effectiveness of early grade instructions through provision of training to in-
               service teachers."

               According to the ICR (p. 7), the project assumed that strengthened ECE was to contribute to primary
               education through the building of stronger foundational skills and increased school readiness in children.
               However, as noted above, pre-primary education was only provided by the private sector. The project
               partnered with three faith-based organizations in the training of ECE caregivers, and the ICR (footnote 27, p.
               17) noted that administrative expenses and caregiver salaries in the CCCP were covered by parent
               contributions. The services of ECE caregivers supported and trained under the project may therefore not
               have been accessible for poorer households. The linkage between the project's support for ECE and the
               strengthening of public primary education, as specified in the objectives, was therefore not clear.

               According to the PAD (p. 8), activities to strengthen the overall learning environment at the school level, as
               well as activities aimed at system improvements, were to be implemented at the national level. Other
               interventions were targeted to 69 underperforming districts where fewer than half of students met proficiency
               standards in literacy and numeracy at the P3 level.



               Outputs

               Primary

                     The number of teachers trained in EGR methodology in local languages and English with at least
                      two EGRAs conducted increased from 12,000 teachers in 2013 to 29,002 teachers in 2020,
                      surpassing the target of 24,100 teachers. 1,534 tutors from 46 Primary Teacher Colleges were trained
                      in EGR methodology.



                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)




       The percentage of teachers (P1-P7) present (during three rounds of unannounced school visits) in
          EGR schools increased from 73 percent in 2017 to 91 percent in 2020 (in a sample of 2,727 primary
          schools where teachers received EGR training), surpassing the target of 90 percent.
         Five learning assessments under the project (Early Grade Reading Assessments (EGRA) and the
          National Assessment of Progress in Education (NAPE) grade 3 and 6) were conducted, achieving the
          target of five learning assessments.
         13.7 million Math and English textbooks for students in grades 1 through 7 were provided.
         2.4 million copies of EGR primers were printed in eleven local languages and English for P1-P4
          students (1:1 primer-per-pupil ratio), along with related teacher guides.
         1,554 students from 79 districts received hearing aids. Also, 217 teachers were trained in an
          instructional methodology for the hearing impaired combining speaking with sign language.
          Furthermore, families received training to support students in the use of maintenance of their hearing
          aids.
         The Integrated Inspection System (IIS), an ICT-based system, aiming to improve the quality of school
          inspections in 46 low performing districts, was implemented. The IIS focused on factors related to
          teachers and teaching aiming to improve their effectiveness. The system includes five templates for
          capturing key school inspection data (a school summary report, a full school-level report that includes
          recommendations for performance improvements, and district, regional, and national reports) and
          transmits real-time information to the Directorate of Education Standards (DES) office in Kampala to
          be processed. Reports are then disseminated to districts. The system also allows schools to share
          action plans for implementation of recommendations resulting from inspections. District education
          officials and DES inspectors can follow up on these reports during supervision missions to schools
          between scheduled inspection cycles.
         100 motorcycles for primary teacher colleges and coordinating centers and 75 motorcycles for school
          inspectors were procured and distributed, achieving the target of 100 and 75 motorcycles respectively.
         DES officials trained 357 District Inspectors and District Education Officers and 1,000 Associate
          Assessors (current head teachers and retired teachers) to conduct school inspections using the new
          IIS installed on mobile phones and tablets. During project implementation, two inspections were
          conducted (March/April 2018 and October/November 2018). Inspections focused on key performance
          areas such as teacher preparation, quality of teaching, effectiveness of head teachers in supporting
          school infrastructure, school supervision, and quantities and condition of scholastic materials.

ECE

       The project supported the MoES to partner with three faith-based organizations to scale up the CCCP
        in 50 districts from 2015-2020. 4,168 ECE caregivers were trained from 2,559 ECE Centers across 50
        districts.
       An evaluation of the ECE-CCCP was completed, achieving the target. The evaluation found that
        caregivers who received CCCP training obtained higher scores on a variety of pedagogical and
        administrative skills than a control set of peers. Obtained skills included using an established learning
        framework to develop learning activities, following pre-defined daily routines, and maintaining
        attendance and physical growth records.
       A draft ECE policy was developed, achieving the target. The policy was to provide a framework to
        guide current and future ECE initiatives. The project supported the government in reviewing the
        existing 2007 Early Childhood Development Policy and updating it to reflect a revised strategy for
        expanding access to quality educational services for learners aged three to six. A ten-year costed

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



       Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) Policy Action Plan to enable the operationalization and
       implementation of the ECCE policy was also developed.



Intermediate Outcomes

      The number of pupils per textbook in English and Math for pupils in grades P1-P7 decreased from 14
       pupils per textbook in 2013 to 2 pupils per textbook in 2020, surpassing the target of 10 pupils per
       textbook.



Outcomes

      The ICR reported that the percentage of pupils reading 20 or more words per minute in Grades 1 to 3
       increased from 1 percent in 2017 to 27.5 percent in 2020, surpassing the target of 20 percent. The
       EGRA also showed continuous improvement of pupil’s reading comprehension, which was measured
       as students being able to correctly answer one or more questions out of three after reading a passage
       in their local language. Reading comprehension measured in this way increased from 11.7 percent in
       2016 to 24.8 percent in 2017 to 55.7 percent in 2018. However, the ICR (p. 15) indicated that these
       results measured the progress of a single cohort of students as they progressed through Grades 1
       through 3; the evidence in the ICR did not make it possible to determine whether student performance
       improved only because the students were advancing through Grades 2 and 3, or if the project's
       interventions significantly contributed to these improved scores. There was no data provided that
       compared student performance as cohorts advanced through Grades 1-3 prior to the project with
       performance during and after project interventions, or any other measure of student performance
       with/without the project. According to the ICR (p. 15), when the Uganda National Examinations Board
       conducted the EGRAs it did not include a control group of students whose teachers had not received
       EGR training. Furthermore, the ICR stated that a direct comparison of the EGRA results with results
       from UNICEF’s School Health and Reading Program (which was implemented between 2012 and
       2017 in 31 districts) and USAID’s Literacy Achievement and Retention Activity (LARA, which was
       implemented between 2015 and 2020 in 28 districts) was not possible because the local languages
       and orthographies differed across the impacted regions under the three programs. Looking at results
       trends, the ICR noted that, for USAID’s LARA program, there was a jump in the percentage of
       students reading 20 or more words per minute from 1 percent at P1 to 5.4 percent at P2 to 24.2
       percent at P3, which is a slightly lower level of improvement than that demonstrated by the cohort
       measured under this project. However, it is not clear for what time period the LARA program data was
       provided and how the LARA program activities were comparable to this project, making it challenging
       to draw conclusions from the comparison. Overall, the data on student outcomes do not allow
       convincing attribution of observed results to the project's interventions.



Although there were achievements at the output level (training of teachers, improved teacher attendance, and
school inspections) and intermediate outcome level (student-textbook ratios), no information is provided on
the results of the school inspections with regard to teacher effectiveness (which measured, among other
things, teacher preparation and quality of teaching). As a result, there is limited evidence on the extent to

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



which the project's interventions demonstrated actual improved effectiveness, such as the manner or extent
to which teachers applied their training in the classroom. In addition, because reading scores were provided
only for a single cohort, it is not clear whether observed improvements were due more to the project's
interventions or simply to the students' progress through three years of schooling. Furthermore, the links are
not clear between the project's support for ECE and improvements in the public primary education system.
Due to lack of outcome data and attribution issues, achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve school effectiveness in the public primary education system (original outcome targets)

Rationale
Theory of Change: The PAD (p. 8) associated school effectiveness with improvements in the overall school
environment, in the form of enhanced school management, accountability, and learning conditions including
school facilities. The project’s theory of change envisioned that providing training to school leaders and SMCs
to allow them to use new skills to better manage and supervise schools, and as well as improvements in
physical infrastructure including the construction of new school facilities and procurement of textbooks, would
result in the outcome of improved school effectiveness. The DLIs for training of head teachers and SMCs,
public display of information on the usage of school funding, and completion and quality of school
constructions, constituted the links between school facility grants and training programs (outputs) and the
desired outcomes of improved school facilities and student survival rates.

The ICR (p. 13) stated that even though the target for one outcome indicator under this objective (“number of
targeted schools with less than three permanent classrooms”) was decreased during the first restructuring, a
split rating is not required because design modifications were required to ensure that new school structures
would be earthquake-resistant and “climate smart,” resulting in higher unit costs and therefore impacting the
number of schools built. Regardless of the rationale, however, the scope of the project was reduced when the
target for number of schools with fewer than three permanent classrooms was decreased, and a split rating is
required.



Outputs

      In 1,047 schools in targeted districts at least two school inspection reports were filed, not achieving
       the original target of 4,000 schools. According to the ICR (p. 19), inspection data has not yet been
       analyzed because a data analyst has not been hired. Therefore, it is not clear to what extent these
       reports demonstrated the achievement of improved “effectiveness."
      97 percent of schools in targeted districts were provided with a standard kit of instructional material for
       grades P1-P3 or P1-P7 as a part of project interventions, surpassing the target of 90 percent of
       schools.


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)




    In 1,201 schools in targeted districts, SMCs and head teachers have received training as a part of
     project interventions, not achieving the original target of 2,000 teachers and the revised target of 1,181
     schools. Specifically, 1,200 head teachers and 1,204 deputy head teachers (from the 50 districts
     that had the poorest performance in the 2013 Primary Leaving Examination administered to P7
     students) received training in areas such as school supervision, assessment evaluation and planning,
     human resources management, and payroll issues. All participants achieved a minimum score across
     all course assessments and attended 75 percent of all training sessions. Furthermore, 5,536 members
     of SMCs from 26 districts received training in areas such as planning for school development,
     preparing and managing budgets, and monitoring teacher and pupil performance.
    In 1,181 schools in targeted districts, information on grants received from MoES is made publicly
     available to the community, not achieving the original target of 2,000 schools and achieving the
     revised target of 1,181 schools.
    138 schools have established a child protection system (CPS), achieving the target of 138 schools.
     The aim was to mitigate potential social risks associated with the influx of labor into districts where
     school construction was taking place by raising awareness about preventing and responding to
     incidents of violence against children. Schools with a CPS met six standards including having two or
     more child protection activities and having five or more teachers trained to identify signs of and protect
     children against violence, exploitation, and neglect.
    929 additional classrooms were built or rehabilitated at the primary level resulting from project
     interventions, not achieving the original target of 1,960 classrooms and surpassing the revised target
     of 882 classrooms. According to the ICR (p. 21), during project appraisal a needs assessment was
     conducted to identify primary schools that would benefit most from construction upgrades. 962
     schools in 105 districts did not meet the minimum infrastructure standards per the government’s Basic
     Required Minimum Standards criteria for quality learning at primary schools. In addition construction
     and rehabilitation, the following outputs were delivered:
           o 144 furnished administration blocks.
           o 290 five-stance ventilated improved pit latrines for boys and girls.
           o 155 two-stance latrines for teachers.
           o Nine teacher’s houses.
           o 154 water harvesting tanks.



Outcomes

    The number of targeted schools with fewer than three permanent classrooms decreased from 962
     schools in 2012 to 817 schools in 2020, not achieving the original target of 672 schools.
    The ICR analyzed student survival rates to the end of P7 (the final year of primary school) in project
     districts. At the national level, survival rates in primary education increased from 33.0 percent to 34.4
     percent between 2015 and 2019. In districts that received between one and three project interventions
     during the same period, average survival rates increased from 33.4 percent to 35.3 percent. In
     districts that received seven interventions, survival rates increased from 25.8 percent to 29.2 percent.
    The ICR's analysis calculated inefficient public spending by multiplying the average primary teacher
     salary by the number of teachers chronically absent from the classroom. The result showed that
     inefficient public spending in Uganda decreased by 67 percent, from UGX 52.2 million in 2015/2016 to



                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



                                    UGX 17.4 million in 2019/2020. However, it is not clear whether this decrease can be solely attributed
                                    to the project.



                            While the target for reducing the number of schools with fewer than three permanent classrooms was not
                            met, student survival rates to the end of P7 increased more in project districts that received higher levels of
                            intervention than in those with fewer interventions. Achievement of this objective under the original outcome
                            targets is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To improve school effectiveness in the public primary education system (revised outcome targets)

                            Revised Rationale
                            Outcomes

                                  The number of targeted schools with fewer than three permanent classrooms decreased from 962
                                    schools in 2012 to 817 schools in 2020, surpassing the revised target of 824 schools.



                            With the revised target for schools with fewer than three permanent classrooms fully met, achievement of this
                            objective under the revised outcome targets is also rated Substantial.




                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Due to lack of evidence on student outcomes and attribution issues, achievement of the first objective to
                            improve teacher effectiveness in the public primary school system is rated Modest. Achievement of the
                            second objective to improve school effectiveness under the original outcome targets is rated Substantial,
                            despite lack of achievement of the target for reduction of the number of schools with fewer than three


                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 22
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



         permanent classrooms, due to evidence that the project's interventions contributed to improved student
         survival through P7. Overall efficacy under the original outcome targets is therefore rated Substantial, though
         marginally so.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The project achieved the revised outcome target for the number of schools with fewer than three permanent
         classrooms, strengthening the Substantial rating for the second objective. Overall efficacy is therefore rated
         Substantial under the revised outcome targets.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency

The PAD (p. 17) conducted a cost-benefit analysis using the present discounted value method. Current and
future economic benefits and costs were formulated in terms of increased primary school completion rates. The
economic benefits were estimated using lifetime adult labor earnings, and the economic costs were estimated
using schooling expenditures. The analysis made the following assumptions: i) completion rate will increase
from 67 percent to 90 percent; and ii) a discount rate of 10 percent. The analysis calculated a net present value
of US$106.1 million and an internal rate of return of 27 percent.

The ICR (p. 22) did not repeat the cost-benefit analysis but instead analyzed three measures of internal
efficiency in Uganda’s primary education system: public spending on teacher salaries, survival rates of primary
grade 7 students, and pass rates for the Primary Leaving Examination. However, these outcomes are related to
sectoral efficiency rather than project efficiency. According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, an economic analysis
should estimate whether the costs involved in achieving project objectives were reasonable in comparison with
both the benefits and with recognized norms (value for money).



Operational efficiency

The project experienced several implementation delays and was extended by a total of 21 months. Reasons for
the delays were related to lack of capacity at the central, district, and local government levels, especially in
regard to procurement, and an overly ambitious timeline for school construction. Also, according to the ICR (p.

                                                                                                           Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



28), significant up-front efforts were needed before the procurement of contractors for school construction could
even start, such as conducting site assessments to determine land ownership of school facilities, scopes of
required civil works, and potential environmental and social impacts. The project coordination unit
(PCU) experienced continuous challenges with timely procurement, resulting in implementation delays. In
addition, the school construction process under the decentralized modality encountered delays due to extensive
pre-procurement work. Finally, according to the ICR (para 23) “MoES and local government capacity constraints
that impacted efficient implementation and/or unforeseen unit cost increases for activities" indicating
inefficiencies.

With inadequate economic analysis, evidence of implementation inefficiency, and an overall scope of
implemented activities and outcome lower than what was initially planned while spending all of the originally
planned budget, efficiency is rated Modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                 27.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were substantially relevant to country context and to Bank and government strategy at
appraisal and closing, with the shortcoming that the objectives did not explicitly cover early childhood education
(even though ECE was a key development constraint and was included in the project's interventions). Under
both the original and revised outcome targets, achievement of the first objective to improve teacher
effectiveness is rated Modest due to insufficient evidence and attribution issues, while achievement of the
second objective to improve school effectiveness is rated Substantial due to attributable improvement in student
survival rates. Efficiency is rated Modest due to inadequate economic analysis and evidence of implementation
inefficiencies. These ratings indicate that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and
implementation, producing an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcomes can be summarized into the following categories:

Government commitment: The government continues to remain committed to the project’s objectives as
demonstrated by the MoES’ collaboration with the PCU on a number of proposed sustainability actions for
major implemented project activities such as the recommendation to further roll out activities in the remaining
districts. Also, according to the ICR (p. 37), several working groups within the MoES and the Local Education
Group have approved the Early Childhood Care and Education Policy, which will be presented to the Cabinet
for approval.

Financing: According to the ICR (p. 36), public spending as a percentage of the national budget has been
declining in recent years (from 15 percent in 2012/13 to 10 percent in 2017/18). When the project closed, the
MoES had not yet confirmed the PCU's budget proposal to maintain and/or expand the project’s activities.
Since 2019, the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Program is being implemented to address low
and inequitable levels of funding for health and education services at the local level by providing additional
resources. The program allocated US$200 million to local governments for the support of teaching and
learning initiatives while strengthening the capacity of local governments to oversee and monitor the
education sector at the school level. According to the ICR (p. 36), program funds could be used to implement
and manage selected project activities in districts and schools that were not included in project
implementation.

Technical capacity: The project built capacity within MoES departments and units in areas such as
planning, budgeting, financial management, procurement, and M&E at the local and national levels. Also, the
project trained head teachers and deputy head teachers as well as SMCs, which have now the required
capacity to support the continuation of project activities. Furthermore, under the project two National
Assessments of Progress in Education were conducted by the Uganda National Examinations Board,
resulting in expansion of the Board’s capacity to develop an assessment instrument, ensuring technical
quality of test administration and scoring and reporting on results. However, continuous training will be
critical for maintaining adequate capacity in case of staff turnover, new administrative procedures, and new
teaching methodologies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p. 26), between November 2012 and May 2014 the Bank conducted a series of
  workshops, consultative meetings, and focus group discussions with stakeholders from different
  departments within the MoES, District Education Offices, the Local Education Group (an advisory body
  comprised of representatives from United Nations agencies, multilateral partners, and bilateral partners),
  education non-governmental organizations, and civil society organizations. Project design used
  disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) for the first time in Uganda’s education sector and took lessons

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



  learned from five years of successful experience with the DLI model in the education sector in different
  countries into account. However, the project’s results framework had several key shortcomings, including
  inadequate outcome indicators for measuring achievement of the first objective (see Section 9a for more
  details).

  The Bank team identified relevant risks, rating several as substantial. The ICR (p. 27) stated that the
  Bank tried to mitigate the risk of low capacity at the MoES by keeping project activities simple and by
  providing training for MoES officials in procurement and M&E. However, the Bank’s efforts to mitigate low
  capacity at the MoES were not sufficient, resulting in implementation delays and procurement and
  financial management issues. The risk of governance challenges such as fraud and corruption was also
  considered substantial. The Bank tried to mitigate this risk by: i) enhancing transparency in the bidding
  process; ii) revising and providing more detail for the national guidelines for the School Grant Facility; iii)
  improving the procurement process and documents for the procurement of instructional materials; iv)
  using third-party monitoring and unannounced school visits; v) implementing ICT solutions for reporting;
  vi) providing more information to all levels of the system to raise demand for accountability; and vii)
  supporting improved timelines for the teachers payroll system. Furthermore, the risk related to delivery
  monitoring and sustainability was rated substantial due to the challenge in monitoring delivery of
  education in a large number of schools and due to the risk of fiscal constraints. Also, according to the ICR
  (p. 27), the Bank underestimated capacity issues at the district local government level.

  The project’s three-year implementation period was unrealistic due to risks that were identified during the
  design phase, including weak capacity and the MoES’ slow procurement process. However, according to
  the Bank team (June 16, 2021) the project’s three-year implementation period was established by
  the GPE and could not be extended despite requests from the Bank. Furthermore, the Bank carefully
  assessed the capacity of the districts to ensure that only capable regions conduct decentralized
  procurement of the civil works and contract supervision.

  According to the ICR (p. 35), the original procurement plan foresaw that between March and December
  2015, 40 contracts (value of over US$50 million) were to be signed. However, the MoES only signed 17
  contracts (value of US$2.7 million), of which 13 contracts were staff contracts, by December 2015. In
  addition, the target for school construction was not realistic given limited implementation capacity and
  lengthy procurement processes. As a result, the target for PDO indicator 3 (“Number of targeted schools
  with less than three permanent classrooms”) had to be significantly reduced during the first restructuring,
  and the implementation period had to be extended by 12 months.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 35), the Bank team conducted 11 supervision missions and implementation
 support missions as well as frequent technical review meetings. The Bank team worked closely with
 the PCU and relevant units within the MoES to provide technical assistance in areas such as procurement,
 financial management, teacher training, school construction, social and environmental safeguards, and
 M&E. The Bank team restructured the project twice: first, to revise activities to focus on those with the
 highest potential to improve teaching and learning in primary schools and to extend the project

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



 implementation period to allow for the completion of the school construction sub-component, and second to
 allow for the full utilization of project funds and to validate DLI results. Shortcomings in the results
 framework, however, were not addressed.

 However, despite the Bank’s support in areas such as financial management, implementation capacity
 within the MoES was not sufficient, resulting in frequent delays in the payment of contractors and
 inconsistent adherence to environmental and social safeguards at many construction sites. The project
 also faced several procurement issues due to weak capacity within the PCU (see Section 10b for more
 details), resulting in implementation delays. The Bank addressed these challenges by working with the
 PCU and MoES to refine workflow processes to improve procurement efficiency during and following the
 Mid-Term Review in September 2016.

 According to the Bank team (June 16, 2021) the Bank addressed the MoES capacity constraints by
 relocating the TTL from HQ to the field to provide close support to the client and coordination with other
 donors. Also, several qualified local consultants were hired by the Bank to support MoES on a daily basis
 and strengthen its capacity in areas including environment and social safeguards, early childhood
 education, civil engineer, architect, financial management and procurement. Consultants and staff worked
 closely with the national and regional / subnational authorities and schools providing ongoing support and
 capacity building. Areas of improvement included a functioning GRM mechanism, better quality and
 timelines of the civil works in poorly performing districts, and timely finishing of all procurement processes.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clear and monitorable, although the PAD's definition of "effective" teachers
 and schools provided more clarity than the ICR's (that used the term "effective" repeatedly to define
 "effectiveness," p. 7). There was a disconnect between the stated objective and project activities, as the
 objective did not encompass the project's planned investments in ECE.

 The indicators included in the results framework had targets and, where appropriate, baselines.
 Disbursements under components 1 and 2 were conditional on the achievement of agreed program
 implementation performance and progress targets. The selected seven DLIs were linked to the PDO and
 intermediate outcome indicators in the results framework.

 According to the PAD (p. 14), the project was to use four different monitoring systems: i) student and
 teacher assessments of pupils in grade P3 and P6 in English and local language literacy and Mathematics


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



 conducted by the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB); ii) data from school inspection, which was
 to capture information in a standardized questionnaire on teacher, head teacher, and student presence,
 teaching practices, and school management and administration; iii) data from an integrated ICT real-time
 reporting system and the Education Management Information System; and iv) data from unannounced
 school visits collected as a part of project-specific monitoring. Lastly, a third-party assessment on a sample
 basis was to be carried out to verify the achievement of the DLIs and satisfactory completion of large
 procurement contracts such as textbooks and school construction.

 The ICR (p. 26) stated that the DLIs were based on the following criteria; i) the DLIs reflected priorities in
 the ESSP related to project interventions; ii) the DLIs included intermediate results that captured
 implementation performance targets that were to be built throughout project implementation; and iii) the
 DLIs captured results critical for achieving the project’s objective. The six original DLIs were linked to 77.2
 percent of total project financing for component 1 and 2 activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the first project restructuring in February 2018, the results framework was restructured to add a
  new PDO indicator (“Percentage of pupils reading 20 or more words per minute in grades 1-3”) replacing
  the original PDO indicator 4 (“Percentage of teachers present in public schools in targeted districts”),
  which was moved to being an Intermediate Results Indicator and redefined to measure teacher presence
  only in the 29 districts where teachers received training in the EGR methodology under the project. Also,
  the target for PDO indicator 3 (“Number of targeted schools with less than three permanent classrooms”)
  was changed from 672 schools to 824 schools, reflecting a decrease in ambition. Three new Intermediate
  Results Indicators were added (“Number of schools with established system to address child protection,"
  “Percentage of teachers (P1-P7) present in EGR schools,” and “Evaluation of the ECD Community Child
  Care Program”). Furthermore, five Intermediate Results Indicators were dropped because the related
  activities were discontinued.

  The new PDO indicator added at restructuring, on pupils reading 20 or more words per minute, captured
  results only for a single cohort of students and did not provide data for children who were not subject to
  any interventions, making an assessment of plausible attribution challenging. The ICR also did not
  provide information on data that was collected through UNEB assessments that might contribute
  to assessing achievement of the objective to improve teacher effectiveness.

  Throughout project implementation, seven DLI verification exercises were conducted.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 32), M&E data was used to track project implementation, demonstrate results
  on the ground, and trigger DLI disbursements. The PCU and the Bank also developed an Excel-based
  procurement activity tracker, contract monitoring matrix, and environmental safeguards compliance
  matrix for monitoring key processes, identifying bottlenecks, and making decisions on how to address
  them. M&E data was shared during bi-weekly project review meetings, and informed decision-making.




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). OP/BP 4.01 was triggered due to
   civil works activities with the potential to generate localized, site-specific environmental impacts such as
   dust, noise pollution, and occupational safety of workers. The project adapted the Environmental and Social
   Management Framework used for the Uganda Post Primary Education Training project. According to the
   ICR (p. 32), the project defined an environmental screening process for school construction sites and
   provided guidance for the development of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), including
   monitoring and reporting formats and a mechanism for addressing grievances.

   According to the ICR (p. 33) an Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist and three consultants were
   based within the PCU. They conducted Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and drafted
   basic ESMPs to mitigate potential environmental and social impacts from civil works for schools.
   Throughout construction, the PCU’s safeguard specialist and consultants monitored and reported on
   compliance with the ESMPs.

   The ICR (p. 32) stated that the project complied with all of the Bank's safeguard policies. However, the
   project encountered several safeguard-related challenges, such as contractors starting work before
   receiving a contract and completing an ESIA, which was to inform contractors about the ESMP. However,
   since they had not signed it, they were in jeopardy of breaching safeguards without realizing it. Also, some
   contractors did not sign employment contracts for short-term workers. This resulted in workers being
   unaware of codes of conduct. Furthermore, some contractors did not have the mandated environmental,
   social, and health and safety officers for their staff, making contractor compliance with safeguards even
   more challenging.

   According to the ICR (p. 33), the safeguard consultants also conducted Environmental and Social Audits to
   assess contractor performance in addressing identified issues. Any issues identified had to be addressed by
   contractors during a 12-month defects liability period in order to be issued a Certificate of Environmental
   and Social Compliance and final payment of five percent of the contract amount. By July 31, 2020, defects
   correction for the final 26 schools constructed were completed.

   The ICR (p. 33) stated that SMCs were responsible for implementing Grievance Redress Mechanisms at
   their schools to ensure that all complaints related to construction were addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



According to the ICR (p. 28), the project experienced several procurement issues. For example, the MoES’
lengthy procurement process resulted in an implementation delay of school construction activities.
Procurement approvals within the MoES were usually not granted in a timely manner, and the
Procurement Disposal Unit did not have sufficient capacity to evaluate bids. The ICR (p. 28) stated that
during the Mid-Term Review in September 2016, the Bank worked with the PCU and MoES to improve
workflow processes and increase procurement efficiency. However, despite these efforts, the project
continued to encounter procurement-related issues, which resulted in implementation delays. For example,
according to the ICR (p. 29), due to slow preparation of required bidding documents, P3 primers were
delivered to schools only in September 2018, eight months into the school year. This significant delay
resulted in teachers having to use existing classroom materials and to develop supplemental EGR
teaching materials. Delays in the delivery of EGR instructional materials had occurred before (in 2016 for
P1 students and in 2017 for P2 students), indicating ongoing challenges with timely procurement, contract
management (required advance payments to vendors were delayed), and planning. Also, the school
construction process under the decentralized modality was delayed. The project design had planned that
regional workshops to raise awareness within communities about upcoming civil works were to take place
during the first year of project implementation. However, the MoES was focused on moving procurement
contracting for schools under the centralized modality forward, and local government officials faced
challenging extensive pre-procurement work.

The ICR (p. 34) stated that after going back and forth between the Bank and the government on the
procurement of school furniture, the government decided to use its own funds (per the Uganda Public
Procurement Development Authority Guidelines) for this purpose. Therefore, in August 2019, US$1.53
million of the grant amount was canceled due to a declared misprocurement of furniture for the 84 schools.
According to the Bank team (December 7, 2020), the misprocurement resulted in a delay in the supply of
furniture in schools, but by project closure all schools were furnished.



Financial Management

According to the ICR (p. 34), the project submitted quarterly Interim Financial Reports in a timely manner
to the Bank. Also, the Office of the Auditor General conducted fiscal year audits of project financial
statements, which received unqualified opinions. The project complied with the Bank’s financial covenants.

However, when the Bank conducted the first review of the project’s financial management performance in
April 2016, it was found that the project did not follow any systematic tracking of payments made under the
project. Weaknesses were identified in accounting for project activity advances (with a substantial amount
of financing for activities remaining unretired). As a result, the project’s financial management performance
was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. In order to address these shortcomings, the Bank provided advice on
strengthening oversight of project funds by the MoES’ internal audit unit. When the Bank conducted its
next financial management review in August 2016, it found that accounting records in place were adequate
with a clear audit trail, resulting in an upgrade of the project’s financial management performance to
Moderately Satisfactory. In November 2019, the Bank conducted the final financial management review
noting that the project’s accounting system was commendable, which resulted in an upgrade of the
financial management performance rating to Satisfactory.




                                                                                                Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                                                                              Shortcomings in the adequacy of
                                                                              evidence and attribution of
                                                                              observed results to project
                                                                              interventions for the objective on
Outcome                       Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   teacher effectiveness, lack of
                                                                              economic analysis to
                                                                              demonstrate project efficiency,
                                                                              and evidence of implementation
                                                                              shortcomings.
                                                                              Insufficient risk mitigation
Bank Performance              Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   measures and shortcomings in
                                                                              the project's results framework.
                                                                              Shortcomings in the results
                                                                              framework that prevented
Quality of M&E                Substantial           Modest                    convincing plausible attribution
                                                                              of observed outcomes to project
                                                                              interventions.
Quality of ICR                ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 37-39) included several lessons learned, adapted here by IEG:

      Enabling an active community dialogue to raise awareness and engagement is critical
       for obtaining a broader buy in by all stakeholders and sustainable long-term
       outcomes. In this project, dialogues with the community were organized in project districts
       that allowed local government officials and community leaders to connect with many
       stakeholders including parents, teachers, and local council officials, to ensure better
       understanding of project implementation. Critical topics such as teaching in local languages
       in the lower primary grades, and children attending local ECE programs to support their
       growth and development and improve their readiness for primary school entry, were
       discussed.
      Assessing institutional capacity at the central and district government levels is critical
       for designing an adequate and implementation timeline and setting realistic targets. In


                                                                                                Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)



         this project, the Bank underestimated institutional capacity constraints at the central and
         district local government levels, which resulted in implementation delays and financial
         management and procurement issues. Also, given the capacity constraints it turned out that
         the target set for school construction was unrealistic. The project required restructuring to
         extend the project's closing date by one year and to decrease the target.
        Designing an M&E framework with a clearly stated objective and indicators that
         encompass all outcomes of the objective is critical for being able to measure
         implementation progress and ensure attribution. In this project, there was a disconnect
         between the objective and the activities included in the project, resulting in monitoring issues
         and the need for several restructurings.
        Ensuring that school designs take natural disasters into account is critical for the
         sustainability of constructions/rehabilitations of schools. In this project some
         constructions were exposed to natural hazards including floods and as a result required
         repair. In order to avoid costly repairs it is useful to screen designs for disaster risks (for
         example topographical and geological assessments) to ensure that climate-proofing
         measures are being implemented.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was internally
consistent and identified implementation bottlenecks and how they were resolved. However, the ICR did not
include a traditional economic analysis and provided data that was related to sectoral efficiency rather than
project efficiency. Also, the ICR's outcome data under the first objective presented data for only one cohort of
students, making an assessment of achievements challenging. While the lessons learned were useful, they
would have benefited from more concrete examples from project implementation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
UG GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness (P133780)




                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
