     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022356

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P130413                                   EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Georgia                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82630,IDA-52450                     28-Feb-2018                                         70,761,647.37

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 09-May-2013                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            75,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             72,023,064.56                                            0.00

 Actual                                         70,761,647.37                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 William B. Denning         Christopher David           Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the Project are to: (i) contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and to
   improve road safety along the section upgraded under the Project; and (ii) to strengthen the capacity of the
   RD [Roads Department] and the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure to plan and manage the
   road network and improve road traffic safety. (Loan Agreement, Schedule 1)




                                                                                                Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improvement and asset management of the East-West Highway (EWH, within the area
   of this project it is also designated as E60, or as the Tbilisi-Senaki-Leselidze Highway) (Estimated cost:
   US$74.5 million, Actual US$70.8 million) (ICR para 11).

   (a) Upgrade the existing EWH by constructing a 2-lane dual carriageway from Agara to Zemo Osiauri; with
   12 km of concrete pavement, including two interchanges, two bridges, several overpasses and
   underpasses, and riverbank protection. Note that Zemo Osiauri is the highway interchange located on the
   outskirts of Khashuri to serve this town and that the two names appear to be used interchangeably in some
   parts of the ICR. (Estimated cost: US$55.0 million, Actual US$53.2 million).

   (b) Maintain the EWH existing 2-lane dual carriageway between Natakhtari and Ruisi (67 km) by financing a
   multi-year maintenance contract. The maintenance program is based on a preparatory study under
   Component 3a. (Estimated cost: US$8.0 million, Actual US$0.0 million).

   (c) Complete civil works to improve road safety and access roads on the existing EWH between Natakhtari
   and Ruisi (67 km) and between Ruisi and Chumateleti (44 km). The identification and design of the road
   safety measures and access roads are carried out under Component 3b. (Estimated cost: US$6.0 million,
   Actual US$5.9 million).

   (d) Implement environmental improvements along the EWH between Natakhtari and Ruisi (67 km). This
   includes addressing adverse environmental impacts of civil works in this section (Component 1c). The
   identification and design of the measures are based on an environmental audit in Component 3b.
   (Estimated cost: US$1.5 million, Actual US$0.0 million).

   (e) Construction supervision and quality assurance services. (Estimated cost: US$4.0 million, Actual
   US$3.7 million).

   Component 2: Institutional strengthening (Estimated cost: US$2.5 million, Actual US$0.66 million) (ICR
   para 11).

   (a) Review and update road sector strategy in two key areas: (i) institutional arrangements; and (ii)
   financing. (Estimated cost: US$0.5 million, Actual US$0.1 million).

   (b) Improve road safety management capacity of the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure
   (MRDI). Provide technical assistance for capacity building in road safety policy issues and management and
   coordination, including: (i) assessment of the existing national traffic safety strategy and action plan for
   2010- 2013; and (ii) development of a new strategy and plan for 2014-2017. (Estimated cost: US$0.2
   million, Actual US$0.0 million).




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



(c) Improve the operating environment for the local construction industry. Promote improved professional
practices within the industry through training needs assessment and manpower development. (Estimated
cost: US$0.2 million, Actual US$0.0 million).

(d) Improve manpower planning and development in MRDI including: (i) training needs assessment and
preparation of manpower development plan; (ii) development and implementation of a training plan; and (iii)
regular learning events to promote Ministry knowledge of best practices in the road sector. (Estimated cost:
US$0.2 million, Actual US$0.0 million).

(e) Improve organizational efficiency and manpower planning and development measures in the Roads
Department (RD) in the MRDI. Provide technical assistance to: (i) improve RD’s internal business
processes, and national design standards; (ii) improve multi-year planning and development; (iii) develop
and implement a communication strategy; and (iv) other studies to be determined. For manpower planning
and development, the activities include assess training needs and prepare a manpower development plan;
implement strategic incremental training with particular focus on FIDIC Rules, and have regular learning
events to promote knowledge of best practices in road management and promote their adoption. (Estimated
cost: US$0.9 million, Actual US$0.4 million).

(f) Prepare a strategic roadmap for the development and implementation of Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS) along the EWH corridor, from Tbilisi to the Turkish Border, including a long-term vision and a
comprehensive action plan for the deployment of ITS. The study includes exploring possible roles for the
private sector in the implementation of the proposed ITS, and training activities. (Estimated Cost: US$0.5
million, actual cost US$0.2 million).

Component 3: Preparation of designs and supporting studies for future projects for the
development of the EWH (Estimated cost: US$10.8 million, Actual US$21.65 million) (ICR para 11).

(a) Study to define the scope of maintenance interventions along some upgraded sections of the EWH 2-
lane dual carriageway from Natakhtari to Ruisi, Component 1b (67 km). This subcomponent includes the
review and update of maintenance guidelines used by the RD.

(b) Road safety improvement studies and designs to identify needed road safety interventions and access
improvements along the existing road between Natakhtari and Chumateleti (111 km) under Component 1c
including: (i) road safety audits along the road section; and (ii) detailed designs of the proposed measures.

(c) Update feasibility studies and undertake the preliminary engineering design of a new Rikoti Tunnel and
60 km of highway between Chumateleti and west to Argveta. The study will use a 'corridor improvement
approach' and identify physical measures to improve connectivity between the EWH and adjacent local road
network. The studies will support subsequent phases of the EWH program, including the East-West
Highway Corridor Improvement Project, which will be financed by the World Bank.

(d) Detailed design of the new tunnel at Rikoti, preparation of bidding documents, and independent review
of all technical and safety provisions. The design will include the design of access roads to nearby
population centers. This activity was separated from Component 3c, above, to allow flexibility in the possible
financing arrangements for the tunnel.

Component 4: Project Management (Estimated cost: US$1.4 million, Actual US$1.7 million) (ICR para
11).


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



  (a) Implementation support to RD; including provision of goods and services.

  (b) Financial audits and project monitoring and evaluation services provided by the Transport Reform and
  Rehabilitation Centre (TRRC). The TRRC is based in Tbilisi and is financed by contributions from many
  international development finance institutions. It has been renamed the Eurasian Transport Corridor
  Investment Centre.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. At appraisal the total cost of the project was estimated at US$93.75 million (PAD, para 26).
  At closing, the actual total cost of the project was US$92.311 million (ICR, page 2).

  At closing the actual costs of components 1b, 1d, 2c, and 2d were zero. This is because they were either
  restructured or moved to other projects. Details are provided under restructuring below.

  The cost of Component 2 was estimated at appraisal as US$2.5 million and on completion had cost
  US$0.66 million. Component 2a (road strategy) was completed for 20% of its estimated cost. Component
  2b (road safety strategy) was completed at zero cost. Components 2e and 2f had actual costs of less than
  half their estimated costs. Component 2e was a pool allocation for training activities that was 44% utilized.
  For 2f, there was a slight cost overestimation at project preparation stage because the activity is not a
  common one, with no similar assignments conducted in the past in Georgia, and so it was not a straight
  forward exercise to estimate a cost with adequate level of accuracy.

  The cost of Component 3 was estimated at appraisal as US$10.8 million and on completion had cost
  US$21.7 million. This was because while the four original sub-components completed at less than
  estimated cost, an additional five design and feasibility studies were included.

  Financing. At appraisal, the amount of Bank financing for this project was estimated as: US$38.0 million,
  IBRD Specific Investment Loan, and US$37.0 million, IDA Credit (PAD, para 26) for a total commitment of
  US$75.0 million. At completion IBRD funds disbursed were US$35.023 million, and IDA funds disbursed
  were US$35.739 million (ICR, page 2) for a total disbursement of US$70.762 million.

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, the Borrower was estimated to provide US$18.74 million, or of 20%
  of the project total (PAD, para 26). At completion, the Borrower had disbursed US$21.549 million, or of 23%
  of the project total (ICR, page 2).

  Dates. The project was approved on 09-May-2013 and became effective on 05-Aug-2013. It underwent a
  midterm review on 20-Apr-2016. The original closing date of 28-Feb-2018 was extended twice; to 28-Feb-
  2019 and then to 31-Dec-2019.

  Restructuring. The project was restructured twice. Both restructurings did not change the PDO (ICR para
  15 to 24).

  The first restructuring in December 2017, was a Level 2 restructuring to extend the closing date by one
  year, from 28 February 2018 to 28 February 2019; to revise the technical assistance components to take




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



   advantage of a new funding opportunity and use project funds for additional studies; and to update other TA
   components.

   In 2016 the Bank obtained a Global Infrastructure Facility (GIF) Trust Fund funding (US$ 500,000) to
   undertake a new Advisory Services & Analytics (ASA) project, the Private Sector Participation and
   Sustainability Options for the East-West Highway (P161225). The activities of this ASA superseded
   Components 3a (study on maintenance interventions) and 1b (putting in place a maintenance contract from
   Natakhtari to Ruisi). These sub-components were cancelled, as the former became an activity in the ASA,
   while the latter would potentially become obsolete, depending on the recommendations of the ASA (ICR
   para 19).

   The savings were allocated to carry out feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for a set of three
   priority road sections north and east of Tbilisi (ICR para 16 and Annex 5, Additional Studies Introduced
   Under Component 3). The savings also paid to install highway lighting, to improve road safety, along the
   Ruisi-Agara-Agara Bypass (E60, km95+km114) and the EWH (Tbilisi-Senaki-Leselidze, 115+km 121.3).

   Component 1d (environmental improvement measures) was dropped as a stand-alone item and was
   merged into the key civil works contract (Component 1c). Component 2d (undertaking a training needs
   assessment and preparation of manpower development plan for the MRDI) was replaced with a similar
   activity, which is a "Capacity Gap Analysis" study.

   Component 2c (Construction Industry Review Update) was cancelled by the Borrower due to: i) internal
   challenges with the Contractors Association, which was a key stakeholder in the activity; and ii) a study with
   similar objectives examining the industry was delivered under another project (Secondary & Local Roads
   Project-II) as a priority activity to enable introduction of Output-&-Performance-Based-Road-Contracts (ICR
   para 24).

   The second restructuring in February 2019, was a Level 2 restructuring to extend the closing date from 28
   February 2019 to 31 December 2019 to accommodate the completion of all ongoing small-scale road safety
   improvement works, feasibility and design studies, and the capacity building activities.

   Two outstanding deliverables, added in the first restructuring, the Capacity Gap Analysis study and the
   feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for three priority road sections north and east of Tbilisi,
   remained unfinished at project completion. They were transferred to the East-West Highway Corridor
   Improvement Project (EWHCIP, P160152) because: (i) this project had already been extended twice, (ii) all
   major civil works contracts had been completed by July 2017, and (iii) only these minor activities were
   unfinished and could feasibly be completed under the EWHCIP (ICR para 23).

   Overall, the changes during the project were not in conflict with the project's theory of change.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context


                                                                                                       Page 5 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



Georgia's economy has recovered strongly since the severe double shocks of the financial crisis and
conflict of 2008. The country's economic growth rebounded strongly to 7.2 percent in 2011 and 6.4 percent
in 2012, mainly due to an increase in exports and tourism and the continued high levels of public
investment. The public investment of the Government of Georgia (GoG) was mainly focused on
infrastructure, with emphasis on improving main road corridors and local connections. (ICR para 1).

Georgia's location is a cross-roads of East-West geographic (Black Sea and Caspian Sea) and socio-
economic (Europe and Central Asia) linkages, and North-South geographic (the Greater and the Lesser
Caucasus Mountains) and socio-economic (Russia and Turkey) linkages. Historically and presently it is well
placed to be an important hub for the transit of goods and people. Within this context the GoG embarked on
the development of the East-West Highway, a transformational initiative for the Georgian economy. The
Highway is part of the Caucasus Transit Corridor (CTC), which is a key transit route between Western
Europe and Central Asia for transportation of oil and gas as well as dry cargo (ICR para 3).

Alignment with Strategy and Rationale for Bank Involvement

As indicated in the PAD (para 15), the proposed Project was in line with investment priorities identified in
the 2010-2013 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), including two strategic pillars: (a) meeting post-conflict
and vulnerability needs, and (b) strengthening competitiveness for postcrisis growth; to which the Project
contributes.

In addition, the 2014-2017 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) identified two strategic pillars of relevance:
(i) strengthening public service delivery to promote inclusive growth; and (ii) enabling private sector led job
creation through improved competitiveness. The ICR indicates, "This Project approved in 2009 is fully in
line with the strategic directions, as it contributes to both strategic pillars of the 2014-2017 CPF and the
2018-2022 Focus Area, by providing infrastructure to facilitate transit and growth and strengthening the
capacity and accountability of RD in road infrastructure management, as well as supporting regional
integration." (ICR para 26).

The current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY19-FY22) was published in April 2018 and includes
three Focus Areas: (1) Enhance Inclusive Growth and Competitiveness, (2) Invest in Human capital, and (3)
Build Resilience. Focus Area 1 includes four objectives: (i) Support agricultural modernization and access
to markets, (ii) Improve connectivity and integration, (iii) Diversify sources of finance and strengthen
innovation capacity, and (iv) Increase economic participation in the regions. Clearly transportation services
are a major part of Objective 2. Transport also plays a key role in agricultural and regional economic
development.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

A policy-based, efficient, and long-term strategic investment was the main priority of the government. To lay
out infrastructure investment plans, the MRDI developed several Action Plans over the years that allocated
considerable resources to improvement of roads. The funding for the EWH corridor continued to be a key
priority in all the Action Plans. In addition, the government placed maintenance of the road infrastructure
amongst the highest priorities. To enable this planned growth in infrastructure spending, the MRDI pays
close attention to building institutional capacity within the ministry and within the RD (ICR para 27).

Innovation was also a priority in the FY14–FY17 CPS and has been applied to this project. The introduction
of output and performance based contracts (OPRCs) in the transport sector has proven highly effective and
will be expanded during the CPF period. Piloting this innovative contracting approach required a

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



               comprehensive and in-depth assessment of: (i) the potential road network area, (ii) public and private sector
               capacity, (iii) macroeconomic factors, and (iv) the time required for adjustments during implementation. As
               the government already intends to generalize the use of OPRCs across Georgia starting in 2019, and it is
               engaging with other donors to seek their financial support, the Bank will provide technical support in
               evaluating existing OPRC models." (CPF para 40).

               Previous Sector Experience

               The project built extensively on five previous transport projects and drew heavily on extensive ASA (CPF
               page 46). The ICR (para 7) notes that the PDOs are similar to those used in the earlier East West Highway
               projects supporting the improvements to the E60 highway since they contribute to the achievement of the
               overall objective of improving the E60 East West Highway Corridor westward from Tbilisi.

               At closing, the Project remained highly relevant to the country’s current development priorities and Bank’s
               engagement. The relevance of the PDO for this project is High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and to improve road safety along the section
                             upgraded under the project.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The ICR developed a theory of change (ICR para 5), which was consistent with the project description and
                             results framework in the PAD.

                             The theory of change of this objective is: Upgrading the capacity of the highway and ensuring the new and
                             existing sections of highway are well operated and maintained will lead to reduced road transport costs and
                             improved road safety. Good operations and maintenance will be supported by ensuring construction,
                             maintenance, and design activities are informed by up-to-date road safety considerations. These benefits
                             would be felt primarily along the road sections actively constructed, maintained, or designed by the project,
                             and contribute to increasing connectivity from the Black Sea to Azerbaijan.

                             Outputs



                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



The project completed all outputs associated with PDO 1. Four Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) were
associated with PDO 1 in the PAD (Annex 1, Intermediate Result 1, page 25). Three of these were re-
classified in the ICR to be associated with PDO 2 (para 35). The original classification in the PAD more
specifically and precisely matches the IRIs to the PDOs and will be used here.

1. Roads Constructed, non-rural (Component 1a, km) - baseline: 0, target: 12, achieved: 12.

2. Multi-year maintenance contract for section of E60 between Natakhtari and report Ruisi completed
(Component 1b, text) - baseline: No, target: Yes, replaced by other TA and GoG funding (see below).

3. Length of East West Highway corridor from Tbilisi to Sarpi with IR Index >6 (km) - baseline: 12.4, target:
12.4, slightly not achieved: 16.2 km in ~375 km

4. Length of E60 between Natakhtari and Ruisi and between Agara and Chumateleti with road safety
improvement measures (Component 1c, km) - baseline: 0, target: 100, achieved: 100.

Two related Components, 1b (maintenance of the existing EWH between Natakhtari and Ruisi), and 3a
(define the scope of the maintenance interventions), were cancelled as they were replaced by new TA in
September 2016, the Private Sector Participation and Sustainability Options for the East-West Highway
project (P161225, Advisory Services & Analytics), financed by the GIF and administered by the World Bank.
The TA covered a wider scope, by examining overall operational options for the highway, including
maintenance and finance. The TA was completed in December 2018 and concluded that tolling for the EWH
would be a financially viable option for operating and maintaining the highway and presented options to
implement such arrangements. The GoG is reviewing the options and scenarios presented by the TA. In the
meantime, a three-year maintenance contract was signed in 2016 for the Natakhtari - Ruisi sections and
another contract of two years period was signed in 2019, funded by the GoG (ICR para 33, and P161225
Activity Completion Summary).

At the first restructuring, Component 1d (environmental improvement measures) was merged into the civil
works contract of Component 1c and implemented as part of that activity (ICR para 15).

The IR Index (International Roughness Index of road quality, a lower value is smoother) measure of highway
condition between Tbilisi and Sarpi at the border with Turkey (approximately 375 km) is based on a
geography outside of the activities in Component 1. It may serve as a proxy for overall road maintenance
activity in the EWH corridor. The usefulness of measures that extend beyond the project as indicators is
discussed below in Section 9 M&E Design.

Outcomes

Project outcomes for PDO 1 were measured by five PDO Indicators. Three achieved, one partially
achieved, and one substantially exceeded its targets (ICR para 30):

1. Reduce travel time from Agara to Zemo Osiaur (minutes) - baseline: 10, target: 7, achieved: 7.

2. Reduce vehicle operating costs from Agara to Zemo Osiaur for cars (US$/km) - baseline: 0.20, target:
0.18, achieved: 0.18.




                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



3. Reduce vehicle operating costs from Agara to Zemo Osiaur for trucks (US$/km) - baseline: 0.76, target:
0.72, achieved: 0.72.

4. Reduce fatality rates along the Tbilisi-Senaki section of the EWH (per 100 mil. vehicle-km) - baseline:
11.6, target: 8.5, achieved: 3.0.

5. Increase in asset value of the EWH Tbilisi-Sarpi (GEL million), - baseline, N/A, target: 2,300, partially
(70%) achieved: 1,599.

The reduction in travel time, automobile operating costs, truck operating costs and the greater than expected
reduction in road fatalities was the direct result of the outputs completed under Component 1a and
Component 1c. This achievement was supported by the road maintenance activities that were derived from
Component 1b and 3a.

Like the highway condition IR Index above, the measure of reduced fatality rates between Tbilisi-Senaki
(approximately 275 km) is based on a geography, including but beyond the construction of Component 1a (12
km) and even outside of Component 1c (111 km). Improved road safety in this larger geography can be
attributed to the cumulative effect of road safety improvements from earlier initiatives, such as improved
police capacity and increased public awareness achieved under previous Bank projects. A useful addition to
the evidence for this objective would be information illustrating the improvements in these issues.

The asset value indicator (#5 above) was underachieved due to the delay in: (1) completion of Samtredia-
Grigoleti road segment in the western part of the country under the EIB (ICR, para 30, Annex 5), and (2)
upgrading of Zemo Osiauri-Chumateleti Lot 2 section, which was terminated in December 2018 and is
currently under bidding under a different project (EWHCIP) (ICR para 30). The usefulness of this “asset
value”, essentially the book value of recently made investments, as an indicator is discussed under Section 9
below.

Rating

The Efficacy of the achievement of PDO 1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of the RD and MRDI to plan and manage the road network and improve road
traffic safety.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The theory of change of this objective is: Having updated strategy support (road sector strategy, road safety
strategy and action plan, ITS strategic roadmap) that has been developed "in-house" with TA, strengthened

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



government institutional capacity (human resources planning and development in MRDI and RD), and local
construction industry support, would improve road safety management capacity, government organizational
efficiency, and overall capacity of the RD and the MRDI. The end result is a road network that has been well
planned and managed, and with improved road safety.

Outputs

The project completed most of the outputs associated with PDO 2. Five IRIs were associated with PDO 2 in
the PAD (Annex 1, Intermediate Result 2, page 26). The ICR re-classified an additional three IRIs from PDO
1 to PDO2 (ICR para 35). The original classification in the PAD more specifically and precisely matches the
IRIs to the PDOs and will be used here.

1. Updated road safety strategy and action plan developed and adopted by decision MRDI (Component 2b,
text) - baseline: No, target: Yes; achieved: Yes.

2. Training needs assessment and manpower development report plan for MRDI completed (Component 2d,
text) - baseline: No, target: Yes. Assigned as "Gap Analysis" to a subsequent project, EWHCIP.

3. Training needs assessment and manpower development report plan for RD completed (Component 2e,
text) - baseline: No, target: Yes. Assigned as "Gap Analysis" to a subsequent project, EWHCIP.

4. Chumateleti to Argveta feasibility and preliminary engineering study completed (Component 3c, text) -
 baseline: No, target: Yes, achieved: Yes.

5. ITS strategic roadmap for East West Highway corridor developed (Component 2f, text), - baseline:
No, target: Yes, achieved: Yes.

Component 2a, the review and update of the road sector strategy was completed, but without social and
gender dimensions .

Component 1 (Improvement and Asset Management) was primarily concerned with achieving PDO 1 but
provided ongoing work for the MRDI and RD in which to put into practice the strengthened planning and
management capacity desired in PDO 2.

Component 2 (Institutional Strengthening) was primarily concerned with achieving PDO 2. Component 3
(Preparation of designs and supporting studies for future projects) is similar to Component 1, in that it
provides ongoing work for the MRDI and RD in which to put into practice the strengthened planning and
management capacity desired in PDO 2.

Components 2d for MRDI, and 2e for RD, were replaced with a “Capacity Gap Analysis" study. Stage 1 of
Component 2d (“Review of Organization Structure”) was completed under the project, with the remaining
deliverables being transferred to the EWHCIP (ICR paras 15, 23).

The Bank team and the RD agreed to slightly widen the scope of the original activity (assess training needs)
to include an assessment of RD capacities in its different functions. The preparation of the ToRs took some
time resulting in a late start of the activities, which was already delayed to workload pressure on RD.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



Therefore some deliverables under the sub-component were not completed by the time of the project close
(ICR para 23).

The ITS strategic roadmap for East West Highway corridor was completed by 31-Jul-2017. It defines the
implementation of the ITS system along the EWH. It will guide the subsequent project (EWHCIP), which has a
component for financing the installation of ITS along the corridor (including sections not financed by the
Bank). The RD is considering merging this strategy with aspects of tolling the highway.

Outcomes

Project outcomes for PDO 2 were measured by one indicator:

1. Road sector strategy incorporating social and gender dimensions developed and adopted by RD and MRDI
(Component 2a, text).

The road sector strategy was developed and adopted by RD and MRDI, however, the strategy did not include
social and gender dimensions. See the discussion under Section 10d below.

The road safety strategy and action plan was completed 30-Oct-2015. The ITS strategic roadmap was
completed 31-Jul-2017. The road sector strategy was completed 05-Nov-2018 (ICR Annex 1).

PDO 2, Institutional Strengthening, was achieved in many respects, i.e., technical analysis and formal
documents were delivered as planned and additional technical work was also completed; and so technical
capacity was improved (ICR para 34).

However, "soft capacity" (Components 2c, 2d, 2e) dealing with local professional practices, government
manpower planning and development, and training were transferred to the EWHCIP or deferred to later work.
This is an area that continues to need attention in the future (ICR para 43). Efficacy is also measured by
timeliness. The transfer of activities to the EWHCIP means that these activities are not being completed
within the planned time. In April 2018 the EWHCIP was provided with EUR16.9 million additional financing
(P160152) and the project closing date was extended from 31-Dec-2020 to 31-Dec-2023. The EWHCIP
Supervision Report of 28-Apr-2020 mentions one, two, and, two RD staff being trained in ITS & Road
Strategy in each of 2017, 2018, and 2019 respectively.

Positive results from the two “outside the immediate project area” indicators from PDO 1: (1) Length of East
West Highway corridor from Tbilisi to Sarpi with IR Index >6 and, (2) Increase in asset value of the EWH, add
to the understanding that the project had broadly positive outcomes.

Rating

PDO 2 was somewhat achieved. The Efficacy of the achievement of PDO 2 is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest




                                                                                               Page 11 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            At closing, the targets for outcome indicators were mostly met. Road transport costs were reduced, road
                            safety infrastructure was improved, and government capacity to plan and manage the road network and
                            improve road safety was strengthened.

                            Based on the evidence of substantial and modest outcomes achieved against the two project objectives, the
                            overall efficacy of the project’s achievements is rated substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   The economic analysis at appraisal was based on a conventional cost-benefit analysis (CBA) applied to
   Component 1a of the project (constructing a 2-lane dual carriageway from Agara to Zemo Osiauri), which
   comprised 62% of the total project cost. The CBA was based on: (i) actual traffic volumes; (ii) forecast traffic
   volumes; (iii) vehicle operating cost savings, travel time savings, and reduced road accident costs; and (iv)
   highway maintenance cost savings. The evaluation was done using the Highway Development and
   Management Model (HDM-4) to estimate road agency and road user’s costs for each project alternative over an
   evaluation period. The traffic forecasts were based on assumed growth rates derived from recent GDP growth,
   recent growth in car ownership, and an assumption for generated traffic. Capital investment costs were
   converted to economic costs by elimination of price contingency, taxes, custom duties, with a resulting overall
   economic cost of about 70% of the financial costs.

   The CBA used a discount rate of 12% and yielded an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 17.5 % and a
   Net Present Value (NPV) of US$26.7 million (PAD para 42, 43, Annex 4). The CBA was not applied to other
   minor civil works in the project (Component 1c). Minor civil works related to road safety and access to trunk
   roads typically have good economic returns. Components 2 and 3 were TA and were not included in the
   analysis of economic efficiency. No emissions analyses were conducted at appraisal.

   The analysis for the ICR was also based on a conventional CBA, also using the HDM-4 model, and adopting the
   same main inputs and assumptions used at appraisal (road and vehicle fleet characteristics, evaluation period,
   discount rate), but now considering the actual project costs, actual duration and completion of the road works,
   and the actual roughness of the road measured from 2013 to 2019. The method for deriving traffic forecasts not
   described in the ICR. The ICR did provide actual traffic data in the initial years (2013 to 2019) which had been a
   forecast in the PAD. This showed traffic 26% higher than the corresponding period in the PAD (ICR Annex 4,
   para 3).




                                                                                                                           Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



The ex-post economic analysis yielded an EIRR of 19.9% and a NPV of US$37.7 million. The higher economic
benefits are due to the higher traffic measured on the project road compared with the appraisal estimates and to
reduced project costs. (ICR para 38, 39, Annex 4).

Additional economic context is provided in the Country Partnership Framework for Georgia for the period FY19-
FY22 (April 2018). Box 2 (page 24) indicates, "The Impact of East-West Highway Corridor Investments. The
Government of Georgia has prioritized infrastructure investments to improve connectivity (local and global).
During the past two decades, about USD 5 billion have been committed to develop the East West Highway
Corridor (EWHC) with support from several IFIs. The economy wide direct and indirect benefits of such
investments in the EWHC have been found to be significant. Indirect benefits have been assessed using a
computable general equilibrium model calibrated for Georgia. The transmission channels modeled are the
reduction in transportation costs - reduction in vehicle operating costs and time savings - resulting from the
construction and upgrading investments along the EWHC. ... The analysis revealed that indirect benefits from
the EWHC investment program have an overall positive impact on key macroeconomic and welfare variables
over the medium and long term. Real GDP was assessed to increase by 1.5 percent over a medium-term
horizon and 4.2 percent over a long-term horizon. ... Infrastructure development contributed to growth in
welfare of all categories of households, although the lowest two income quintiles would gain relatively less than
other household groups. On average, rural households are to gain more than urban households."

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

There were delays in completion of some activities that led to an extension of the project closing date by about
two years. A few analytical activities were not completed by project close and deferred to a follow-up project.

The ex-post EIRR estimate of the road works (56% of the project as completed) was satisfactory (19.9%). Based
on this and the above discussion, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     62.00
 Appraisal                                                 17.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     56.00
 ICR Estimate                                              19.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)




Relevance of the objectives is rated high. There were moderate shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of
its objectives, particularly in institutional capacity building; but only minor shortcomings in its efficiency. The
overall outcome of the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Commitment and Local Capacity

There is little risk that commitment and local capacity will be eroded. The infrastructure built and highway
management, road safety, and organizational concepts and practices advanced by the project have been
well received by the GoG and its agencies. The GoG has secured financing to complete the full corridor from
Tbilisi to Kobuleti (40 km from the border with Turkey), with six major contracts being currently under
implementation; and has so far obtained financing for three out of five priority road projects to the east of
Tbilisi (ICR para 90, Annex 5). Local institutions improved their management and practices by developing
strategic policies, manpower planning, technical training, and implementing maintenance and operating
practices across the whole EWH corridor. The institutional capacity measures are expected to continue to
achieve their objectives, supported by continued TA activity from the Bank (ICR para 92). The Bank has
worked through two TA projects, (1) East-West Highway O&M, and (2) Private Sector Participation and
Sustainability Options for the East-West Highway, to assess the options available for maintaining the
highway in a sustainable manner, including the engagement of the private sector. The second TA (2018)
concluded that tolling would be a financially viable option for operating and maintaining the highway and
presented options to implement such arrangements. The GoG is reviewing the options presented. (ICR para
33).

Technology Risk

The RD has developed a strategic roadmap for deployment of ITS along the EWH (31-Jul-2017) and
analyzed possible private sector engagement in delivering ITS services on the highway (ICR para 45).
Future activities in the EWH corridor could include: (1) the implementation of ITS, and (2) the adoption of
innovative procurement of road maintenance. Both types of initiative have been advanced by this project and
related Bank work. Both areas are being supported by the GoG for development and implementation.

The risk that technological and operational innovation will not be supported is assessed as low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



Project preparation work began in FY13, leading to appraisal later in FY13 (03-Apr-2013) and utilizing 51
weeks of staff time. The project was prepared meeting all Bank requirements, including attention to the
strategic context of the project and its relevance to Government development plans. Project design
benefitted from lessons learnt under the Third East-West Highway Improvement project (TEWHIP).

Environmental, social, and fiduciary aspects were adequately assessed at preparation stages. Risks
were properly identified and mitigation measures were adequately developed during project preparation.
Extensive public consultations were held during RAP preparation (ICR para 77, PAD para 57). A
Grievance Redress Mechanism had been established under previous East-West Highway projects and
was maintained for this project. The implementation arrangements were well detailed, including the role
of the different entities (RD, and MRDI) in the supervision of different activities. The support to improve
the local construction industry relied on the engagement of the Contractors Association, yet no
assessment of the Association was included in the PAD. The institutional weakness of the Association
led to delays in starting this component and ultimately cancelling it.

Three areas of concern at entry were raised in the ICR: (1) the choice of financing instrument, (2) the
implementation capacity of the RD, and (3) the complexity of ensuring consistency between preparation
activities undertaken at different times and by different donors.

First, while using a sequence of Investment Project Financing (IPF) loans has produced satisfactory
results, the use of a programmatic approach would have enabled the Bank to engage deeper, and over
longer period, in the institutional and governance aspects in the sector. It would also offer the desired
continuity in implementing the physical infrastructure (ICR para 49).

Second, the total number of activities under each component challenged RD’s implementation capacity.
The project included measures to improve the capacities of RD. While the project was well designed by
having an integrated view of road management beyond the physical infrastructure, the list of activities
introduced became too many to be implemented in a timely manner.

Third, the use of one project to prepare feasibility studies and designs for future road investments by
other IFIs may mean detailed project designs are prepared by one donor under their preparation
framework, in advance of and in isolation from environmental impact assessments (EIAs) done by
another donor under their preparation framework.

The risk associated with complex arrangements materialized to some extent in this project when a
stakeholder complained to the Bank about a situation that arose under another IFI. The Bank team and
Georgia Country Office adequately handled the complaint advising RD on the corrective action and
including the other IFI.

A further area of concern relates to program and donor coordination. The risk of poor coordination was
assessed as low in the PAD because there is good inter-donor and donor-Government coordination and
the Bank is the only IFI assisting the government to upgrade the EWH east of the Rikoti Tunnel (PAD
page 56). However, the RD workload beyond the project segment presented a challenge.

Overall the project was well prepared. The discussion above highlights complexities in multi-staged
project delivery with multiple donors. The Bank performance in ensuring quality at entry is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was managed by three different Bank Task Team Leaders (TTLs) over its implementation.
 There was a Co-TTL based in Georgia who left the unit shortly before project close but after delivering the
 key components. The transition between TTLs was handled effectively, with each incoming TTL first
 assuming the role of co-TTL prior to taking leadership of the project. Regular supervision missions and
 technical visits, including site visits, were conducted throughout the project implementation. Team
 composition reflected the project supervision needs, including transport experts, engineers, financial, and
 procurement and safeguards specialists, both from Washington, D.C. and from the field. Mission aide
 memoires and implementation status and results reports (ISRs) were well-written, reflecting progress,
 delays, and challenges and including ratings on the project implementation objectives and implementation
 progress. The Bank supervision was proactive in raising implementation flags to RD’s management (ICR
 para 82, 85).

 The procurement workload challenges of the RD described above in Quality of Preparation had their
 corresponding challenges during implementation (ICR para 52, 55, 56). Close support from the Bank team
 helped facilitate and support the RD in addressing challenges that emerged on the procurement,
 safeguards, and technical sides. The Bank teams exercised flexibility in adjusting and modifying activities
 of the project in a manner that best served the GoG in achieving its development objective (ICR para 83).
 RD and MRDI continued to value the Bank’s role as an advisor on the strategic aspects such as
 maintenance, and institutional development.

 Five priority activities were added to Component 3 during the project. The Bank team worked closely with
 RD to review and scrutinize the quality of the corresponding feasibility and design studies. This helped
 other IFIs to trust the quality of the studies, particularly for projects that they would be financing. On the
 other hand, these studies did not benefit from detailed guidance by the Bank on documents review and
 clearance. This led to challenges in document review, delays in providing Bank clearances, and delayed
 delivery of these studies. This delayed the overall timeline for implementation of the civil works of these
 projects, which were to be financed by other IFIs.

 Based on the above, the Bank performance in supervising the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)




a. M&E Design
 The five PDO Indicators for PDO 1 were well specified with comprehensive measurement of road transport
 costs for both people and freight; and measuring the most important outcome of road safety, fatalities. Two
 indicators were "beyond project", see comment below. Relevant IRIs for PDO 1 were defined and provided
 an understanding of the achievement of the individual project components. One IRI was "beyond project".

 The PDO 2 indicator was based on the completion of a national road sector strategy. It was complemented
 by five IRIs which provided more detail on institutional strengthening, but were also based only on the
 completion of documents. As the ICR indicates, the activities under Components 2 and 3 were not as well
 represented by the IRIs and hence to PDO 2 (ICR para 57). The IRIs could have been defined with clearer,
 measurable expected results. This would have enabled better assessment of the value added by these
 components and their contribution to the sectoral development objectives (ICR para 80). The underlying
 issue is that completion of documents may not be the best measure of capacity building. The PDO2
 indicator and the five IRIs were all not linked to a specific project geography. This is appropriate given the
 overall goal of national capacity building.

 The M&E Design includes two measures or approaches perhaps described as innovative. The first
 innovation, the indicator, Increase in Asset Value of the EWH corridor, is the cumulative book value of
 recently made investments. It is not an "asset value" that takes into account depreciation or its economic
 counterpart, deterioration; nor does it take into account the economic benefit value of its usefulness
 depending on level of demand. It is an engineering spending value that, despite its name, should not be
 confused with a financial nor an economic value. It does not refer to changes in the value of adjacent land
 arising from the transport improvement. Nevertheless it can be a useful measure, as intended, of
 government and IFI commitment to the corridor as a whole. The PAD, in an Attachment to Annex 1,
 Results Framework and Monitoring, devotes one and a half pages to describing this indicator and its
 calculation.

 The second innovation is the three measures that extend beyond the geography of the project's civil works.
 These are: (1) Reduced fatality rates between Tbilisi to Senaki, (2) Increase in asset value of the EWH
 corridor, Tbilisi to Sarpi, and (3) Length of the EWH corridor with IRI greater than 6, from Tbilisi to Sarpi.
 Despite being "beyond project" and therefore beyond immediate project control, these measures are
 important because, as the PAD describes (para 20), "it will be possible to measure success in the
 development and management of the E60 corridor as a whole." Since the PDO 2 is about national capacity
 to manage the "road network", these corridor measures are appropriate.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E arrangements were clearly defined with the RD responsible for preparing progress reports. The
  indicators identified for assessing progress toward achieving the project outcome and PDO were suitable
  and easily measurable. All indicators were retained unchanged over the entire duration of the project,
  although some target dates were modified (ICR para 59).

  The RD was responsible for the collection of project’s performance indicator data and analysis of the
  results. A specific Monitoring Unit were established within RD. Progress towards the achievement of the
  final targets was monitored through regular project progress reports by RD and Bank’s ISRs. Most
  indicators were regularly updated without major issues. In early 2016, as the capacity of RD, including the

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



  Monitoring Unit, were strengthened by filling vacant positions which in turn improved the data collection
  and reporting process. Hence, the project's Monitoring and Evaluation was rated Satisfactory in the last
  ISR (ICR para 60).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E indicators were used by both RD and the Bank during supervision activities to gauge and
  assess performance and to prepare response measures to ensure the project was on track towards
  achieving its development objectives (ICR para 61).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered three safeguard policies: OP4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP4.11 Physical
   Cultural Resources, and OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.

   It was classified as environmental category A due to the complexity of the expected environmental and
   social impacts. The Borrower carried out a full-scale Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of upgrading
   EHW between Agara and Zemo Osiauri. Environmental performance was satisfactory throughout the
   project life due to experience gained by the RD in undertaking previous EWHIPs as well as good corporate
   environmental standards of the works provider and strong implementation support by the Bank team. RD’s
   inhouse institutional capacity for environmental management had a few deficiencies, such as shortage of
   dedicated core staff; and insufficient integration of environmental and social inputs into procurement,
   contract management and reporting lines. However, supplementing the environmental and social team of
   the RD with external individual consultants and using services of a technical supervision company allowed
   the RD to minimize the existing gaps (ICR para 63).

   One environmental challenge concerned gaps in the national regulatory framework for the extraction of
   construction materials which meant that the RD experienced difficulty in enforcing mitigation measures
   beyond the scope of the national framework despite these measures being prescribed by the environmental
   management plan of the EIA.

   Social safeguards

   The Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered because the construction from Agara to
   Zemo Osiauri required land acquisition, causing both physical and economic displacement. Social
   safeguard compliance was mainly rated as satisfactory and social impact and risk related to land acquisition
   and resettlement was assessed as moderate. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed in
   February 2012 and the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) in March 2013. The Project required the acquisition




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



  of 110 ha (571 parcels) of which 60% was state land and 40% private land. The resettlement process was
  completed in February 2018 (ICR para 67).

  A total of 1,162 persons in 272 households were affected. Five households were resettled; four businesses
  stopped operation; one construction material processing plant and 20 reservoirs were relocated (within the
  existing area of the company); and 20 ancillary and 45 minor structures were impacted. No complaints
  related to land acquisition and resettlement were reported. However, some 50 complaints related to indirect
  negative impact caused by highway civil works were filed by the residents of the Agarebi village. These
  were mainly verbal complaints registered by both the RD and the contractor. The Agarebi village case took
  a long time to be resolved and the complaint was extensively covered and reported in the missions' Aide
  Memoires starting in May 2017. Several public consultation meetings were held with affected locals and
  local officials to agree on appropriate corrective and compensation measures to resolve the complaints (ICR
  para 68).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM)

  FM performance under the Project was reported to be satisfactory throughout the project implementation.
  All project related interim unaudited project financial statements were acceptable and submitted on time.
  Annual audited project financial statements were acceptable and submitted on time. The audit of project
  financial statements did not reveal major weaknesses and/or errors. Throughout the project
  implementation, the implementing agency maintained adequate financial management arrangements
  including staffing, project planning and budgeting, accounting, funds flow, reporting, internal controls and
  external audits (ICR para 73). The TRRC assisted the RD in implementation by processing disbursement,
  financial auditing and related activities.

  Procurement

  The overall procurement risk was moderate throughout the life of the project and procurement was
  completed without major issues. Procurement of goods, works, non-consulting services, and consultants
  was carried out in accordance with relevant Bank Guidelines and the Loan Agreement.

  Component 2c (Construction Industry Review Update) was cancelled by the Borrower due to: i) internal
  challenges with the Contractors Association, which was a key stakeholder in the activity; and ii) a study
  with similar objectives examining the industry was delivered under another project (Secondary & Local
  Roads Project-II) as a priority activity to enable introduction of Output-&-Performance-Based-Road-
  Contracts (ICR para 24).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The key civil works contract involved a local contractor from Georgia (the Blacksea Group) who was
  engaged as a subcontractor to the key contractor (COPRI). The engagement of the local contractor (one of
  the largest in Georgia) presented an opportunity for the local construction industry to develop expertise and

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



   experience in developing major highways. This will, in the long run, together with other factors, contribute
   to building the resilience and the competitiveness of the local firms in the field of Highway construction.
   This should assist in generating more sustainable jobs in construction and produce incremental reductions
   in highway construction costs (ICR para 46).



d. Other
   Gender

   The project design did not have a distinct activity targeted at improving gender mainstreaming, however the
   updating of the road sector strategy was intended to include analysis of social and gender dimensions. The
   RD and the Bank agreed to remove this analysis because the sector strategy was focused at high level,
   institutional and maintenance arrangements and sector financing; and would not provide the most suitable
   entry point into the discussion of social and gender aspects. Instead this would be incorporated into other
   ongoing projects such as the Secondary Roads Asset Management project,

   The ICR does not indicate if any mention of social and gender considerations was made in the road sector
   strategy, such as: a high-level introduction to the scale and importance of the issues, guidance on how
   these issues might figure in more detailed studies or projects, or initiating data collection activities to support
   this analysis in the future.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory    Modest Efficacy of PDO 2.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The lessons are drawn with some adaptation of language.

1. The overlap of design and planning from one section of road to another, and from one
project to another, can speed implementation of a whole strategic road corridor but comes at
a cost. Such approach under this project required an extraordinary effort, EIA coordination, multi-
donor coordination, and multi-project phasing. The adoption of a programmatic approach could have
deepened the level of the Bank’s engagement. This is particularly the case with governance
interventions such as road safety and institutional development, where many stakeholders are
involved, and interventions are required over a long period of time. The programmatic approach


                                                                                                       Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



would also be suitable for the phased approach followed in developing the highway (earlier phases
include construction of specific sections, while preparing studies for the subsequent sections).

2. Capacity assessment needs to take into account sector-level, not just immediate project
considerations. The risk of poor program and donor coordination causing a problem for the RD was
assessed as low under this project because the Bank was the only IFI assisting the government in
the road segment of this project and because there is a good inter-donor and donor-government
coordination. However, the long list of activities that needed to be procured and managed in the
country as a whole, and involving other donors (EIB, ADB, AIIB), led to the RD's capacity being
stretched and affected the timeliness of delivering the project.

3. A wide range of components and responsible government agencies can reduce the level of
diligence at preparation. For example, the readiness of the Contractors Association to support
delivery was not assessed as adequately as aspects related to the larger components. The large
number of activities placed pressure on RD’s teams, particularly when several new projects were
being prepared. Projects should be prepared with streamlined implementation arrangements in mind
and should be designed with more attention to executing agencies’ capacities, not only to implement
the subject project, but also the pipeline of projects that will be prepared and implemented in
parallel. The study on assessing the capacity of RD should have taken place during project
implementation.

4. In M&E design, the outcome indicator “increase in asset value of a road corridor” may not
convey meaningful information. It is the cumulative book value of recently made investments. It is
not a financial "asset value" nor a measure of economic benefit. It does not measure the change in
the value of adjacent land arising from the transport improvement. If it is to be useful as a measure
of government and IFI commitment to the corridor as a whole, it should be re-defined in more formal
financial terms or economic terms, or as the economic benefit of higher land value.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written; it provided a good summary of the project and its implementation.

It was difficult to get a good understanding of the geography of the project. At the overall country level the
concept of the east-west highway was clear and a map of the country was provided. However the geography of
specific road sections, interchanges, intersections, bypasses; either under construction, being maintained, or
being studied was difficult to sort out. There seemed to be inconsistent naming, or perhaps two different names
for locations that were essentially the same place. More than half the place names or locations used in the
report were not identified on the map. An expanded local map, or diagram with all place names, to show the
project geography would have been helpful.



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EAST-WEST HIGHWAY 4 (P130413)



Estimated and actual costs should have been provided for the individual sub-components of Component 3.

There were various changes and additions to the advisory work and studies undertaken as part of the
project. It would have been useful if Annex 5, Supporting Information, could have provided a complete list of all
studies, reports, assessments, outputs prepared and the estimated and actual costs of each.

In Efficiency, the ICR did not discuss aspects of design and implementation that either contributed to or
reduced efficiency, including delays in implementation of key activities, procurement issues, cost overruns, etc.

The lessons were presented in the form of findings specific to the project, rather than for general application to
similar operations in the sector.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 22
