     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022524

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P122124                                    NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52200,IDA-58480                        31-Oct-2017                                       230,176,709.09

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2013                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            243,162,126.07                                             0.00

 Actual                                        230,176,709.09                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Nigeria State Education Program Investment Project as set
   out in Schedule 1 of the Financing Agreement and page 11 of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) was to
   support: (a) need-based teacher deployment; (b) school-level management and accountability; and (c)
   measurement of student learning in Participating States.

   The PDO was revised in June 2017 during Additional Financing, AF (see “Significant Changes” below). The
   revision emphasized that the reforms aimed at strengthening the education system, while at the same time

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



   expanding geographic coverage from the original three states to include five additional states. The revised
   PDO read as follows: the PDO was to strengthen the educational system by supporting: (a) need-based
   teacher deployment; (b) school-level management and accountability; and (c) measurement of student
   learning in the Participating States.

   While the project was focused on strengthening the education system, notably by improving teaching and
   learning, it stopped short of setting targets for learning outcomes or measuring the impact of interventions on
   learning; rather, the project’s objectives were expressed in terms of intermediate development outcomes. For
   purposes of this review, the analysis will be based on those intermediate outcomes:

   (a) need-based teacher deployment;

   (b) school-level management and accountability; and

   (c) measurement of student learning.

   The formulation of the project objectives remained essentially the same for the AF as for the original project,
   albeit with expanded geographic coverage and an increase in commitment, so in this case the revision of the
   PDO does not warrant a split rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-May-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The original project covered three States (Nigeria has 43 states) that had been selected based on strong
   government commitment at the sub-national level, strong fiduciary capability, complementarity with other
   donors (i.e. gap-filling while avoiding duplication), and the States' willingness to use results-based
   approaches (see Component 1). The project had two components:



   Component 1: Results-based Support to Education Sector Reform Program (estimated cost at
   appraisal US$125 million; actual cost US$104.50 million). The component was to apply performance-based
   approaches with strong in-built monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to improve learning outcomes in schools in
   participating States. It was to do so by emphasizing the use of better information flows to trigger
   accountability supported by decentralized school-level decision-making; and provision of teachers through
   assigned deployment or recruitment through incentives. For this, the component used a results-based

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



financing modality (RBF) with disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) to finance participating States’ eligible
expenditure programs focusing on the achievement of tangible and measurable results over the project
period. DLI-linked areas of focus included: improving teacher effectiveness through better deployment of
teachers based on need; regular measurement of student achievement; stronger school management and
accountability through effective school-based management committees (SBMCs); and public-private
partnerships to raise relevance of technical training. According to the PAD (p. 14), the choice of these areas
of focus responded to key constraints in each of the States’ education systems, confirmed by a rigorous
benchmarking system (SABER) developed by the Bank to strengthen performance in education.

The DLIs were as follows:

DLI 1 – improving teacher availability in rural areas to address the imbalance in the supply of teachers
in rural and hard-to-staff schools through improved deployment policies and teacher incentives (mandatory
postings; bonus programs).

DLI 2 – improving teacher availability in core subjects through a better matching of teacher skills with
student needs, including addressing the lack of teachers in core subjects – English, Mathematics, Science -
- again through improved deployment policies and teacher incentives.

DLI 3 – improving measurement of learning and achievement at primary and secondary levels,
focusing on introducing a regular system for collecting standardized information on student learning
outcomes and effectively reporting on results to support improved teaching and learning.

DLI 4 – stimulating partnerships and program accreditation for relevance in technical and vocational
schools to improve the quality of teaching, research, and skills development in senior secondary technical
schools, and increasing their relevance for the job market. Measurable outputs were to include the number
of partnerships established, improvements in course accreditation, and capacity building in technical and
vocational training.

DLI 5 – strengthening school-based management committees’ participation and capacity to influence
schools’ effectiveness, management, and accountability through grants to primary and secondary schools
based on their school improvement plans (SIPs).



 Component 2: Technical assistance (TA) (estimated cost at appraisal US$25 million; AF US$19.7
million; actual cost US$40.25 million). The component was to finance advisory, technical, and capacity-
building support to: (i) the federal level for overall project coordination and to help ensure sustainability of
successful activities; and (ii) the State level to achieve the DLIs and strengthen related capacity. TA under
the component focused on the following four areas: educational development; developing budget
frameworks; monitoring and evaluation; and strengthening fiduciary processes.



Significant Changes During Implementation

Several changes were made to the project during implementation, mainly reflecting the Boko Haram
insurgency, but also to clarify project aims. None of the changes materially affected the educational


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



priorities (the theory of change) that were being pursued under the original project, i.e. supporting the
priorities of participating States in improving educational access, quality, and efficiency.

Additional Financing. AF totaling US$100 million was approved by the Executive Directors in June 2017
to support the government’s emergency program for the North East region that was being affected by the
Boko Haram insurgency. Since the project already was operating in some North Eastern states, it was
reasonable to scale up the project rather than introducing a separate project, especially in consideration of
the relative urgency of stabilizing the education system in the threatened areas. The Bank was able to
process the AF under OOP10.00 paragraph 12, referring to projects in situations of urgent need of
assistance. Project coverage – originally consisting of three States with a population of 15.2 million –
expanded to cover an additional six States and 23.4 million people. (Nigeria’s total population is 205 million
people.)

The PDO was marginally revised with the introduction of the AF (see Section 2a), and two outcome
indicators were added to measure the impact of the project in the new areas.

Components revised with the introduction of AF. Component 2, TA, was revised, and a new
Component 3 was introduced:

Revised component 2 (Technical Assistance): (original financing US$25 million; AF US$19.7 million; total
planned US$44.7 million; actual cost US$44.7 million). The component was scaled up to accommodate the
new States, and three TA sub-components were defined:

Sub-component 2.1 (a): TA – improving education quality in the three original States, as well as
strengthening their institutional capacity to implement DLIs;

Sub-component 2.1 (b): TA to the North-East States (introduced under AF) for institutional capacity building
in terms of teacher management and deployment, school-level management, and psycho-social and
pedagogical training for teachers;

Sub-component 2.2: TA to the Federal level for overall project coordination and for the establishment of an
enabling environment in line with national policies.



Component 3: Improving access to quality education and learning environment in the North East
States (AF US$80.3 million; actual cost US$67.05 million). While similar to the original Component 1, the
results-based approach was dropped from this component with the urgency of intervening in the North East
due to the insurgency. Likewise, the “quality” focus was somewhat different from that envisaged under
Component 1. The emphasis shifted to addressing damage from the insurgency, i.e. the physical
rehabilitation of schools and improving access to the schools.

The new Component 3 had two sub-components:

Sub-component 3.1: Teacher incentive grants through salary top-ups after psycho-social and pedagogical
training (to counteract the effects of the insurgency on teachers and school children).




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



   Sub-component 3.2: School grants to school management committees that produced approved SIPs,
   including physical rehabilitation plans.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. At appraisal, total project cost was estimated at US$150 million. Actual project cost at closing
   was US$211 million. The totals express spending on the original project and AF. The discrepancy between
   allocations reflects changes in the US$/Naira exchange rate and an unspent amount of US$6.8 million due
   to disturbances from the insurgency.

   Financing. The project was financed by a US$150 million IDA Credit and a US$100 million Additional IDA
   Credit. A total of US$169.70 million and US$67.05 million, respectively, were disbursed. Remaining funds
   were cancelled, as they could not be used in the insurgency-affected areas.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 26, 2013 and became effective on August 27, 2013. AF was
   approved on June 12, 2017, and the closing date was extended to October 31, 2019. Three Level II
   restructurings were noted. A first one in September 2018 involved the reallocation of funds from preparation
   of the new Component 3 to the project support unit for project coordination; a second one in October
   2019 extended the closing date for the project to June 30, 2020 to allow insurgency-affected States to
   complete one more school year; and a third one allowed for cancellation of US$6.8 million due to limited
   access in one participating State. The project closed on June 30, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project (in its original and revised version) addressed key challenges in the education system, notably
the persistence of poor learning outcomes driven by limited availability of qualified teachers, affecting
access and quality of learning especially in rural areas and in core subjects, and weak governance and
management capacity. In doing so, it continued the Bank's engagement in the education sector, this time
focusing on the North East where the Boko Haram insurgency makes the provision of quality basic
education particularly challenging. The project drew on that longer-term reform effort and aligned
with findings of the Bank’s 2020 Systematic Country Diagnosis (SCD) and the current Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY21-25, which draws on the SCD. The CPF explicitly underlines the
importance of supporting increased access to quality basic education; empowering girls and women; and
promoting youth employment and skills. The project supported this by providing better learning tools (well-
trained teachers and better governance), but it stops short of examining the implications of these
interventions on beneficiaries, given the challenging environment (the insurgency). The project also served
as a building block for the Bank’s ongoing Partnership for Education project, notably with regard to
strengthening governance and public sector management, and lessons learned from coordinating federal-
and State-level actions and the use of DLIs are being drawn on for other Bank projects to come on stream.

The AF fit into the above framework. It drew on the teacher deployment function in the original project to
deploy teachers to insurgency-affected areas, and it formed part of a coordinated multi-sector package of
support to the North East and the World Bank’s North East Emergency Transition and Stabilization Program

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



               in support of the government’s efforts to restore stability and create economic opportunities for the most
               vulnerable. Other projects include five human development operations and an agriculture operation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Need-based teacher deployment

                             Rationale
                             Needs-based teacher deployment was to be achieved by improving the availability of qualified teachers in
                             conflict and displacement-affected project states, where in many areas teachers as well as students risked
                             being subject to violence (DLI 1 and DLI 2). This involved the mandatory deployment of teachers, as well as
                             the application of incentives, including bonus programs, and conditioning incentives on pedagogical training
                             and training in psycho-social skills to better cope in their postings.



                             Outputs/Outcomes

                             Success under the original project was measured in terms of the percentage of planned teachers who were
                             actually deployed. This was a straightforward and practical indicator that was measurable, monitorable, and
                             understandable, and it was pertinent to the stated objective. Teachers deployed by core subjects and to rural
                             areas exceeded planned levels (as determined in the education management information system (MIS) and
                             by local education authorities) in two of the three original States. The third, insurgency-ridden Bauchi State,
                             fell short on deployment to rural areas. In other insurgency-affected areas introduced under the AF, teacher
                             deployment targets were achieved or exceeded in four States and not achieved in one case, Adamawa (in
                             addition to the original Bauchi). No baselines (pools of potential teachers) had been determined in AF States,
                             and no distinction was made between need on core subjects and need in rural areas. The focus was on
                             getting trained teachers into the field and appropriately equipped with pedagogical and socio-psychological
                             skills. In general terms, from a deployment angle, project interventions appear to have been relatively
                             successful overall, with teacher deployment exceeding targets in both original and AF States, and while it is
                             not obvious by which means targets were achieved – through deployment or incentives, or both – in core
                             subjects, total deployment reached 90 percent, surpassing a target of 80 percent of pre-project levels; and in
                             rural areas total deployment reached 108 percent, surpassing a target of 81 percent of pre-project levels.

                             Teachers deployed by core subjects:

                                        Anambra, original target 50%, revised target 90%, achievement 117%

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)




      Bauchi, original/revised target 70%, achievement 81.4%
      Ekiti, original target 86%, revised target 90%, achievement 104%

Teachers deployed to rural areas:

      Anambra, original target 60%, revised target 90%, achievement 167%
      Bauchi, original target 60%, revised target 70%, achievement 60%
      Ekiti, original target 70%, revised target 95%, achievement 136%

Teachers deployed in insurgency-affected areas (under the AF):

        Adamawa: target 9,450, achievement 9,050
        Bauchi: target 9,000, achievement 7,724
        Borno: target 16,070, achievement 25,000
        Gombe: target 4,500, achievement 9,739
        Taraba: target 5,400, achievement 5,400
        Yobe: target 2,370, achievement 5,090



The ICR summarized a set of plausible factors that may have influenced teacher availability: government
engagement in performance management, extra teacher training, and better equipped schools (the latter is
also believed to have promoted student retention and re-engagement, lowering absenteeism).

Although beyond the scope of the PDO, the ICR (p. 16) speculated about higher-level improvements in
learning outcomes that may have resulted from the needs-based teacher deployment specified in the
objective. It made the reasonable argument that greater access to skilled teachers and to ones specialized in
core subjects may have improved the learning experience of children and raised morale among teachers; it is
not, however, obvious how actual learning progressed. Financial incentives (top-ups to salaries) and
improvements in school system management, introduced under PDO 2, are likely to have had a positive
impact on the teaching and learning environment, in attracting teachers and maintaining teachers and
students in school.

Achievement of this objective is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improved school-level management and accountability

Rationale


                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



The objective was to be achieved by: (i) improving the quality of secondary technical schools by raising the
relevance of their programs through public-private partnerships and program accreditation (DLI 4); and (ii)
strengthening school-level management at primary and secondary levels (DLI 5). Such improvements were
expected to result in an increase in the number of schools meeting agreed service standards, as well as an
increase in the number of enrolled students. In AF, the bulk of funds for school-level management and
accountability were focused on physical rehabilitation of schools that had been damaged as a result of the
conflict.



Outputs/Outcomes

Key indicators included the total number of beneficiaries (annual estimates for students and teachers in the
catchment area), enrollments in technical schools, schools meeting service standards, and schools receiving
grants against improvement plans proposed by local school boards. All were relevant in measuring results
from the project interventions.

      The overall number of direct project beneficiaries, 2.4 million, fell almost 30 percent short of the target
       of 3.3 million; only two States met or exceeded the target.
      The target for students enrolled in technical and vocational schools was exceeded overall but was not
       achieved in two individual cases (Ekiti, Anambra). Of students enrolled in technical and vocational
       schools, the number of girls increased by 27 percent from the baseline, while the number of boys
       remained flat. The share of girls in the system increased from 24 percent at the baseline to 30
       percent.
      The target for schools receiving grants against improved plans (concerning only AF) was exceeded by
       some 75 percent.
      None of the three original States achieved the target for schools meeting agreed service
       standards. According to the ICR, measurement of this indicator was modelled on a survey that had
       been completed but was not being repeated in Nigeria, and its monitoring by the project was stopped.

Results partly reflect the likely influence of more effective SBMCs and a better educational environment
resulting from training provided to SBMCs under the project. Additional information provided by the task team
in the Region comments to the ICR Review draft indicates that such training has resulted in a gradual
increase in the quality of SIPs and in their implementation. Surveys indicate a steady rise in SBMCs that
produce quality SIPs that in turn plausibly influence service standards and enrollments.

While the measurable outcome indicators in most cases showed targets as being only partly achieved, the
strengthened SBMCs are likely to constitute a platform of school-level management and accountability that
can serve as a springboard towards better school performance in the future. On that basis, the project
plausibly contributed substantially toward achievement of this objective.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)




                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            Measurement of student learning

                            Rationale
                            The objective was to be achieved by introducing standardized, state-level testing (DLI 3) to collect
                            standardized information on student learning outcomes, helping to determine what, if any, efforts would be
                            needed to improve student performance.



                            Outputs/Outcomes

                            The PDO-level indicator – availability of a system for learning assessment at the State level – was achieved
                            in all three States (in Bauchi English and Mathematics for Primary 5, and in the other two in English and
                            Mathematics for Senior Secondary 2).

                            The ICR (p. 19) rated achievement of this objective substantial instead of high, pointing to the use of an un-
                            nuanced “yes/no” indicator, rather than a more complex one that might offer further guidance. This ICRR
                            review agrees with this assessment, noting that a more in-depth assessment might have been more in line
                            with the spirit of the project’s intentions of providing insights into the teaching, learning and school
                            management process.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project included three objectives - all three were rated substantial. The first objective included PDO
                            indicators that all were valid ones measuring changes in need-based teacher deployment. The second
                            objective in large part reflected the results of improved SBMCs, albeit that quantitative results in
                            some instances fell short of targets. The single target for the third objective was met, although a more in-
                            depth analysis would have been useful.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



The ICR undertook a benefit-cost analysis (BCA), estimating benefits generated by each component of the
project on an incremental basis, and the project's economic feasibility was determined based on calculation of
the net present value (NPV) as well as the internal rate of return (IRR). As no BCA was conducted at appraisal,
the ICR applied assumptions used for similar projects in Nigeria as comparators. Aggregating benefits across
project beneficiaries and considering direct project costs and project management costs, the NPV of the project
was estimated at US$ 12,557,702, and the IRR was 19.6 per cent, comparable to results for such analyses in
other similar countries. Assumptions and methodology for the calculations appear reasonable.

Factors that favorably influenced implementation efficiency: (i) the government’s strong commitment; (ii) the use
by the project of local structures, including by drawing on a significant TA component; (iii) the identification of
key risks and mitigation measures; and (iv) a consultative approach to both clients and donors. Delays in
implementation were driven by the need to constantly reassess project activities in context of the Boko Haram
insurgency; a loss of momentum in setting up DLI-related verification for disbursements and in converting
project accounts to a Treasury Single Account (see Section 14 on Financial Management); and general
elections. A change in project scope – the introduction of AF – also contributed to slowing down the project as
originally envisaged. Altogether, project closing was extended by 32 months.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated substantial: they were relevant to country conditions and to government and
Bank strategy, noting however, that objectives were pitched at a relatively modest level, in part because of the
restlessness in the project States. Achievement of the three objectives was rated substantial, with most targets
being achieved or exceeded. Efficiency was rated substantial. On this basis, the project is considered to have
had minor shortcomings, and outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

The federal government as well as participating State governments appear committed to sustaining the
institutions that were put into place under the project, especially the school-based management
mechanisms, including by institutionalizing their school-based funding. Still, building sustainable levels of
teaching quality can take time and will require continuing efforts. Here, the Bank’s continued presence in the
education sector should alleviate concerns. The country program points to continued education sector
engagement; already, two projects are underway – AGILE Project (P170664) and Edo Basic Education
Sector and Skills Transformation Operation (P169921); and the ICR (p. 34) drew attention to the recent CPF
and its support for further increasing access to and quality of basic education.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, being linked to higher-order objectives of achieving better learning
  outcomes through improvements in such aspects as access, quality, and efficiency that were basic tenets
  of Nigerian development planning in education, and consistent with the Bank’s CPS that also flagged
  these three aspects. At the same time, project design was mindful of the uncertainties surrounding life in
  North East Nigeria, and project objectives were modestly set, but still with an aim to move the education
  agenda forward. That involved focusing on teacher availability, pedagogy and socio-psychological
  training for teachers, and governance, which together provided a platform for better learning but did not
  set targets for learning outcomes. The project concentrated on States in the North East, giving it a strong
  poverty focus, and with the subsequent introduction of the AF it also came to support areas that were
  falling behind as a result of the Boko Haram insurgency. In pursuing equity, gender was introduced, as
  the project sought to correct gender imbalances among teachers and inclusion of women in school
  committees. (However, among indicators only one – students enrolled in technical and vocational schools
  – made a gender distinction.) The results-based design of the project gave it a coherent results
  framework, focusing on institutional changes as sources of sought-after quality improvement. At the same
  time, project design complemented other more traditional community-level Bank-financed projects
  supporting schools and health facilities (P090644, P126964, and a State Health Investment Project,
  P120798). The pre-project risk assessment focused on essential issues in the Nigerian environment, and
  mitigating measures proved adequate (within the framework that the Bank team could influence). M&E
  indicators were robust, albeit output-oriented. Design was underpinned by extensive data analysis
  (including through the Bank’s SABER initiative for examining education systems) and lessons learned
  from earlier engagements in Nigeria and further afield. In addition, the project drew on participating
  States’ own education sector plans in a consultative and participatory approach. Project preparation was
  designed to complement the work of other donors, adding a more systemic approach to their more child-
  and teacher-centered interventions.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)




b. Quality of supervision
 Project supervision was facilitated by the government’s commitment to the project and by the choice to use
 existing institutional structures in implementation, which strengthened client ownership. This may have
 been especially useful when facing the challenges of Boko Haram and in furthering implementation, as the
 DLI procedures (and especially the hiring of a firm for verification of DLIs) took longer than initially
 expected. Likewise, fiduciary challenges would delay the AF. On these, and other lesser implementation
 issues, the project was able to benefit from consistent Bank team support and active follow-up on issues in
 terms of technical support and capacity building. Despite changes in TTLs and the project team over the
 life of the project, consistency in approach appears to have been maintained and adjustments to the project
 from security concerns and field-level operational challenges handled. Supervision inputs appear to have
 been adequate, and performance reporting was straightforward. Technical support from the Bank was an
 important element for project implementation, and here the project team was effective (ICR, p. 27).




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s M&E framework was based on the government’s established education monitoring system,
 including some adjustments to allow selected outputs to be measured during implementation. Fully
 engaging local government authorities was a strong point of the design, which tended to reinforce lessons,
 even under the uncertainties created by the Boko Haram insurgency. Objectives were clearly set out,
 and indicators focused on institutional changes (for instance public-private partnerships, service standards,
 learning assessments) as sources of increased access and improved quality of the included school
 systems. Indicators were measurable and included baseline and quantitative targets where relevant. While
 output-oriented ones, they allowed monitoring of the kind of institutional reforms being sought.
 Achievement of the third objective could have been monitored by more complex, nuanced indicators in
 additional to the simple yes/no indicator that was adopted.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was the responsibility of the State Ministries of Education, and data collection was a routine function
  of their operations. This ensured that data collection would be (and was) carried out, and indicators
  included in the results framework were measured and reported. Use of established systems strengthened
  the likelihood that M&E functions and processes, including adjustments, were to continue after project

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



  closing. Indicators would prove to be robust, although as noted above, their emphasis was more on
  measuring outputs than outcomes. Still, implementation of M&E suffered from some delays in third party
  verification of DLIs, in part due to the importance given to the function, and in part due to the bureaucratic
  process required in establishing a Treasury Account for channeling project funds, resulting in additional
  consultant support being drawn into the process. In part, national elections also interfered. For the AF,
  separate consultants were recruited to verify progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was utilized by the project team, the federal government, and education partners at the
  sub-national level and in the donor community to inform themselves about the project and how it was
  contributing to the overall education sector plan. Most indicators were consistently tracked, and
  supervision missions and stakeholder meetings received timely updates on how the project was
  achieving its objectives. This permitted course corrections to be made which, according to the ICR, were
  minor, albeit contributing to more reliable data. The project also contributed to analytical work, including
  student learning assessments, as well as several studies of the project’s impact on targeted
  beneficiaries. To the extent that such studies were completed during the project, or available to the ICR
  team, the information might have supported a more robust consideration of project outcomes than that
  presented in the ICR.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B and triggered the Environmental Assessment
   OP/BP 4.01 safeguard policy. Activities that triggered the policy were related to Component 1, in which
   grants were to be provided to education services, including for school maintenance and repairs. In
   response, the project developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). These
   safeguards classifications were retained over the life of the project. To ensure safeguard compliance in line
   with the project’s ESMF, the project required that site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans
   (ESMPs) be prepared and disclosed in-country and subsequently at the World Bank InfoShop before the
   commencement of any minor rehabilitation works. This was completed as planned. Further, the task team
   recommended that each State prepare a monitoring plan on compliance with environmental and social
   safeguards guidelines in the ESMF. Safeguards compliance was rated as Satisfactory throughout the
   entirety of the project’s lifespan. The project financed some minor rehabilitation and maintenance of schools
   in participating States. All physical works were completed by the project’s closing date of June 30, 2020.
   The safeguards rating at project closing thus stands as Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). Budgeted expenditure programs and actual expenditure were captured in a
  credible and timely manner including through tracking and recording. The aggregated disbursements and
  Statements of Expenditures were promptly submitted to the Bank for review and reimbursement. Account
  records were adequate, with timely preparation of accurate financial reports. Overall, funds flows,
  reporting, and accounting system(s) were deemed sound, and there were no major audit observations.
  Nevertheless, some challenges regarding FM were encountered, specifically, delayed submission of the
  audit report for 2016 and the delayed account opening and activation under the AF; other minor challenges
  were related to some delays in addressing unretired balances and audited reports submission.
  Recognizing the need for further capacity building, in July 2016, core personnel of State units participated
  in a refresher training in procurement, FM, and disbursements. Other fiduciary clinics were also provided
  throughout project implementation.



  Procurement. Procurement was rated satisfactory throughout the life of the project. Procurement activities
  focused on the provision of TA according to World Bank procurement guidelines. To accelerate
  implementation, client teams had technical discussions with the Bank team, focusing on implementation
  start-up activities. Identified procurement staff also benefited from other appropriate training and capacity
  building programs. For instance, the World Bank Fiduciary team provided fiduciary clinics, and other
  presentations on procurement, financial management, and safeguards were given by World Bank
  specialists throughout project implementation. Generally, there were no major issues on procurement.
  Internal controls, record keeping, and implementation of the project were in accordance with the PAD.
  There were some delays related to the selection process and delayed deployment of a newly selected
  independent verification firm to undertake DLI validation. This was also negatively affected by the
  introduction of a Treasury Single Account, as the project's account at the level of the Federal Ministry of
  Education took a while to get activated by the Central Bank. Nevertheless, necessary action was taken to
  address issues as they came up, and as a result, at the close of the project, procurement was rated
  Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
  Gender. The project focused on promoting equity, including by setting goals to close the gender gap
  through correcting gender imbalances among teachers; identifying out-of-school children, including gender
  considerations, and considering strategies to get girls back into school. It sought to ensure that women were
  represented in school management committees and thereby have opportunities to engage in decision
  making at the community level. At the time of the project, Baluchi State was implementing a policy of
  improving gender parity imbalances by 2018 through a set of measures aimed at: (i) increasing the number

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



   of female graduates at its colleges of education from 632 in 2012 to an expected 720 in 2013 and 900 by
   2016; (ii) providing more space for girls in secondary schools; (iii) replacing all retiring/exiting teachers by
   female teachers; and (iv) providing incentives to attract and retain girls in schools, as well as providing
   conditional cash transfers focusing on female students. In response, the project provided TA to support
   Bauchi State's plan to attract, recruit, and retain female teachers to improve the gender balance among the
   teacher force.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG draws several lessons from the ICR:

Output-type objectives may be stronger when direct links are established to higher level
outcomes. A major objective for the Nigerian education system is providing access to quality basic
education. The project supported this by providing better learning tools: teachers and the school
environment. However, it stopped short of examining the implications of project interventions on the
teaching-learning process.

Building formal relationships between the school system and the community can revive and
mobilize both in the face of adversity. The project advocated for community (and increased
female) participation in school committees, and this active engagement on a broad front was
intended to re-engage teachers and students in the schools, increase a sense of security in exposed
communities, and lead to better monitoring of the school community.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG State Edu. Program Inv. Project (P122124)



The ICR is extensive at 36 pages (83 pages with Annexes) and partly because of that, and also because it is
well-written, it mostly offers a robust evidence base to support its ratings. That said, the discussion of efficacy
and in particular the results orientation could have been stronger, and here shortcomings - concerning both
objectives and indicators - are to be found on the side of the project team. Other parts are more satisfying – in
particular those on Efficiency and M&E, as well as the overall impressions one can draw from the text on
Relevance and Bank performance.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 16
