     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022494

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P123994                                    Second Power Transmission Development

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82800                                 31-Dec-2018                                         105,364,546.29

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Jul-2013                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           325,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            105,364,546.29                                                0.00

 Actual                                        105,364,546.29                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Ramachandra Jammi            Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p.6) dated August 28, 2013 and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   p.4), the original project objective was “to meet growing electricity demand and increase access to electricity
   in the project area through strengthening and expanding the capacity of the power transmission networks in
   the project area in a sustainable manner.” The project area included a total of 27 provinces in East Indonesia
   (Kalimantan, South Sulawesi, Central Sulawesi, and Southeast Sulawesi), Java-Bali, and West Indonesia
   (Sumatra).


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



The project objective was revised in May 2019, and the objective “to increase access to electricity” was
deleted. According to the World Bank (the Bank) letter dated April 15, 2019 amending the Loan Agreement,
the revised project objective was “to meet growing electricity demand in the project area through
strengthening and expanding the capacity of the power transmission networks in the project area in a
sustainable manner.”

Reasons for not undertaking a split-rating

Despite the revisions of the project objective and key associated outcome targets, this review will not
undertake a split rating because of the following reasons:

    1. The project did not finance any activity that would lead to an increase in access to electricity. As
       explained in the Components section below, the project activities consisted of only the expansion,
       rehabilitation, and construction of substations to address the bottlenecks in the transmission network.
       At appraisal, the increase in access to electricity was interpreted as a higher objective that could be
       achieved as improved transmission substations would increase the PLN’s grid capacity to establish
       new connections. Since the project did not directly support the achievement of the project objective to
       increase access to electricity, which was interpreted as a higher objective, this review will not assess
       the achievement of this objective. A rating is not applicable for this objective.
    2. At the first and second restructurings, the project scope was reduced along with the cancellation of
       project funds. This led to a downward revision on the target values of some of the key associated
       indicators. The reductions in target values (see the Restructurings entry below in this section) were
       commensurate with the cancelled loan amount and the decrease in project scope. This supports a
       decision not to undertake a split rating and to assess the project’s achievement based on the revised
       scope.

In light of the reasons given above, this review will assess the achievement of the following objective without
applying a split rating:

Objective: to meet growing electricity demand in the project area through strengthening and expanding the
capacity of the power transmission networks in the project area in a sustainable manner.

Note on the Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project (IPTD1 - P117323) and the Indonesia
Second Power Transmission Development Project (IPTD2 - P123994)

The IPTD1 was approved in July 2010. The IPTD2, the subject of this review, was a continuation of the IPTD1
and approved in July 2013. Upon the request of the project implementing agency, i.e., PT Perusahaan Listrik
Negara (PLN – Indonesia’s state-owned power company), the IPTD2 was designed as a separate project,
rather than an additional financing under the IPTD 1 (ICR, footnote 6, p.7). The IPTD2 closed in December
2019, three months after the IPTD1 closed. Both projects aimed at expanding the transmission substation
capacity to meet growing electricity demand in their respective project areas. Because of the similarities
between the two projects, this review will borrow from the ICR Review of IPTD1, which was disclosed on the
Independent Evaluation Group’s website on December 23, 2020
(https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/201911608755401615/pdf/Indonesia-Indonesia-Power-
Transmission-Development.pdf)




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  10-Apr-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project consisted of one component that was to support the following substation investments to improve
   the transmission network in the project area. (At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$346.43
   million including physical and price contingencies, taxes, interest during construction and front-end fee. At
   the second restructuring, the estimated project cost was revised to US$159.0 million because of the
   cancellation of some of the substation projects. The actual cost at project closing was US$124.6 million.)

        1. Extension and rehabilitation of selected existing 150/20 kV and 70/20 kV substations in the project
           area, including the addition of new transformers and equipment, and/or replacement of existing
           transformers with new ones and associated equipment with higher capacity.
        2. Construction of new 150/20 kV substations in the project area, including the installation of
           transformers and associated equipment.

   The project was to be implemented in two phases. In the first phase, the project was to finance the
   expansion and rehabilitation of 37 substations (Group 1) that were appraised and ready for implementation
   (PAD, pp.15 and 23). In the second phase, the PLN was to prepare a list of 71 substations, including 27
   new substations, and the project was to finance these sub-projects upon being appraised by the Bank
   against a set of eligibility criteria (PAD, pp.15 and 23). These Group 2 sub-projects were already been
   identified at appraisal, but changes in the list were expected because of changing priorities and availability
   of alternative financing sources during implementation. The PLN’s least cost expansion plan included all the
   sub-projects that were to be financed by the project.

   Revised Components

   The project scope was reduced because of cancellation of substation projects under Group 2 (see
   Restructurings in the following section). The number of substations to be upgraded, rehabilitated, or
   constructed decreased from 71 at appraisal to 41 after two restructurings. After the inclusion of substation
   projects with voltages higher than 150kV to the project scope at the first restructuring, the definitions of
   subcomponents were revised as follows:

         Subcomponent 1: Extension and rehabilitation of transmission substations and construction of new
          transmission substations under Group 1.
         Subcomponent 2: Extension and rehabilitation of transmission substations and construction of new
          transmission substations under Group 2.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$346.43 million. The project cost was
  revised to US$181.0 million at the first restructuring and US$159.0 million at the second restructuring
  because of reduced scope of Group 2 activities and savings from Group 1 activities. In December 2019, the
  project closed with a total cost of US$124.6 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan was
  estimated at US$325 million. At the first restructuring, US$165.4 million was cancelled and the loan amount
  was revised to US$159.6 million. At the second restructuring, an additional US$22.0 million was cancelled
  and the loan amount was revised to US$137.6 million. Savings from Group 1 activities and reduced scope
  of Group 2 activities were the main reasons for reduced Bank financing. By project closing in December
  2019, US$105.4 million of the IBRD loan had been disbursed, amounting to 75.5 percent of the revised loan
  amount.

  Borrower contribution: At appraisal, the contribution of the Government of Indonesia (GoI) was estimated
  at US$21.4 million. At project closing, the GoI’s actual contribution was US$19.3 million.

  Restructurings: There were two project restructurings.

        First Restructuring (Level 2 – April 15, 2018): At this restructuring, US$165.4 million of the loan
         was cancelled because of cost savings from Group 1 projects (US$20 million) and the decrease in
         the scope of Group 2 substation projects (US$145.4 million). The cancellation of a large amount
         under Group 2 was mainly driven by lower-than-expected electricity demand growth and the
         postponement of a 35GW generation program (ICR, p.11). In accordance with the decrease in
         project scope, target values of some of the indicators were revised down as follows: (i) growth in
         electricity sales in Java-Bali from 135 percent to 117.5 percent; (ii) growth in electricity sales in East
         Indonesia from 144 percent to 120 percent; (iii) growth in electricity sales in West Indonesia from
         145 per cent to 120 per cent; and (iv) commissioned capacity of transformer substations for Group 2
         from 4,130,000 KVA to 3,150,000 KVA. These reductions in target values were commensurate with
         the cancelled loan amount and the decrease in project scope. At this restructuring, it was confirmed
         that the scope of transmission investments included substations with voltages higher than 150 kV.
         Lastly, the project closing date was extended by 12 months from December 31,2018 to December
         31,2019. This extension was needed to allow time for the completion of the substation projects in
         Group 2 that were delayed because of the PLN’s slow progress in finalizing the list of eligible
         substation projects and preparing feasibility studies.
        Second Restructuring (Level 1 – April 10, 2019): The project objective was revised. The objective
         “to increase access” was deleted, because the project did not include any activity that would be
         expected to lead to the achievement of this objective. An additional US$22 million loan was
         cancelled. Substation projects in Group 2 were to be contracted under four packages. The offer
         received for Package 2 was higher than the cost estimate of US$22 million for this package. Since
         PLN’s own procurement rules did not allow an award price higher than the estimate, PLN decided to
         enter into price negotiations with the only bidder. This was against the Bank’s procurement rules.
         Therefore, PLN decided to continue the procurement in accordance with its own procurement
         guidelines and finance Package 2 using its own resources. This reduction in the project scope
         resulted in a decrease in the target value of the indicator “commissioned capacity of transformer

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



                              substations for Group 2” from 3,150,000 KVA to 2,290,000 KVA. This reduction in the target value
                              was commensurate with the cancelled loan amount and the decrease in project scope.

                       Dates: The project was approved on July 8, 2013 and became effective on March 26, 2014. A Mid-Term
                       Review of the project was completed on April 1, 2016. The original closing date was December 31, 2018. In
                       the first restructuring, the closing date was extended by 12 months. The project closed on December 31,
                       2019. The reasons for closing date extensions have been outlined in the first restructuring entry above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objective was aligned with the Bank strategy for Indonesia at project closing. The project sought
to address the development problem of unserved electricity by addressing the bottlenecks in the
transmission network capacity. This was expected to increase the availability of electricity and meet
growing electricity demand. The project objective falls under the Engagement Area 2: Sustainable Energy
and Universal Access of the Country Partnership Framework FY2016-FY2020 (CPF, pp.25-27). The project
objective corresponds to one of the four strategic objectives under this engagement area: “to improve
operational efficiency and reliability of services through transmission and distribution, pumped storage”
(CPF, p.25). The Bank strategy defines the power deficit in Indonesia as a major bottleneck “to growth,
shared prosperity and human capital formation” (CPF, p.25). The project objectives were aligned with the
Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic of June 2020, too. The report emphasizes the importance of
increasing investment in the energy sector in order to meet the growing demand for energy that requires
increased investment in associated transmission and distribution capacity (ICR, p.15).

The project objectives were relevant to the country context, too. The objective was appropriately pitched for
the development status of the country. To meet the power needs of the economy, the GoI has been aiming
to increase the electrification rate to close to100 percent by 2020 (achievement by December 2019 was
98.89 percent) from 85 percent in 2015 and the installed generation capacity to 115 gigawatt (GW) in 2025
from 60GW in 2015 (National General Energy Plan 2017 - Rencana Umum Energi Nasional 2017, p.34 and
85). Achievement of such targets depends on the expansion and strengthening of the transmission
networks, including substations, and the distribution networks. According to the Electric Power Supply Plan
2019-2028 (Rencana Usaha Penyedian Tenaga Listrik 2019-2028, p.I-4), two of the strategic objectives of
the PLN are to improve the reliability and quality of electricity supply and increase the efficiency of the
national grid by lowering transmission and distribution losses. Expansion, rehabilitation, and construction of
transmission substations would be expected to contribute to the achievement of these objectives.

The Bank supported Indonesia in infrastructure development through investment lending, and in improving
policy environment for infrastructure project development through development policy lending. The Bank
has also provided technical assistance in reforming electricity tariff and subsidy regime, establishing
incentives for geothermal resource development and capacity building (ICR, p.8). This project was the
continuation of the first Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project. Therefore, the Bank had
sufficient experience in the sector and the country, and the project objective was adequately challenging.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To meet growing electricity demand in the project area through strengthening and expanding the capacity of
                the power transmission networks in the project area in a sustainable manner.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change

                The project had a direct causal chain: the project inputs, i.e., loans, would finance the expansion, upgrading,
                and construction of a total of 114 substations to address the transmission bottlenecks. Most of the substations
                were operating over 80 percent of their capacity that was higher than the PLN technical standard of 60
                percent (ICR, p.7). Load shedding was common, and the duration of outages was long. The expected
                intermediate outcome was an increase in the transmission capacity in the project areas. Because of the
                increase in the transmission capacity, the electricity availability would be expected to increase to meet
                growing demand. The causal pathways from inputs/activities to outputs and to outcomes were valid and
                direct, although the outcomes achieved could not be fully attributed to the project’s intervention because of
                the following reasons: (i) the project’s theory of change was based on two critical assumptions that the
                generation capacity would be sufficient to supply electricity to the system, and that the electricity grid would
                have the capacity to distribute electricity to the end-users; and (ii) although the outcome indicators were
                broadly relevant, i.e., increase in energy sales, to capture the achievement of the project objectives to meet
                growing demand, energy sales were influenced by other factors, such as economic growth, technological
                advances, and tariff changes, making it difficult to establish full attribution between the project outputs and
                expected outcomes (ICR, p.16). Additionally, the PAD does not define “a sustainable manner.” This can be
                interpreted as the sustainable operation of these substations because of the operation and maintenance
                (O&M) capacity of the PLN, but the project did not finance any activity to further develop the O&M capacity of
                the PLN. The theory of change does not support the achievement of this aspect of the project objective,
                either.

                Outputs

                1. Under Group 1, 37 substations were expanded, rehabilitated, or constructed as planned.

                          19 substations in Java-Bali
                          7 substations in Sumatra
                          5 substations in Kalimantan
                          4 substations in Sulawesi
                          1 substation in Amlapura and 1 substation in Nusa Dua/Sanur


                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



2. Under Group 2, 41 substations were expanded, rehabilitated, or constructed as planned at the second
restructuring.

        18 substations in Java-Bali
        16 substations in Sumatra
        4 substations in Kalimantan
        3 substations in Sulawesi

Outcomes

      The incremental capacity of substations in Group 1 increased by 2,040MVA against the original target
       of 2,010MVA.
      The incremental capacity of substations in Group 2 increased by 1,680MVA falling short of the revised
       target of 2,290MVA.

The above-listed intermediate outcomes, i.e., increase in substations capacities, were to result in an increase
in the availability of electricity to meet increasing demand. This outcome was measured by the amount of
electricity sales (in GWh) in the project areas:

      The electricity sales in project areas for Group 1 increased from a baseline of 10,000GWh to
       14,109GWh, which was lower than both the original and revised targets of 18,580GWh and
       16,000GWh, respectively.
      The growth in electricity sales in project areas for Group 2 in Java-Bali was 136.4 per cent against the
       revised target of 117.5 percent.
      The growth in electricity sales in project areas for Group 2 in East Indonesia was 126.2 per cent
       against the revised target of 120 percent.
      The growth in electricity sales in project areas for Group 2 in West Indonesia was 152.0 per cent
       against the revised target of 120 percent.

Overall, the project was substantially successful in achieving the output and outcome targets. The increase in
energy sales in Group 1 project areas was lower than the target, despite achieving the target for substation
capacity increase. On the other hand, the growth in energy sales in all Group 2 project areas was higher than
the revised targets, despite the achievement of capacity increase was lower than the target. Other factors had
a significant impact on the energy sales increases. In Group1 project areas, the growth of electricity demand
was lower than the estimates because the economy was driven mostly by agriculture and service sector that
consume less power than industrial sector. On the other hand, the growth in electricity sales in Group 2
project areas was higher than the estimates mostly because of relatively faster economic growth, especially in
Jakarta, Central and East Java (ICR, p.32).

Overall, the project was substantially successful in achieving the project objective to meet growing electricity
demand in the project areas, but due to weaknesses in establishing full attribution between project outputs
and outcomes and the weaknesses in the theory of change, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project
objective is rated modest.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the project was substantially successful in achieving the project objective to meet growing electricity
                            demand in the project areas, but due to weaknesses in establishing full attribution between project outputs
                            and outcomes and the weaknesses in the theory of change, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project
                            objective is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Insufficient evidence


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, a “with project” and without project” economic analysis was conducted for each of the six project
   implementation regions, i.e., Java-Bali, Sumatra, South Sulawesi, South Kalimantan, West Kalimantan, and
   Central Kalimantan. The economic benefit of the project was calculated as the value of all electricity (rather than
   incremental increase in the amount of electricity available to the consumers because of the project’s
   intervention) sold at the willingness-to-pay of unconnected consumers. The cost of self-generation by private,
   commercial, and industrial consumers using gasoline, diesel, and furnace oil, respectively, were used to
   calculate the willingness-to-pay at the medium-voltage and low-voltage levels. The economic analysis resulted
   in a range of economic internal rate of returns (EIRR) estimated for six regions from 42 percent in West
   Kalimantan to 60 percent in Central Kalimantan (PAD, p.9). The weighted average of these EIRRs was 55
   percent (ICR, p.45). The economic analysis conducted at project closing resulted in a lower weighted EIRR of
   46 percent. The lower electricity demand than estimated at appraisal and delays in project implementation were
   the main reasons for a lower EIRR at project closing.

   Financial Analysis

   At appraisal, a financial analysis of ONEA was conducted and the utility was found to be profitable because of
   the public service obligation (PSO) subsidies it received from the government to cover the shortfall between
   electricity tariffs and electricity supply costs. In 2015, PSO subsidies constituted 21 percent of PLN’s revenues
   (ICR, p.42). The ICR (p.41) reports that, at project closing, the project’s financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
   was calculated at 17 percent based on the following assumptions: annual electricity growth of five percent and
   annual electricity tariff increase of three percent. These assumptions and calculations are identical to those in
   the first Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project.

   Administrative and Operational Efficiency




                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



Project efficiency was adversely affected by the change in government priorities following the 2014 presidential
election. The PLN’s focus shifted from transmission investments to the construction of 35GW power generation
capacity, a target set by the new government. This delayed the preparation of the list of substations for Group 2,
which was submitted to the Bank along with feasibility studies two years after loan effectiveness. However,
because of decreased electricity demand increase forecasts due to economic downturn, the uncertainty about
which transmission infrastructure should urgently be built, and the limited time left to complete all substation
investments, PLN decided to cancel most of the investments under Group 2 (ICR, pp.11 and 23). This resulted
in the cancellation of US$145.4 million of the loan (about 45 per cent of the total loan of $325 million).
Completion times of various contracts were routinely underestimated resulting in numerous time extensions
(ICR, p.24). The procurement process was inefficient (ICR, p.27). The time required from bid opening to
processing the advance payments to contractors took more than one year, which was too long and delayed
project implementation (see section 10.b Procurement below). Prolonged internal processes and reviews of
invoices by various directorates within the PLN and the Ministry of Finance delayed payments to contractors in
the range of 42 to 133 months slowing project implementation (ICR, p.24). Various changes to technical
specifications, too, contributed to the delayed completion of the procurement process and signing of the
contracts (ICR, p.24). As a result of the reorganization of the PLN in 2014, the decision-making processes for
the project were delegated to regional offices, but they did not have sufficient capacity to implement the project.
This created a more complex bureaucratic process for contract management (ICR, p.22). The data flow from
regional offices to the project management unit was not smooth. This complicated project coordination and also
contributed to the delay in the preparation of the substations list to be included in Group 2 (ICR, p.23).

Taking the above factors into account, the efficiency of the project in achieving the project objectives is rated
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  55.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               46.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly aligned with the Bank strategy at project closure and Indonesia’s
development status, and it was adequately challenging given the Bank’s prior experience in the country and the
sector. Hence, the relevance of objectives is rated High. The efficacy of the achievement of the project objective


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



to meet growing electricity demand is rated Modest because of weak attribution between the project activities
and the achievement of expected outcomes. The efficiency of the project in achieving the project objectives is
rated Modest, because of significant administrative and operational inefficiencies and weak methodology used
in calculating the project’s economic benefits. Overall, the Outcome of the project is rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks identified to the development outcome of the first Indonesia Power Transmission Development
Project equally apply to the development outcome of this project.

Financial and technical constraints of the PLN, including its organizational deficiencies, pose a risk
for the operation and maintenance(O&M) of the substations financed by the project. The transmission
system in the country has been expanding rapidly, which can stretch the technical and financial capabilities
of the PLN to maintain the system. If PLN’s financial situation worsens, that could weaken its O&M
capabilities. Historically, PLN had been allocating three to five per cent of capital expenditures for O&M, and
it is expected to continue with this practice in the future.

If PLN does not continue with the expansion and strengthening of the transmission and distribution
systems, the substations financed under the project might not be able to meet the electricity demand
in the event of a rapid demand increase. The ICR states that the demand for electricity has been lower
than the estimates at appraisal, but it is highly likely that demand for electricity will increase in the
future, given that Indonesia has a large population and a potential for fast economic growth. Therefore,
continuous investment to increase transmission capacity is needed, in the absence of which outages may
reoccur and growing electricity demand may not be met because of the overloading of the existing
substations.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goals of addressing the transmission bottlenecks through the expansion of the
  transmission substation capacity to meet the growing electricity demand of consumers and increasing
  access to electricity were of high strategic priority. The project’s intervention was straightforward:
  expansion, rehabilitation and construction of substations would increase the transmission capacity and
  more electricity would be available to consumers and allow more people with access to electricity.
  However, the project design did not include any activity to expand the transmission and distribution grids
  or increase connections to households or businesses. The project design did not support the
  achievement of the objective to increase access to electricity. This was a significant shortcoming in the
  formulation of the project objective. Technical feasibility studies of the 37 substations in Group 1 were

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



  reviewed and approved at appraisal, and these projects were ready for implementation. However,
  although the 71 substations to be financed under Group 2 were known at appraisal, a final list was not
  prepared at appraisal due to absence of detailed technical feasibility studies. The finalization of this list
  was delayed significantly causing project implementation delays and cancellation of a large amount of
  project loans. The economic analysis was adequate to justify the financing of the project, but the
  economic benefit was defined as the monetary value of all electricity in the system rather than the
  incremental increase in the electricity amount as a result of the project’s intervention. There were some
  shortcomings in the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) design, but it was sufficient to measure the
  outcomes of the project’s intervention, which consisted of scattered investments in a large project area.
  The project implementation arrangements were simple: the PLN was a reputable utility with sufficient
  capacity and experience gained in similar projects to implement the investment activities supported by
  the project. The overall risk assessment was adequate, but mitigation measures for the procurement risk
  and design risk related to Group 2 projects were not sufficiently identified that led to cancellation of
  around US$167 million of the loan amount.

  Because of the significant shortcomings in the identification and preparation of the project, the quality at
  entry is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p.28), supervision missions were held approximately every eight months, but during
 the last two years of project implementation, formal missions were held every four months. The project
 team prepared 11 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs); they were candid in reporting the
 project implementation issues and the actions to be taken. Procurement issues and contract management
 constituted a major problem during implementation, contributing to project implementation delays and
 extension of project closing date. To improve project implementation and closely monitor the project
 implementation, the Bank’s project team mobilized a senior power engineer during the last 18 months of
 project implementation. Additionally, monthly meetings were held with PLN during the last 12 months of
 project to monitor project progress. These increased supervision efforts resulted in an improvement in
 project implementation and effectiveness of coordination between regional offices, PLN headquarters and
 the Bank’s project team (ICR, p.28). At project closing, all substations were energized, except one in Group
 2. The project team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project was adequate. Because
 of the implementation delays of around two years after effectiveness and the delays in identifying
 substations under Group 2, the project team’s focus was more on the completion of project activities and
 the achievement of outputs rather than the outcomes of the project’s intervention; the shortcomings in the
 M&E system were not addressed to fully capture the project’s outcomes. The factors outside the control of
 the project team also necessitated a greater focus on the achievement of project outputs rather than
 outcomes, such as the change in government priorities towards generation, complex project
 implementation because of the reorganization of PLN delegating decision-making processes to regional
 offices that did not have sufficient project implementation capacity, and numerous technical specification
 variations.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



 Overall, the quality of Bank supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives to meet growing electricity demand and to increase access to electricity were clearly
 defined, but the definition of “a sustainable manner” was not given in the project documents. The
 formulation of the project objectives did not match the activities the project was to finance. The causal
 pathways in the results chain were plausible for the achievement of the first objective to meet growing
 electricity demand. However, the project’s theory of change did not support the achievement of the
 objective to increase access to electricity. There was no project activity to achieve this objective. Hence,
 there was no indicator in the results framework to capture its achievement. The outcome level indicators of
 “electricity sales” and “growth in electricity sales” in project areas were proxy indicators to capture the
 project outcomes in meeting growing demand for electricity. However, a full attribution between these
 indicators and the achievement project outcomes could not be established, because there were other
 factors that could affect energy sales, such as tariff changes, economic downturn, and improved efficiency
 of electrical appliances. The indicators were selected in accordance with the PLN reporting system,
 therefore, indicators that would better capture the achievement of project outcomes could not be included
 in the results framework, such as the number of new customer registrations, the increase in customers’
 electricity consumption, and customers’ applications to increase the power capacity (ICR, p.47 and footnote
 11 on the same page). The indicators capturing the project’s intermediate outcomes, i.e., increases in
 transmission capacity, were specific, measurable, and relevant.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PLN reported the progress in construction works quarterly, but with delays (ICR, p.25). During the
  first year of the implementation, the reports did not include the indicators in the results framework. This
  was because of the reporting format used by PLN, which was later revised to include the measurements
  of the indicators in the results framework. However, the quality of the data did not satisfy the
  requirements of the Bank; “[t]he data, however, was not provided in a structure that is consistent or in the
  level of granularity requested by the Bank” (ICR, footnote 31, p.26). The weaknesses in the M&E system
  in fully capturing the project outcomes were not corrected during implementation. The target values of
  indicators for Group 2 projects, such as the increase in transmission substation capacity, were reduced to
  match the change in project scope because of the cancellation of most of the substation projects in that
  group.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)




c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to project stakeholders. M&E data were used to provide evidence of
  application of inputs and achievement of outputs, but due to the shortcomings in the M&E design, the
  achievement of outcomes could not be fully captured. The M&E findings led to the downsizing of project
  scope and cancellation of almost 45 per cent of the loans. M&E findings are not expected to influence
  subsequent interventions in the near term.

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated modest. There were significant shortcomings in the design and
  implementation of the M&E system making it difficult to adequately assess the achievement of the
  project objectives and test the links in the results chain.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and the Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): At appraisal, the impact of the substation projects was
   assessed to be modest, non-sensitive and reversible, such as increased level of dust and noise from the
   use and movement of machinery, non-toxic solid waste during construction; oil spill or leakage from
   machinery or transformers; and worker health and safety from existing electromagnetic fields (PAD, pp.23-
   24). No long-term adverse impact was expected due to investment activities. PLN prepared an
   Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for expansion and rehabilitation of substation projects under Group
   1, EMPs for two new substations to be built in Group 2 and an Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) for the expansion and rehabilitation of other substation projects to be included in Group
   2. The EMPs and ESMF were disclosed on PLN’s website in March 2013 and in the Bank’s InfoShop in
   April 2013. The PLN had a dedicated unit responsible for the project’s compliance with environmental and
   social safeguard policies. At project appraisal, this unit had already been implementing the safeguard
   policies under ongoing two Bank-financed transmission projects (PAD, p.26). During project
   implementation, ESMF was used to screen substation projects in Group 2 and EMPs were prepared when
   required. The ICR (p.26) states that “[t]he project was overall in compliance with environmental and social
   safeguards procedures.”

   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): Although there were no indigenous people present in or collectively
   attached to the project areas for the substation investments in Group 1 and the candidate substation
   investments to be proposed under Group 2, this safeguard policy was triggered in case the PLN could
   propose new substation projects in areas where indigenous people were present. The PLN prepared an
   Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) to guide, if necessary, indigenous people development plan
   for substation projects in Group 2. The IPPF was disclosed on the PLN’s website on March 2013 and in the

                                                                                                Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



  Bank’s Infoshop in April 2013. During project implementation, no indigenous people were affected by the
  project activities because the investment works consisted of the expansion and rehabilitation of existing
  substations on PLN’s own premises.

  Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): This safeguard policy was triggered because the construction of
  two new substations in Group 2 would require land acquisition. Therefore, at project reparation Land
  Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plans acceptable to the Bank were prepared and they were disclosed
  on the PLN’s website on March 2013 and in the Bank’s Infoshop in April 2013. Because of the cancellation
  of most of the substation projects in Group 2 and the PLN’s decision to finance the construction of those two
  new substations using its own resources, the investment works consisted of the expansion and
  rehabilitation of existing substations on PLN’s own premises; hence, there was no land acquisition or
  involuntary resettlement during project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  PLN submitted interim financial reports to the Bank regularly. The audit reports were unqualified and
  submitted according to the schedule. As was the case in first Indonesia Power Transmission Development
  Project, there were lengthy delays in payments to the contractors in this project, too. The ICR (p.24) lists
  the reasons as follows: (i) delay of the annual project budget approval by the Ministry of Finance (MoF); (ii)
  delays in submission of the supporting documents from regional project offices to the PLN headquarters;
  (iii) delays in the regional director’s clearance of payments; and (iv) lengthy verification of the invoices and
  documents by the MoF. The processing of invoices from submission by contractors until the payments
  were made by the Bank was in the range of 42 to 133 days, which was overly lengthy. The PLN failed to
  comply with one of the financial covenants, i.e., debt service coverage ratio of 1.5. Waivers from this
  covenant were granted until project closing. There were no known issues of corruption or misuse of funds
  associated with the project. All project funds were fully accounted for at project closure.

  Procurement

  The procurement process for the substation projects in Group 1 was inefficient. The evaluation of bids took
  more than three months until a bid evaluation report was submitted to the Bank for review. Another five
  months were required after the Bank’s no-objection to issue the notification of the award and sign the
  contract. The delays in the issuance of the contractor’s guarantee postponed the issuance of the advance
  payment to the contractor by another five months from the contract signing date. The whole process took
  more than one year adversely affecting the project implementation schedule. Various changes to technical
  specifications of the substations contributed to delayed completion of the procurement process and signing
  of the contract. Because of the differences between the procurement guidelines of the Bank and the PLN,
  the Package 2 in Group 2 could not be financed by the project. According to the PLN’s procurement
  guidelines, the award price of a contract must be below the cost estimated for the scope of that contract.
  The only bid for Package 2 was higher than the cost estimate of $22 million. Therefore, PLN decided to
  enter not price negotiations with the bidder, which was against the Bank’ guidelines. Consequently, that
  package was excluded from the project scope and $22 million from the loan amount was cancelled. Since
  the procurement of Package 2 did not comply with the Bank’s procurement guidelines, the PLN’s spending
  of $22 million could not be recognized as the borrower’s contribution to the project (ICR, footnote 15, p.12).

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



   The procurement process of the Group 2 substation projects was more efficient. The bid evaluation
   process was completed within the 60-day bid validity period (ICR, p.28). Overall, the procurement was in
   compliance with the Bank’s guidelines, except Package 2 in Group 2, which was later cancelled, but the
   procurement process was slow and mostly inefficient.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                Because of the significant
                                                                                shortcomings in the identification
                                                                                and preparation of the project,
                                                                                the quality at entry is rated
                                                                                moderately unsatisfactory. The
                                                                                quality of supervision is rated
                                                                                moderately satisfactory.
                                                                                According to the Bank guidance
                                                                                (p.23), when the assessment of
                               Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                one dimension is in the
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                satisfactory range, and that of
                                                                                the other dimension is in the
                                                                                unsatisfactory range, overall
                                                                                Bank performance depends on
                                                                                the outcome rating. Since the
                                                                                outcome rating is moderately
                                                                                unsatisfactory, the Bank
                                                                                performance is rated moderately
                                                                                unsatisfactory.
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



12. Lessons

Uncertainty about the investments to be financed under the project could adversely affect
project implementation and result in lower achievement and cancellation of loans. The project
was to finance substation projects under two groups. The technical feasibility studies of Group 1
substation projects had already been reviewed and approved during project preparation, and they
were ready for implementation. However, the technical feasibility studies of the Group 2 projects
were to be prepared after project start, and the project was to finance these projects upon the Bank
team’s appraisal of each one of them against an agreed set of eligibility criteria and acceptance for
financing. However, the finalization of the list of projects for Group 2 was delayed by more than two
years. As a result of changing government priorities, the project implementing agency, i.e., PLN,
cancelled most of the substation investments under Group 2 that led to a cancellation of a big part of
the project loan—around $145 million. On the other hand, the 37 substations projects under Group
1, which were ready for implementation at project start, were completed and all substations were
energized two years before the extended project closing date.

While acknowledging that "[i]t was a major and fast shift in sector and specific investment priories
that led to significant revision and reduction of identified and otherwise quite certain
investments," the project team commented in their email dated June 28, 2021 that "emphasis on
uncertainty, which by design is embedded in framework type operations, may be slightly misleading
as a lesson from this operation."

A weak M&E system can fail to fully capture the achievement of the project outcomes or
establish full attribution between the project activities and outcomes. The M&E system was
designed in accordance with the PLN reporting system. The intermediate results indicators were
sufficient to capture the increase in the transmission substation capacity. However, the outcome
indicators, i.e., increase or growth in electricity sales” were insufficient to capture the project
outcomes in meeting growing electricity demand in project areas, because other factors affected the
achievement of these indicators, such as tariff changes, economic downturn, and efficiency in
increase in appliances. Indicators, such as the number of new customer registrations, the increase
in customers’ electricity consumption, and customers’ applications to increase the power capacity,
were not included in the results framework. The indicators did not have the specificity and granularity
to capture project outcomes and were insufficient to test the links in the results chain resulting in
weaker attribution.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. The report is sufficiently evaluative. The narrative is
candid in explaining the project’s shortcomings. There has been sufficient interrogation of the available
evidence. The report is focused on what occurred as a consequence of the project. The narrative mostly

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Power Transmission Development (P123994)



supports the ratings. The report is internally consistent; there is a logical linking and integration of the various
parts of the report. The report follows the majority of the Bank guidance. The section on key factors that
affected implementation and outcome provides detailed information about the issues emerged during project
implementation. However, the discussion of project efficiency does not include an assessment of the project’s
administrative and operational efficiency. The information in the M&E Utilization section is insufficient. The
Lessons and Recommendations section consists mostly of findings rather than lessons. There were numerical
errors in the tables; for example, the original target of the indicator of “commissioned capacity of transformer
substations for Group 2” was 4,130MVA, but the ICR report it as 1,680GVA, which was the actual achievement.
The ICR is substantially longer (30 pages) than recommended in the Bank guidance (15-20 pages).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 17
