     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022587

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P117947                                    CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Colombia                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80830                                30-Nov-2016                                         159,412,193.34

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jul-2011                               30-Sep-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          350,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           198,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       159,412,193.34                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur              Peter Nigel Freeman          Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to enhance the efficiency, affordability, quality, safety, and
   environmental sustainability of the provision of public transit services in the participating cities (Loan
   Agreement page 6 and Project Appraisal Document (PAD) para 21).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  20-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Note: The first restructuring approved on June 21, 2013 added a new Technical Assistance component. The
   components were renumbered as follows: Component A – Implementing Capacity Building (the new
   component), Component B – Integrated Mass Transit System, and Component C – Strategic Public Transit
   Systems (ICR para 23).

   Original Component A (or revised component B): Integrated Mass Transit Systems (estimated cost
   US$ 253 million, actual cost US$67 million). This component included the following activities:

         revision of detailed engineering designs;
         construction of bus rapid transport segregated busways;
         construction of bus stops, terminals and transfer centers;
         construction of mixed-traffic lanes adjacent to busway corridors;
         construction of sidewalks and bicycle paths;
         rehabilitation of feeder routes;
         construction of pedestrian ways along busway corridors, including pedestrian bridges;
         construction or adaptation of complementary transport corridors to the segregated busways;
         carrying out required adaptation and/or relocation of public service networks adjacent to the
          construction areas;
         the construction of bus workshops and parking;
         review and upgrading of technical designs; and
         carrying out supervision of construction works.

   This component would also finance the acquisition of land and compensation for resettlement of affected
   persons; and the design and implementation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

   Original Component B (or revised component C): Strategic Public Transit Systems (estimated cost
   US$154.0 million, actual cost US$99.0 million). This component included the following activities:

         development of detailed Project engineering designs of integrated transport systems;
         construction and rehabilitation of road networks;
         construction and rehabilitation of sidewalks, public space, pedestrian ways along bus corridors and
            bicycle paths;
         construction of pedestrian bridges;


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



        construction of bus stops, terminals and transfer centers;
        construction of bus workshops and parking places;
        acquisition of control centers for strategic public transport systems, including fleet control, traffic
           lights and traffic signaling;
          rehabilitation and renewal of historic centers;
          provision of equipment and training for the Implementing Entities;
          hiring of specialized technical staff for the Implementing Entities for the implementation of the
           project;
          financing of Operating Costs; hiring of project auditors; (
          design and construction of centers of public citizen services;
          design and implementation of broad communication strategies; and
          supervision all these activities.

  This component would also finance the acquisition of land and compensation for resettlement of affected
  persons; and the design and implementation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

  New Component A – Implementing Capacity Building (estimated cost US$15 million, actual cost
  US$8.68 million). This component was added in the first restructuring in 2013. It involved the strengthening
  of the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Transport (MoT) at the national level through the provision of
  Technical Assistance (TA) to its Project Coordination Unit (PCU) - the Ministry of Transport Implementing
  Unit (UMUS), to support the Borrower’s formulation of national urban transport programs and strategies
  pursuant to the National Urban Transport Program (NUTP). The component sought to: (i) strengthen the
  technical, functional, and operational capacity of the UMUS; (ii) strengthen the implementing entities of each
  city managing the systems (Metroplús in Medellín, Metrolinea in Bucaramanga, SIVA in Valledupar,
  MetroSabana in Sincelejo, and Transfederal in Neiva); and (iii) provide technical support to Integrated Mass
  Transit Systems (IMTS) and Strategic Public Transit Systems (SPTS) in the design of urban mobility and
  operational plans, and the implementation of marketing strategies (ICR para 24).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$198.0 million, substantially lower than the appraisal estimate
  of US$ 407.0 million (ICR page 59). This was due to initial reduction of the scope of original components
  because of delays in reaching effectiveness, as well as implementation delays and changes in exchange
  rate which resulted in the cancellation of resources (ICR para 32). The project’s effectiveness date was
  delayed by more than two years after approval, primarily to accommodate the new Colombian law,
  vigencias futuras (future budget allocations). The law affected the co-financing arrangements between
  national and local governments.

  Financing. The original loan amount was US$350.0 million. The actual disbursements were US$169.49
  million. A total of $152 million of loan funds were cancelled in the 2013 and 2016 restructurings.

  In 2013, a US$58.0 million was cancelled. This included a full cancellation of the loan allocation to Pereira
  and Cartagena and partial cancellation (and reallocation) of the loan allocation to Bucaramanga and
  Medellin under Component B. The loan amount was reduced from US$350 million to US$292 million (ICR
  para 25).


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



   In 2016, US$94.0 million was cancelled, including a partial cancellation (and reallocation) of the loan
   allocation to Bucaramanga, Medellín, Sincelejo, and Valledupar. The loan amount was reduced from
   US$292 million to US$198 million. The undisbursed amount at project closure was US$36.82 million.

   Co-financing. None.

   Borrower Contribution. The actual borrower contribution was US$78.69 million, significantly lower than
   the appraisal commitment of US$118.0 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 21, 2011, became effective on October 18, 2013, and closed on
   September 30, 2020 after a four-year delay. This was due to capacity constraints, which caused
   implementation delays (ICR para 34). Constraints were due to significant staff turnover, a lack of resources
   at the PCU at the national level, as well as significant challenges to attract and retain qualified staff for
   technical, fiduciary, and project management.

   Restructurings

   The first restructuring approved on June 21, 2013 added a new Technical Assistance component. The
   components were renumbered as follows: Component A – Implementing Capacity Building (the new
   component), Component B – Integrated Mass Transit System, and Component C – Strategic Public Transit
   Systems (ICR para 23). There was cancellation of financing (US$58.0 million).

   The second restructuring approved on August 25, 2016 resulted in changes in component costs and loan
   closing date, and cancellation of financing (US$94.0 million).

   The third restructuring approved on June 28, 2018 simplified the results framework by eliminating the
   redundancies in the intermediate indicators, and introduced revised indicators to measure the outputs or
   intermediate outcomes rather than procurement processes (ICR para 28).

   Split Rating. The objectives were not revised. The methodology for measuring the outcome targets was
   substantially modified in the third restructuring approved on June 28, 2018, and the outcome target values
   were lowered. However, because the ambition of the outcomes remained the same, a split evaluation was
   not conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Colombia is an upper-middle income country with a relatively good
economic performance. It has experienced high population growth in the urban areas. At the national and
local levels, urban transport was regarded as a catalyst for higher productivity, greater access to economic
opportunities, and social inclusion (ICR para 3). However, public transport had been a long-standing
concern for planners and decision makers in Colombia. At appraisal, public transportation was
characterized by an institutional arrangement that led to an oversupply of buses and low-quality service.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



 In 1997, the Government of Colombia published Decree 3109 to regulate mass passenger transport
services. In 1998, the city of Bogotá embarked on a radical program to improve the quality of public transit
services by implementing the TransMilenio bus rapid transit (BRT) system. The system aimed to build new
infrastructure consisting of dedicated lanes, large-capacity buses, and elevated bus stations that allowed
pre-board ticketing and fast boarding. It also implemented a prepaid method of payment (off-board fare
collection) and an integrated fare system that allowed free transfers.

Alignment with Country Strategy.

The PDO was aligned with the National Development Plan (2018-2022), which seeks to strengthen public
transportation systems. The PDO was also aligned with the 2020 National Urban and Regional Mobility
Policy, which outlines a road map to achieve more resilient, sustainable cities by providing good quality
public transport. According to the ICR (para 39), the third objective of this policy aimed to strengthen the
institutional framework of local administrations and the Government of Colombia's in the planning,
execution, control, and monitoring of mobility in cities and urban agglomerations to effectively implement
comprehensive urban and regional mobility strategies.

Alignment with Bank Strategy. The PDO was fully aligned with objective 8 of the current 2016-2021
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Colombia. The PDO supports CPF Objective 8
"Improved infrastructure services and enhanced urban planning to develop competitive cities" by increasing
the capacity of the Government of Colombia and municipal governments to analyze urban mobility and
options to strengthen planning, management, operations, and financial sustainability of integrated public
transport systems (CPF page 43).

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank has had a long-term engagement in Colombia's urban transport
sector. The Bank‘s engagement with the Government of Colombia on urban transport dates back to the
mid-1990s when the government was pursuing a series of regulatory reforms to promote private sector
participation in infrastructure, when the city of Bogotá was first embarking on the implementation of
Transmilenio. The Bank has supported the National Urban Transit Program through three loans in 2004,
totaling US$757 million (Integrated Mass Transit System Project and two subsequent Additional
Financings) aimed at financing the governments commitments to large cities for the construction and
implementation of BRTs (six out of the nine cities – Barranquilla, Bogotá, Bucaramanga, Cartagena,
Medellin-Valle de Aburrá, and Pereira).

The Project continued to scale up the Bank’s support to Colombia by financing the government’s
commitments to large and medium cities. For these cities, the project introduced urban transport
interventions that focused less on infrastructure but addressed the negative incentives of the traditional bus
system and tackled new issues such as informal public transport (motorcycle cabs and vans) (PAD para 17
-19).

Overall, the relevance of PDO was high.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To enhance the efficiency, affordability, quality, safety, and environmental sustainability of the provision of
               public transit services in the participating cities.

               Rationale
               The five sub-objectives are bundled together as they are the outcomes of the improved public transit services.
               This is discussed in detail in the theory of change below.

               Theory of change (ToC). The projects ToC was based on the premise that the development of the Integrated
               Mass Transit System (IMTS) and the Strategic Public Transit Systems (SPTS) - would transform the urban
               transport sector and enhance the provision of public transit services in each of the subnational entities. This
               would be achieved through outputs, such as improved urban infrastructure, segregated BRT busways, mixed-
               traffic lanes, bus stops, terminals, transfer centers, renewal of historic centers, and urban renewal. These
               outputs were expected to result in outcomes such enhanced efficiency, affordability, quality, safety, and
               environmental sustainability of the public transit services.

               The ToC presented on page 10 of the ICR is straightforward, robust and valid, and provides critical
               assumptions such as: (a) effective technical collaboration between the Government of Colombia and the sub-
               national governments; (b) effective concession contracts granted by the cities to private sector operators; (c)
               effective public-private partnership as private sector finances the operation, equipment and fare collection;
               and (d) each city establishes transportation entities which are responsible for planning, regulation and
               operation of the system. The main shortcoming is that many of the project infrastructure outputs were not fully
               completed or the outcomes were only partially attributable to the project activities (see detailed discussion in
               the M&E section 9 below).

               Outputs

                     For the Integrated Mass Transit System, 59.9 km of trunk road corridor was constructed, higher than
                        original target of 30.7 km but lower than the revised target of 65 km: Medellin, actual 25.8 km, revised
                        target was 31.0 km; and Bucaramanga, actual 34.9 km, revised target was 34.1 km (ICR page 44).
                       For the Strategic Public Transit Systems, 88.5 km were constructed or rehabilitated substantially lower
                        than the target of 160.6 km. None of the targets for the cities were achieved: Valledupar, actual 25.76
                        km, target was 27.8 km; Sincelejo, actual 42.0 km, target was 56.1 km; and Neiva, actual 42.0 km,
                        target was 56.1 km (ICR page 46).
                       As targeted, 3 terminals were constructed in Bucaramanga.
                       13.75 km of sidewalks were rehabilitated or constructed in Valledupar and Neiva, against the target of
                        35.5 km .
                       141,775 square meters of public space area was rehabilitated or constructed in Sincelejo and
                        Valledupar, well under the target of 297,550.
                       In Bucaramanga 8.9 km segregated BRT busways were completed, as targeted; 80.1 km feeder
                        routes were completed, as targeted; 25 pedestrian bridges were completed, as targeted; 76 terminals

                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



       and stops were completed, as targeted; and 25,19 km mixed lanes corridors were completed, as
       targeted.
      In Medellin, none of the planned stations (5 stations Troncal Medellin, 19 stations Troncal Itagui, and 7
       stations Troncal Envigado) were completed.

The ICR report (para 41) that many of the project infrastructure outputs under Component B and C (i.e., BRT
busways, mixed-traffic lanes, feeder corridors) were not fully completed or have designs but lack resources.
Also, some outputs that are key for the IMTS and STPS operation (i.e., control centers, fleet management
systems and transfer centers) were not delivered by project closure.

The Project supported the capacity building and planning towards the operation of the IMTS and SPTS
system through technical studies:

      Guide on climate change and urban transport;
      Technical assistance to Metro de Bogota Implementation;
      Technical assistance on urban transport indicators;
      Feasibility assessment on the use of motorcycles and tricycles for the provision of urban transport
       services;
      Financial sources for urban transport sustainability;
      Guidelines for implementation of exclusive lanes in Colombian cities.

Outcomes

The project modestly contributed to enhanced efficiency of public transit services. In Bucaramanga,
average travel time was reduced from 35.7 minutes (baseline) to 13.5 minutes, underachieving the target of
12.4 minutes. In Medellin, average travel time was reduced from 30.5 minutes (baseline) to 23.78 minutes,
underachieving the target of 21.2 minutes. The indicator compared the average travel time on the intervened
exclusive trunk corridors against the average time on the adjacent mixed traffic lanes. As noted by the ICR
(para 42), the IMTS infrastructure is still not fully in operation; therefore, the time savings cannot be fully
attributed to the project.

The project did not enhance affordability of public transit services, as the percentage of household
expenditure spent on urban transport was higher than the target in all subnational entities other than Neiva
(actual 13%, baseline 13%, target 13%). Bucaramanga: actual 18.7%, baseline 10%, target 13%; Medellin:
actual 15.9%, baseline 9%, target 12%; Sincelejo: actual 13.7%, baseline 9%, target 12%;
and Valledupar: actual 14.3%, baseline 9%, target 12%.

The ICR reports (para 43) that the urban transportation expenditure increased over time due to exogenous
factors beyond the project’s control because, as the income of the lowest two income quintiles (Stratas 1 and
2) grew slower than inflation, the target showed a higher percentage than the baseline in the first year.

The project contributed to enhancing the quality of public transit services to a modest
extent. According to the satisfaction survey, in Medellín, 91% of those surveyed were satisfied (rated their trip
as satisfactory or very satisfactory) with the public transit system compared to the baseline of 60% and target
of 75%. In Bucaramanga, 73% of those surveyed were satisfied with the public transit services compared to
the baseline of 67 percent and target of 75%. With regard to the STPS projects, satisfaction rates improved
compared to a very low baseline of 50% in each city. In Neiva, the satisfaction rate of 81% significantly

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



                            exceeded the target of 70 percent, while Sincelejo achieved 73% satisfaction rate and Valledupar 67%,
                            almost achieving the target of 75%.

                            The ICR notes (para 44) that there are attribution issues: (a) the data on the percentage of people satisfied
                            with the system was collected from surveys that targeted users of the entire public transit systems (not only
                            the corridors targeted under the project). Therefore, these figures are not directly attributable to the project;
                            and (b) since the project infrastructure investments (i.e. trunk corridors, sub-truck corridors, feeder corridors)
                            under Component B and C were not yet in operation at project closure, it is unclear to what extent the
                            improvements of quality can be fully attributed to the project.

                            The project substantially enhanced safety of public transit services. The number of deaths in accidents
                            directly related to public transport decreased in all subnational entities except Bucaramanga where it
                            remained the same. This was because the project interventions such as traffic measures, better road
                            infrastructure, lighting, among others, helped reduce the number of deaths and traffic accidents. As
                            highlighted by the ICR (para 45), the indicator measured only accidents in segregated corridors for the IMTS
                            and accidents related to the public transport in STPS, which resulted in very small numbers. The ICR (para
                            76) adds that in the case of Medellín and Bucaramanga, beyond TA activities, there is no clear link between
                            the infrastructure financed and accidents in segregated corridors.

                            The project contributed to enhancing environmental sustainability of public transit services to a
                            modest extent. The targets for reduction in PM2.5 levels were achieved in all subnational entities, except
                            Bucaramanga. This was due to a modal shift from private cars to public transport and to renewal in bus and
                            car fleets. Modal shift was estimated at 5% for Medellín and Bucaramanga and 1% for Sincelejo, Valledupar,
                            and Neiva.

                            The daily ridership in public transport was lower than the baseline for all cities, except for Medellin. The
                            achievement against targets is as follows: Bucaramanga at 36%; Medellin at 50%; Sincelejo
                            at 33.4%; Valledupar at 71%, and Neiva at 26% (ICR Table 2, page 17). The ICR (para 47) notes that the
                            ridership was highly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020, but the projections for the near future
                            are difficult to make and demand levels may take long to recover, even when the pandemic is over. As of
                            June 2020, the demand level was between 40-60 percent of pre-pandemic levels (ICR, para 74).



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project modestly achieved its outcome targets, and the outcomes, as reported, are not fully attributable to
                            the project. Overall, efficacy is modest.




                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
  Modest                                                    Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

At appraisal, cost benefit analysis was carried out for two large cities - Cartagena and Medellin-Valle de Aburrá,
and two medium cities - Sincelejo and Valledupar. The analysis included all public and private costs associated
with the implementation and operation of the new transport system (PAD para 49). Benefits include travel time
savings for both bus users and private vehicles, efficiency improvement in transit operations due to scrapping of
obsolete units, as well as modal shifts, trip generation, accident reduction and pollution abetments (PAD para
49). The Economic Rates of Return (ERR) are presented in table 1 below. The PAD did not provide an overall
ERR.

At completion, the two Integrated Mass Transit Systems (IMTS) projects showed positive ERRs but only one
Strategic Public Transit Systems cities (STPS) (Neiva) had a positive ERR with "COVID-19 scenario". The ex-
post ERR was also calculated for "without COVID-19" scenario, and an average annual growth rate of 3% and
1% was applied for the SPTS and IMTS cities. This yielded a positive scenario for all cities (see table
below). The ICR did not provide an overall ERR.

                                     Table 1. Economic Analysis*
                                               ex-post ERR with COVID-          ex-post ERR without
                         ex-ante ERR (12%
                                                   19 scenario (4.5%           COVID-19 scenario (4.5%
                           discount rate)
                                                     discount rate)                discount rate)
Cartagena (IMTS)                17%
Medellin (IMTS)                  9%                      9.9%                            11.9%
Bucaramanga
                                                            12%                          13.7%
(IMTS)
Sincelejo (STPS)                17%                        -5.4%                          4.9%
Valledupar (STPS)               13%                        -3.7%                           7%
Neiva (STPS)                                               10.3%                         18.9%

*The ex-post cost-benefit analysis used a low discount rate of 4.5%, while the ex ante comparison used a 12%
discount rate, which was the recommended rate in 2011 at appraisal. Therefore, the methodologies were not
strictly comparable.


Administrative efficiency

The project experienced delays prior to effectiveness and during implementation and closed fours year behind
schedule. This resulted in a high amount of unutilized loan resources - the project closed with 20% of
undisbursed proceeds from the last structuring in 2018. The cost of supervision was high (ICR para 51).

Overall, project efficiency was modest.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is high. The project modestly achieved its objective of enhancing the efficiency,
affordability, quality, safety, and environmental sustainability of the provision of public transit services in the
participating cities. The outcomes, as reported, are not fully attributable to the project. The project efficiency
is modest. The project outcome is moderately unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risks to the development outcome are related to:

Operations and Maintenance (O&M). This risk is substantial as the subnational entities would require
additional resources for maintenance of assets such as stations and fleet or even increased
investment/expansion if demand were to increase dramatically. Currently, there is no budget allocation of
resources for O&M.

Competition from conventional routes. There is a substantial risk that the modal shift to BRT may reverse
with the increased use of motorbikes and the operation of moto-taxis. The subnational authorities need to
create incentives for users to prefer the new systems.




                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



Impact of COVID-19. The pandemic has had a strong negative impact on all public transport in Colombia,
severely impacting ridership, thereby impacting revenues and financial sustainability. This poses a
substantial risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had high strategic relevance and was a continuation of the Bank's engagement in the urban
  transport sector in Colombia. Despite this, the project design had several significant shortcomings:

        Rigid technical requirements did not adapt to local contexts and needs, nor did they provide
         incentives to ensure operation of the systems. The program for the IMTS was designed following
         the model of TransMilenio Phase I. No modifications were made to take into consideration the
         specific conditions and context of each city nor the current administrative or economic conditions
         of local operators. The specification of the systems was too rigid, and many had oversized
         technology requirements, especially for the STPS (ICR, para 67).
        Subproject structuring for the systems under Component C (STPS) was approved for
         implementation by the Government of Colombia based on pre-feasibility studies, which didn’t
         include any commercial studies nor an in-depth analysis of the need for public policy for financing
         the operation of the public transport systems. In case the of SPTS, no realistic plans were put in
         place to foster operational efficiency (ICR, para 66).
        While some key risks were assessed adequately at appraisal (PAD, para 47) (i.e., implementation
         and supervision complexities stemming from the project‘s scope of activities and geographical
         coverage; weak implementation capacity in new medium-sized cities, and prevalence of informal
         transportation, including motorcycle taxis, that may hinder the reorganization and formalization of
         the transport sector by decreasing overall demand for public transit), this did not include other
         important factors, such as unwillingness of some political stakeholders; systematic overestimation
         of transport demand; no incentives or institutional strength to promote the integration between
         collective public transport and informal transport; and lack of public policy to ensure financial
         sustainability of the operations (ICR, paras 67, 69).
        Risk mitigation measures proved to be inadequate. The PAD (para 43) acknowledges that the
         project team expected to a greater extent some higher institutional risks in the implementation of
         the project in medium-sized cities as a result of their relatively weaker institutional and technical
         capacity, however, the planned capacity building, technical assistance, close supervision by MOT
         and PCU, along increased Bank supervision, were insufficient and failed to meet expectations.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



The ICR notes (para 92) that the Bank conducted regular supervision missions and provided support for
technical, fiduciary, procurement, and environmental issues. Specific support included hiring a senior
consultant to support the five cities in launching the bidding processes and implementing the works
according to schedule.

Capacity constraints at national and subnational levels delayed the implementation of the project and
impaired support to the systems’ operation. The NUTP required substantial supervision as envisaged at
appraisal. The PCU-UMUS suffered from budgetary instability that resulted in a high staff rotation, poor
project monitoring, slow TA, and low knowledge development (ICR, para 71). The World Bank continuously
requested the Ministry of Transport to provide more budget allocation to the UMUS. Adequate funding was
critical to allow UMUS to effectively support subnational entities and carry out the identified studies for
supporting the systems’ operation.

The Bank team failed to provide sufficient support either through TA or a better M&E framework to start the
operation of the systems. The ICR (para 94) points to the fact that the slow or absent progress in setting
plans for operating the project-provided infrastructure became evident in 2016/2017. The Bank and the
UMUS made several efforts to emphasize the importance of such operations, including national
workshops. However, these efforts were insufficient as the subnational entities lacked incentives/funding to
commence the operations. The situation was aggravated by some of the program’s requirements that were
not revised during the implementation. The project team as well as the ICR noted in (para 103) that the
National Economic and Social Council (CONPES) program specifications were too rigid and the process to
request modifications to the initial specifications was complex and lengthy, resulting in delays in project
execution (the CONPES are agreements between the national and subnational governments by which the
national government commits to provide funding subject to compliance with program requirements. These
agreements cannot be unilaterally modified, and subnational entities would not agree to include new
requirements to ensure an operation they were not convinced to foster). Overall, the increased supervision
and efforts during nine years of the project implementation could not address the deficiencies in design and
ensure the achievement of the desired development outcomes.

The project team informed IEG (06/28/21) that in order to resolve implementation issues and work more
closely with the clients to advance project execution, the World Bank significantly strengthened its
supervision strategy and committed a high amount of resources to project supervision. For example,
decentralization of project management and the assignment of a TTL based in the Bogota office. This was
aimed at providing maximum handholding to project implementing agencies at both the national and
subnational levels. Moreover, when implementation delays impacted project execution and the ability of the
project to achieve its development outcomes by the closing date, the frequency of supervision mission was
enhanced, beyond the standard two yearly general missions.

There were external factors that were out of the supervision teams control. These included: (i) increased
informal transport services that would compete with the new systems, associated with increased internal
migration; (ii) increased access to motorbikes affecting the demand for public transport; (iii) the COVID
pandemic causing both delayed operation and a dramatic reduction of mobility demand (up to 80 percent
close to the Project’s closing date).



Quality of Supervision Rating
 Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design included typical public transport outcome indicators to measure efficiency, affordability,
 quality, safety, and environmental sustainability. However, there were shortcomings: (a) the baselines and
 the targets were not designed in a way that allowed the impact of the indicator to be attributed to the
 project; (b) in most cases the methodology was too complex and did not match the capacity of the local
 authorities, which required a simplification of the M&E during project implementation; and (c) the
 affordability indicator was influenced by exogenous macroeconomic factors beyond the project’s scope and
 control, generating issues with attribution (ICR para 75).



b. M&E Implementation
  During the 2018 restructuring, the Bank attempted to simplify the M&E framework by reducing the
  number of indicators, eliminating the redundancies in the intermediate indicators, and by making the
  indicators specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound (ICR para 77). The UMUS also
  clarified responsibilities for the collection of indicators data according to the competencies of different
  agencies at the municipal level. However, the targets for the indicators were not reliably defined since
  specific analysis for project activities was not performed during project preparation. Such an analysis
  would have made available key metrics, including expected passenger demand in the opening year and a
  forecast trend for the future.

  The ICR reports (para 78) that the implementation of the M&E framework proved to be difficult for local
  implementing entities because of the data and resources requirement. After the 2018
  restructuring, subnational entities were more consistent in reporting intermediate indicators through
  progress reports. The ICR further notes that after the 2018 restructuring, M&E implementation improved
  over time and was better for intermediate indicators. However, outcome indicators still didn’t have clear
  reporting procedures and methodologies, and required specific consultants and follow-up from the
  UMUS, which sometimes caused delays in reporting. The information in the M&E was not actual data, but
  estimates from feasibility studies - and was complemented with field visits, secondary sources of
  information, and stakeholders interviews.



c. M&E Utilization
  The UMUS and the Bank used output indicators to monitor implementation progress and guided project
  decision making. The outcome indicators were not utilized as the project needed to be fully operational
  to achieve the PDO. As mentioned above, the M&E information was not actual but estimated.

  The ICR mentions that the output indicators were useful to monitor implementation progress, flag
  implementation problems between subnational entities, and provided justification for project extensions.


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category "B" and the following four safeguards were triggered;
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was developed by the Bank in coordination with the
   Ministries of Environment and Transport, the National Planning Department, and the local implementing
   entities. The Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were put in place for all infrastructure works to be
   contracted.

   During implementation, the Ministry of Transport Implementing Unit maintained a qualified and proactive
   specialist who provided continuous support to local implementing agencies on the implementation of the
   environmental safeguards. This included regular documentation, reporting, and capacity building. The ICR
   reports (para 84) that the project’s environmental safeguards performance was satisfactory. With the
   projects still ongoing, the Bank prepared a post-closure action plan to ensure continued compliance with
   environmental safeguards (ICR para 83).

   The ICR does not report on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04).

   The ICR does not report on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). The project team informed IEG that
   in in Envigado in Valle de Aburra, there were several "chance findings". The Bank safeguards policy was
   followed.

   The ICR reports (para 85) that the social safeguards performance was satisfactory. At project closure,
   there was only one pending social safeguards issue. This related to Metroplús Project involving construction
   of a box culvert for slope stabilization in the construction and complementary works in the south of the Valle
   de Aburrá Phase 1. For the ongoing projects, the UMUS would keep tracking social compliance and ensure
   that that the resettlement continues to be delivered in accordance with World Bank policy since the
   Resettlement Policy Framework has been assumed by the Ministry of Transport.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM)

   The ICR reports (para 87) that the FM of the project was conducted in accordance with the arrangements
   set forth in the legal agreement. During the initial years, the FM performance was satisfactory. However, in
   2016-2017 (when the implementation accelerated), there were minor shortcomings (the ICR does not

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



   specify them). The project team informed IEG that the minor issues related to delays in providing
   information or clarifications. They occurred in a context in which implementation picked up and the PCU
   had to deal with more FM transactions and contracts than before. The Bank and the client agreed on an
   action plan to provide pending information that the client complied with.

   At project closing FM issues outstanding related to the amortization of advances/return of unused funds to
   the World Bank in Medellin-Valle de Aburrá (US$560,000), a pending clarification of the final audit, and a
   justification or refund of expenses. The project team informed IEG that audit issue is still pending. The
   issue with resources in Valle de Aburra is resolved.

   Procurement

   The 2018 restructuring paper instituted a requirement that the procurement regulations would apply (ICR
   para 29). This would allow for a greater focus on value for money and would foster competition (ICR para
   35). The Ministry of Transport Implementing Unit (UMUS) maintained appropriate procurement capacity
   during project implementation. The ICR reports (para 86) that as implementation accelerated in 20016/17
   (there were 16 contracts financed by the World Bank compared to just seven in previous years), there
   were more procurement challenges. This reflects an acceleration of implementation in all subnational
   entities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately               Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately               Moderately                  There were significant
Bank Performance
                               Satisfactory             Unsatisfactory              shortcomings in quality at entry.
Quality of M&E                 Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

Key lessons adapted from the ICR are as follows:

For a national program to support urban transport, technical requirements should be flexible
to adapt to local needs, and based on evidence (i.e., systems should be made more attractive to
users and financial sustainability ensured to facilitate private sector participation). Based on the

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)



initial success of TransMilenio, the national policy established requirements (e.g., use of technology)
or even objectives (e.g., fleet rationalization) that did not fit local needs. Cities across the globe
(especially cities in Africa and Asia) have been implementing BRTs aiming to replicate the
TransMilenio system without taking into consideration the local context and specific needs of the
cities concerned. It is important to highlight the importance on providing customized transport
solutions for each city. In Colombia, SPTSs were severely impacted by the influence of TransMilenio
as they were overspecified in terms of technology requirements for smaller operations. Several cities
suffered from an undersupply of public transport as informal services advanced while operators did
not renew their fleets.

A Technical Assistance (TA) component directly supporting subnational level implementing
entities can help with implementation. Project implementation suffered from delays due to
instability and lack of capacity of the implementing agency as well as the low technical capacity of
smaller cities. Including the TA component allowed the speeding up of the implementation. Such a
TA component benefited the program implementation and built technically strong teams with
experienced specialists at the city level.

Early consolidation of the environmental and social management capacities is important to
ensure timely project implementation. Experience has shown that the earlier these teams are
onboard and able to participate in project design and planning, the higher the rate of success for the
particular project activity.

It is important to go beyond building infrastructure and focus on achieving outcomes
through systems operation. Urban transport projects should explore system interventions to
attract greater demand for public transport, especially in terms of disincentivizing motorcycles and
moto-taxis or integrating informal transport into the system.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written with ample evidence to support its findings and ratings. It was candid about the flaws
in the results framework and put forward a sound theory of change. The ICR is results-oriented and discusses
attribution issues. It is nicely illustrated with before and after photographs, maps, and useful tables summarizing
the achievement of outputs and outcomes by city that also reflect delays and risks of non-completion (Tables 2
and 3, pages 17-18). The ICR provides an excellent analysis and account of key factors that affected
implementation and outcomes. The lessons are based on project experience.

Some shortcomings include: (a) the quality at entry rating of "moderately satisfactory" is not consistent with the
narrative under "key factors during preparation" (pages 25 and 26); and (b) it does not report on natural habitats
or physical cultural resources, even though they were triggered.



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program (P117947)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
