     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022303

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P122486                                   IN: Karn Wtrshed II

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                     Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50870                                 31-Dec-2018                                         40,181,396.71

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Sep-2012                               31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           60,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            45,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        40,181,396.71                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson               J. W. van Holst             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, 2012) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, 2012), for this India Karnataka Watershed Development Project II (KWDP II), was
   to “demonstrate more effective watershed management through greater integration of programs related to
   rainfed agriculture, innovative and science-based approaches, and strengthened institutions and capacities”.
   KWDP II was part of the national Integrated Watershed Management Program (IWMP).



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



   While the KWDP II had three restructurings during implementation, the PDO remained the same. There were
   some adjustments in some of the performance indicators and targets with respect to the PDO and some of
   the components, as described in Section 2e below, where it is argued that a split evaluation of objectives be
   undertaken in this review.

   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved in Section 4, this review will parse the
   PDO into three objectives:

   Objective 1: to demonstrate more effective watershed management through greater integration of programs
   related to rainfed agriculture;

   Objective 2: to demonstrate more effective watershed management through innovative and science-based
   approaches; and

   Objective 3: to demonstrate more effective watershed management through strengthened institutions and
   capacities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Support for Improved Program Integration in Rainfed Areas (Original allocation:
   US$22.13 million; Actual: US$17.86 million): Five activities, namely; (i) developing a Land Resource
   Inventory (LRI) of the pilot micro-watersheds (MWSs) and the decision support systems (DSSs) for
   improved integration of watershed management; (ii) developing a spatial digitized library; (iii) conducting
   hydrological assessments of selected catchments, and generating and disseminating water availability
   maps to farmers; (iv) developing MWS master plans for soil and water conservation investments, integrating
   with plans in the Integrated Watershed Management Program (IWMP) and the National Rural Employment
   Guarantee Scheme (NREGS); and (v) strengthening community-based monitoring and documentation.

   Component 2: Research, Development, and Innovation (Original allocation: US$19.57 million; Actual:
   US$21.75 million): This component was comprised of four four activities; (i) conducting applied research
   studies on several strategic topics; (ii) conducting hydrological monitoring and piloting community-based
   groundwater management; (iii) developing or adapting planning and training tools, maps, and climate
   information for use by farmers; and (iv) strengthening the institutional arrangements for rainfed agriculture
   and watershed management research and technology transfer.

   Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (Original allocation: US$9.14 million; Actual cost: US$1.61
   million): Four activities, namely; (i) developing and delivering training modules, awareness raising activities,
   and structured exposure visits on extension, integrated watershed management, and value addition for key

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



  actors; (ii) training of key Government staff on in-house M&E systems and conducting exposure visits for
  state-level stakeholders; (iii) improving the capacities of farmer contact centers (RSKs) in project areas; and
  (iv) upgrading government training centers’ servicing activities and strengthening their information systems.

  Component 4: Strengthening Horticulture in Rainfed Areas (Original cost: US$27.57 million; Actual
  cost: US$14.93 million): Five activities, namely; (i) demonstrating productivity improvement in annual and
  perennial horticulture crops, nutrition gardens, crop diversification, and crop-soil-water relationships; (ii)
  strengthening model nurseries in the existing Department of Horticulture (DoH) farms; (iii) establishing soil
  and leaf tissue analysis laboratory facilities and providing training to farmers on their use; (iv) conducting
  feasibility studies, participatory value chain investigations, and field demonstrations of low-cost post-harvest
  equipment and expanding the DoH skill development programs on the production post-harvest
  management, value-addition, and market linkage support; and (v) establishing producer companies.

  (e) Component 5: Project Management and Coordination (Original cost: US$7.29 million, Actual cost:
  US$3.79 million). Ensuring effective and efficient project management by financing (i) specialized
  consultants; (ii) incremental administration costs; (iii) a communication strategy; and (iv) third-party M&E.

  The project was to implement watershed management planning and capacity-building activities in two
  phases: support a small number of sub-watersheds in the first phase, and apply lessons learned and
  experience from the first phase in additional sub-watersheds under a second phase.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   (i) Project Costs: The total project costs at approval was US$85.7 million. The actual project costs at
  closing was US$59.94 million (or about 70% of original total costs). The difference was due to three factors:
  a cancellation of US$15 million of the IDA credit (during the December 2018 restructuring); SDR
  depreciation against the US dollar of almost US$5 million; and a decrease of Government counterpart
  funding of US$5.94 million.

  (ii) Financing: At approval, the IDA credit (IDA No. 50870) was US$60.0 million, with a Government
  counterpart financing commitment of US$25.7 million, totaling US$85.7 million. By the end of the project,
  total financing had decreased to US$59.9 million (IDA: US$40.18 million; Government: US$19.76 million),
  due to the 3 factors cited above.

  (iii) Borrower/Recipient Contribution: At approval, the Borrower counterpart contribution was supposed
  to have been US$25.7 million, with a final contribution of $19.76 million (or 77%) (ICR, Annex 3). The main
  reason for this decreased contribution was due to reduced project costs for various components.

  (iv) Dates: The project was approved on September 6, 2012, became effective on April 23, 2013. A mid-
  term review was carried out in November 2016. The original closing date was December 31, 2018, with the
  final closing date being December 31, 2019.

  Restructurings: Significant Changes During Implementation, Revised Allocations Among
  Components and Revised Indicators/Targets (see ICR Annex 7 for details of the main changes)




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



The project underwent three Level-2 restructurings: in July 2015, in October 2017, and in December
2018. While the PDO was not revised, PDO indicators and targets were revised in the first two
restructurings (see ICR, paras. 12 - 24 and Annex 7).

Before any project restructuring, the four PDO indicators were as follows (ICR, paras 8 and 9):

      Percentage of micro-watersheds with improved convergence and integration (target 70%);
      New science-based approaches and tools adopted into wider watershed operations (number);
      Improved M&E capability in Watershed Development Department (WDD) (M&E cell established and
       functional); and
      Incremental change in agricultural and horticultural productivity in project areas for selected crops
       (ton/hectare) (target 70%).

The main revisions in components and changes in PDO indicators during restructuring were as follows
(ICR, paras. 14 and 16):

First restructuring in 2015: The changes made were (a) three new activities were introduced under
component 2, (b) the PDO indicator (percentage of micro-watersheds with improved convergence and
integration) was changed from only hydrological assessments to include the digitized library, the DSS and
the portal; and (c) for the PDO Indicator (increase in agricultural and horticultural productivity) the target was
reduced from 75% to 25%. These changes resulted in a reduction in the level of ambition of the project's
PDO.

Second restructuring in 2017: The changes made were (a) various activities were added and dropped,
(b) the major change was abandoning the four original PDO indicators and replacing them with the following
two:

      Data from science-based approaches adopted by other departments/institutions in the state for
       planning (number).
      Sub-watershed management plans based on innovative science-based approaches and community
       consultation (number).

These changes resulted in another reduction in the level of ambition of the PDO.

Third restructuring in 2018 made the following changes (a) value addition support was shifted from farmer-
based organizations to farmer-producer organizations (FPOs), also resulting in some adjustments in
costs; (b) there was cancellation of $15 million from the IDA credit and an extension of the closing date by
12 months (to December 31, 2019); and (c) the scope of the project increased with respect to two aspects:
the size of the saturation area where the project was to finance implementation of the newly developed
watershed management plans (DPRs) increased from 11 to 87 micro-watersheds, and from 9 to 11 sub-
watersheds; and the inventory scale increased from 935 micro-watersheds to 1,931 micro-watersheds, with
the addition of four districts to the project (from 7 to 11 districts) (see ICR, para. 20, and Annex 7). These
changes resulted in no reduction in the level of ambition of the PDO.

These revisions in components, PDO indicators and targets, especially those which were part of the second
restructuring, resulted in a two stage reduction in the level of ambition of the project, caused by the revised
indicators, targets and achievements (summarized in Annex 7 of the ICR). It was for these reasons that this
review will undertake a split rating of objectives in Sections 4 and 6 based on the project's restructuring in

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



   2015 and 2017. It should be noted that the ICR assessment of the project's achievements in Section II B
   and its split rating analysis of objectives recognizes only the 2017 restructuring because "it was the most
   profound revision of the results framework" (para 28).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were relevant to addressing the critical problems of achieving sustainable and
effective watershed development in the State of Karnataka, namely:

(a) Ineffective watershed management planning and implementation;

(b) Ineffective integration of national support programs;

(c) Outdated and generic approaches to watershed management; and

(d) Insufficient capacities of central and Karnataka state extension services, and of farmers.

Accordingly, the overall PDO was to achieve more effective watershed management through three strategic
sub-objectives. The objectives were strongly aligned with the Government of India (GOI) 12th Five Year
Plan for 2012–2017, which called for inclusive growth through increasing agricultural production and food
security, with attention to rainfed agriculture. The project was particularly relevant to supporting core
elements of the Plan’s priorities, especially regarding the integrated water management program (ICR,
para. 5). As part of Government’s national watershed management program, Government had identified
three weak, but imprecisely defined, watershed management aspects (integration with other programs
supporting rainfed agriculture, the extent of innovative and science-based approaches, strengthened
institutions and capacities) which were considered to be major gaps which needed to be addressed by the
project. Hence, these gaps motivated Government’s request to the Bank for financing this project.

The project's objectives also contributed to the fulfillment of the World Bank Group’s FY13–FY17 Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India, especially with respect to the improvement of rainfed agriculture’s
productivity by supporting the implementation of the national IWMP; helping farmers diversify production,
lower the cost of production, and identify stable markets for their goods; supporting self-employment
opportunities; and developing in-demand skills, particularly for women. The Project also was strongly
aligned with and supported the Bank's subsequent Country Partnership Framework/CPF for India (FY18 -
FY22) with respect to a focus area of "Promoting resource-efficient growth", objective 1.1 and three cross-
cutting themes: climate-smart engagement; addressing gender gaps; and harnessing high impact
technologies. The World Bank had a history of partnership with India in supporting their watershed
development program, supporting 11 watershed development projects, since 1981, for a total of US$808
million. Projects pioneered and scaled-up participatory watershed development planning integrated with
livelihood improvement and improved monitoring and evaluation (M&E). KWDP II was a follow-on
intervention to the Karnataka Watershed Development Project (KWDP), which closed in FY09 and was
implemented by the Government of Karnataka (GoK) Watershed Development Department (WDD). The
GoI requested a different model of support which would ensure that watershed management was


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



               implemented more effectively, and would address key weaknesses in watershed management (ICR, paras.
               3 and 4).

               In summary, this project's objectives addressed highly relevant watershed management issues and the
               objectives were also highly aligned with both Government and World Bank development strategies for
               India. The relevance of the project's objectives is therefore rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To demonstrate more effective watershed management through greater integration of programs related to
                             rainfed agriculture.

                             Rationale
                             While the project’s original design included a results framework (RF) in the PAD, it did not include a theory of
                             change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The ICR reconstructed a ToC for
                             the project which was consistent with its strategy, objectives and components, especially with respect to the
                             overall outcome of promoting more efficient watershed management through the three sub- objectives (ICR,
                             Figure 1, paras. 6 & 18). The ICR highlights the rationale for addressing watershed development in rainfed
                             areas (ICR, para. 1), with high concentrations of environmental stress and rural poor.

                             Theory of Change: The ToC emphasizes integration of micro watershed (MWS) master plans for soil and
                             water conservation investments developed for this project with those developed by the India-wide Integrated
                             Watershed Management Program (IWMP) and the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
                             (NREGS). As noted already, poor integration of the national rainfed support program with other schemes was
                             a weak aspect of watershed management (ICR, para 4).

                             Outputs:

                             Number of micro-watershed master plans (MWMPs) integrated with larger scale sub-watershed assessments:
                             Original Target: 935 not achieved. The convergence target with the IWMP and NREGS of 70% was not
                             achieved as planned because the IWMP ceased to exist in 2015 and the mobilization of the NREGS
                             resources until then had been slow (ICR, para 29).

                             Outcomes:




                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



Percentage of micro-watersheds with improved convergence and integration: Original Target: 70%; Revised
Target: 25%; Original target not achieved when the project closed for the same reasons as the output was not
achieved.

The efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated modest



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To demonstrate more effective watershed management through greater integration of programs related to
rainfed agriculture, but with a reduced level of ambition resulting from the restructuring in 2015.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The ToC was the same as for Objective 1, but with a reduction in the watershed
management planning and implementation to achieve integration and convergence with IWMP and
NREGS. The a reduced ambition reflected a deeper understanding of the long time it took to achieve the
envisioned integration and convergence (ICR, para. 18);

Outputs (ICR, para. 34, Annex 7): As for Objective 1, and in addition, the following outputs information was
recorded in the ICR:

The target for the number of micro-watershed master plans integrated with larger scale sub-watershed
assessments at the end of the project was reduced from 935 to 931. The ICR comments that "The target was
not upscaled to 1,931 with the addition of four districts in October 2017 (see below) due to an oversight"
(Annex 7, page 75)

A reduction of the time taken for net planning at the micro-watershed (MWS) level was introduced in July
2015 "to reflect the efficiency introduced into the planning process", but the new standard was dropped in
October 2017 "because of concerns about its measurability" (Annex 7, page 75).

Outcomes.

As noted above, the percentage of micro-watersheds with improved convergence and integration at the end
of project target was reduced from 70 percent to 25 percent. The reduction was made because of the
expected shift in the IWMP. The ICR does not indicate whether 25% was achieved.

Because of the absence of any evidence of progress toward the objective, the efficacy with which Objective 1
Revision 1 was achieved is rated modest.



Revised Rating
Modest

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To demonstrate more effective watershed management through greater integration of programs related to
rainfed agriculture, but with a reduced level of ambition resulting from the significant restructuring (substantial
changes in PDO indicators) in 2017.

Revised Rationale
Theory of change. The ToC was the same as for Objective 1 except that, according to the ICR, the IWMP had
been terminated and "since the IWMP resources were no longer available, it was decided to use the project
resources to finance implementation of DPRs within several MWSs (called a saturation area), thus
demonstrating the innovations and technologies supported by the project". The "PDO indicator which
measured the integration outcome was reduced in scope to measure adoption of science-based data by
departments/institutions in the state for watershed planning". In addition, the PDO indicator measuring
improved agricultural productivity was dropped because yield increases were not expected before project
closure (ICR, para 19).

Outputs (ICR, Table 4 and Annex 1, page 46)

Departments and institutions provided access to information from the digital portal and decision support
system (DSS): Target: Yes (all 5 Depts.); Actual: Yes: Percent of Target: 100%

Establishment and operationalization of a public portal, as interface between digitized library, Decision
Support System (DSS) tools and users;

Organization of international conference to showcase the Land Resource Inventory (LRI) work;

Hosting of five day knowledge sharing workshop for key representatives from 9 states;

Development of three demonstration models on soil fertility management in MWSs; integrated nutrient
management; water harvesting and improved production technologies.

Outcomes:

Data from science-based approaches adopted by other departments/institutions in the state for planning.
(Target: 5; Actual: 5: Percent of target: 100%.

Substantive outcomes generated by the science-based approaches to planning included (a) the Department
of Agriculture used the LRI data and crop planning DSS to determine the suitability of crop introduction in
watersheds; and (b) the Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department (RD-PR) used hydrological
monitoring data and the farm pond and check dam planning DSS to determine the need for check dams in
Karnataka. Other important outcomes are listed in the ICR (para 34)

The extent to which Objective 1, Revision 2 was achieved is rated substantial



Revised Rating

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To demonstrate more effective watershed management through innovative and science-based approaches.

Rationale
Theory of Change: Problems which constrain the effectiveness of watershed management in the target areas
were identified as high levels of poverty, as well as ineffective and outdated watershed management planning
and implementation. In response, the project design established priority activities which would address these
constraints through generating, testing and implementing enhanced innovative and science-based
approaches to achieve more effective watershed management. These investments provided the basis for a
range of approaches and outputs which resulted in a number of important outcomes, including preparation
and implementation of: enhanced/”new generation” watershed management plans, supported by improved
Land Resource Inventories (LRIs); establishment of digitized information to support planning;
generation/piloting of improved production and post-harvest technologies at the farm level; and access to
improved weather advisory information.

Outputs (based on ICR, Annexes 1 and 7):

Number of new hydrological monitoring systems installed and functional (advanced and community
monitored): Equipment Units: Original Target: 150; Revised Target: 120; Actual: 179; Percent of Revised
Target: 149%; Advanced Monitoring Stations: Target: 14; Achieved 14: Percent of Target: 100%; Community
Monitoring: Target: 25; Achieved 25: Percent of Target: 100%;

Number of MWSs with digitized database library fully operational: Target: 935; Actual: 2534: Percent of
Target: 270%;

Number of Demonstrations of Improved Technologies for processing and value chain improvements in
selected horticultural crops: Target: 108; Actual: 60; Percent of Target: 56%;

Number of Farmer Contact Centers for improved information for farmers on climate change and risk
management: Target: 73: Actual: no data in the ICR

Number of commodities with value addition and market system improved: Target: 3; Actual: no data in the
ICR

Outcomes

(a) The ICR (para 30) states that the outcome, as measured by the original PDO indicator, (new science-
based approaches and tools adopted into wider watershed operations) was "partially achieved". It is noted,
however, that Table 2 in the ICR which shows the target for the number of new science-based approaches
and tools adopted into wider watershed operations as 2 compared with an actual achievement of 4 based on
the revised definition of this indicator "before restructuring" in 2017 and not before restructuring in 2015.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



(b) Incremental change in agriculture/horticulture productivity in project areas for selected crops (MT/ha.) - no
data in the ICR

Based on the shortfalls in outcomes for this objective, measured with the relevant indicator before the 2015
restructuring, the efficacy with which Objective 2 has been achieved is rated modest



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To demonstrate more effective watershed management through innovative and science-based approaches,
but there was a reduced level of ambition because the indicator calling for an increased productivity of
agricultural and horticultural crops was reduced from 75% to 25% (Restructuring in October 2015).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: While based on essentially the same theory of change, revision 1 Introduced key
innovative tools which were developed and implemented under the project, but also reduced the level of
ambition of a key performance indicator (i.e. increased productivity of target crops).

Outputs

Number of new hydrological monitoring systems installed and functional: Advanced Monitoring System:
Revised Target: 120; Actual: 179; Percent of Revised Target: 149%;

Number of MWS master plans where innovative and relevant science-based knowledge is used to develop
Land Resource Inventories: Target: 1,931; Actual: 2,534; Percent of Revised Target: 131%;

Number of MWSs with digitized database library fully operational: Revised Target: 1,931; Actual: 2,534;
percent of revised target: 272%;

Number of MWSs with pilot demonstrations on watershed treatments saturation: Revised Target: 87; Actual:
89: Percent of Target: 103%;

Number of pilot demonstrations of water harvesting and crop production technologies: Target: 9: Actual: 11:
Percent of Target: 122%;

Introduction of peri-urban watershed planning and management pilots.

Outcomes:

The designated PDO indicator was "Number of sub-watershed management plans based on innovative
science-based approaches and community consultations": Target: 9; Actual: 11; Percent of Target: 122%;




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



Incremental increase of yields (of 25%) for agricultural and horticultural crops was not achieved (and
productivity progress was not cited)

This ICRR does not accord the same importance as the ICR to the "number of sub-watershed management
plans based on innovative science-based approaches and community consultations" because this indicator
does not measure the outcome of Objective 2/Revision 1. While this indicator measures a process, it does not
"demonstrate more effective watershed management through innovative and science-based approaches".

While productivity increase (usually a sound PDO indicator) is often not achieved before project
closure, some progress towards "increased productivity of agricultural and horticultural crops" may have
justified a "substantial" efficacy rating. However, the ICR provided no evidence of increased productivity.

Therefore, in the light of the above points with respect to the two outcome indicators, the efficacy with which
this Objective 2 Revision1 was achieved is rated "modest".



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To demonstrate more effective watershed management through innovative and science-based approaches,
but while science-based approaches were retained, the aim to achieve incremental increase in agricultural
and horticultural yields was abandoned (restructuring in 2017).

Revised Rationale
 Theory of Change: Overall , most elements of the ToC for this objective remained the same, while
incorporating improved tools, but the PDO indicator involving incremental agricultural and horticultural yields
was eliminated, due to a change in the national watershed management program and project implementation
delays.

Outputs: (In addition to the outputs already listed above under Revision 1, unless noted below.)

Community monitoring breakdown indicator: Dropped (due to termination of the national IWMP);

Improved information for farmers on climate change and risk management: Dropped (measured by next
output

Number of farmers in each MWS willing/intending to adopt at least two climate-adaptation and/or climate
mitigation practices recommended by LRI knowledge and sub-watershed management plans: Target: 70% of
farmers; Actual: 78%; Percent of Target: 111%;

Value addition and marketing system improved: dropped (but merged with another indicator);

Peri-urban watershed planning and management pilot: dropped, due to delayed launching;


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



Number of sub-watershed in which soil and water conservation investments were made, based on
management plans: Target: 11: Actual: 11: % of Target: 100%;

Outcome:

New science-based approaches and tools successfully adopted into wider watershed operations.

The ICR concluded that as a result of the innovations and capacities introduced into watershed management
planning at the MWS level, soil and water conservation planning and execution, crop planning, nutrient
management, and livelihood interventions would be more effective and would demonstrate strong results
while better utilizing government resources (Annex 7, page 74).

The efficacy with which Objective 2, Revision 2 was achieved is rated substantial



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To demonstrate more effective watershed management through strengthened institutions and capacities, but
the PDO indicator (“M&E capability of the WDD” as a measure of institutional capacity) was dropped because
“it measured only a narrow capacity element in the WDD” (ICR, Annex 7).

Rationale
Theory of Change: Based on an assessment of institutional capacities of central and extension services,
there was a need to identify priority activities which would enhance the capacities of the relevant agencies
and farmer groups, at central and provincial levels to prepare, implement and monitor/evaluate enhanced
approaches to watershed management, with a result focus. The ToC (ICR, Figure 1) illustrates how the
institutional development objectives were achieved through the inter-connections between the various inputs,
outputs and institutional outcome, including interventions at the farmer group level.

The restructuring in either 2015, 2017 or 2018 did not affect the level of ambition for Objective 3 and hence
this review does not consider any revisions of this objective

The main relevant outputs and outcomes achieved and not achieved with respect to Objective 3 during this
project's implementation are summarized below.

Outputs (ICR, Tables 3 and 6, paras 32,33, 37,38, and Annexes 1 and 7):

Percentage of farmers in each micro-watershed willing/intending to adopt at least two climate-adaptation
and/or climate-mitigation practices, recommended by LRI knowledge and sub-watershed management plans:
Target: 60%; Actual: 74%; % of Target: 123%; note: Annex 7 states this indicated was dropped but provides
no reason.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



Percentage of farmers trained in each sub-watershed intending to adopt practices that are based on
integrated land resource knowledge generated by the project: Target: 70%; Actual: 78%; % of Target: 111%

Number of Watershed Assistants trained on use of LRI data for assisting farmers: Target: 60; Actual: 172: %
of Target: 350%.

Percentage of farmers expressing satisfaction with the LRI-based assistance provided by Farmer
Centers. Target: 75%; Actual: 93%; Percent of Target: 124%;

Number of strengthened women's self-help groups (SHGs) supported: Target: 250; Actual: 360:
Percent Target: 144%;

Number of technical staff trained on use of LRI data for assisting farmers: Target: 60; Actual: 172; % of
Target: 287%;

Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) replaced the previous Farmer Based Organizations (FBOs), to
provide more effective support, covering several activities, which contributed to the overall objectives more
effectively, involving improved value chains, processing facilities, development of business plans, and
logistics infrastructure

Strengthened women self-help groups supported .Target: 250; Actual: 360; Percent of Target: 144%;

Number of laboratories established and operationalized: Target: 2; Actual: 2; Percent of Target: 100%

Outcome

Improved M&E Capability in the Watershed Development Department (Target: M&E cell produces M&E
reports on regular basis: Actual: M&E reports were produced on a regular basis). While the ICR (para. 32)
states that this outcome "as measured by the original indicator was partially achieved” by end of project it
was 100% achieved (ICR, Annex 1). Nevertheless, by the second restructuring in 2017 this indicator had
been dropped because, according to the ICR, it measured a narrow capacity element in the Watershed
Development Department (WDD).

Percentage of farmers adopting improved conservation practices & production technologies: Target: 60%;
Actual: 89; Percent of Target: 148%.

Percentage of farmers adopting Improved horticulture techniques: Target: 60%; Actual: 28%; Percent of
Target: 47%;

Based on the achievement of the PDO indicator, other indicators and the institutional improvements this
review rates the extent to which Objective 3 has been achieved as substantial.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 27
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The efficacy of the extent to which the original objectives were achieved was modest. This was because there
                            was very little progress made towards Objective 1, namely the integration of the activities in this project with
                            those of the national Integrated Watershed Management Program (IWMP) and the National Rural
                            Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS). For the original Objective 2 the project made only partial
                            progress on "new science-based approaches and tools adopted into wider watershed operations". For
                            Objective 3, however, for which there were no revisions, efficacy was rated substantial . Nevertheless
                            because of the original poor performance vis a vis Objectives 1 and 2, the overall efficacy of the original
                            objectives was rated modest..



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the objectives at their first revision was also modest. The basis for this rating was as
                            follows. With respect to Objective 1 Revision 1, efficacy was rated negligible because, having reduced the
                            percentage of micro-watersheds with improved convergence and integration from 75% to 25%, there was no
                            evidence that this much lower level of ambition was achieved. The efficacy of Objective 2 Revision 1 was
                            rated modest because, although the first restructuring had reduced the target for increased productivity of
                            agricultural and horticultural crops from 75% to 25%, there was no evidence that the lower productivity was
                            achieved. As noted above, although the number of sub-watershed management plans based on innovative
                            science-based approaches and community consultations was exceeded by 22% this was not an
                            outcome. There was no revision of Objective 3 and hence the efficacy with which this objective was achieved
                            remained the same, namely substantial. Based on these ratings the overall efficacy of the objectives at their
                            first revision was rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                       Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Low achievement
                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            The efficacy with which Objective 1 Revision 2 was achieved was rated substantial by this review
                            because new science-based approaches and tools were being successfully adopted into wider watershed
                            operations and substantive outcomes were being generated. .The evidence regarding the achievements of
                            Objective 2 as a result of Revision 2 was that data from science-based approaches had been adopted by
                            other departments/institutions in the state for planning, and that consequently at the MWS level, soil and
                            water conservation planning and execution, crop planning, nutrient management, and livelihood interventions
                            would be more effective and were expected to generate strong results. As noted earlier, there were no


                                                                                                                              Page 14 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



  revisions for Objective 3 for which efficacy was rated substantial during the project implementation
  period. The overall efficacy of these achievements is rated substantial by this review.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project performance and results demonstrated an efficiency rating of substantial, based on the
various evidenced-based tools applied and presented in the ICR (paras. 44 & 45, and Annex 4, also informed by
the project’s impact evaluation study). This detailed assessment in the ICR shows that the project cost-
benefit analyses demonstrated improved efficiency, especially following the project restructurings, compared to
the values at appraisal. In the cost-benefit analysis, the project compared well with past watershed projects,
and considerably better than the predecessor KWDP. Using conservative assumptions and reliable datasets,
the economic rate of return (ERR) at completion was estimated in the ICR to be 27.4 percent, compared to the
two ERRs estimated at appraisal (a) ERR of 19.7 percent, if other complementary incremental investment funds
(from NREGS program) are included in the project investments; and (b) ERR of 17 percent, with only the project
investments from the overall “parent” IWSM program. Also, the ICR financial rate of return (FRR) was estimated
to be 18.8 percent, slightly above the estimated FRR of 17.2 percent estimated at appraisal. As the ICR states,
the ERR is, of course, sensitive to reductions in income for farmers due to the weather (ICR, para. 44), but the
analysis in Table 4.3 in Annex 4 of the ICR shows that the estimated percentage decline in the ERR due to the
weather is lower than the estimated percentage decline in farm income due to weather. The ICR does not
comment on this.

With respect to other cost-effectiveness measures, the ICR showed positive results due to the project: (a) The
total project financial cost at current prices per project farmer was India Rupees (INR) 11,625 over the project
period compared to INR 24,194 at appraisal; (b) The cost per hectare of designing and implementing watershed
management interventions was INR 14,786 during the project, compared to INR 20,479 in non-project
watershed management planning and implementation under the IWMP, showing a drop of 28 percent because
of project interventions (para. 44); and (c) The project showed significant reductions in the duration of the normal
watershed project cycle used in Government programs, thereby reducing watershed treatment/management
costs; these reductions resulted from the project-supported generation and availability of the land resource
inventory (LRI) data and from the large inventory of micro-watersheds for which LRI data is now available.

The implementation efficiency is also reflected by project actions and corresponding efficiency measures (ICR,
para. 45):

(a) The ICR stated (para 45) that the project caught up with the delays experienced during the first two years
with a one-year extension, while expanding significantly the: project's geographical scope (from 7 districts to 11,
and from 935 MWSs to 2,534 MWSs); scope of the digitized library, data portal, and DSS tools, to include
additional features; and the beneficiary reach (11 FPOs compared to 2 planned, and 360 SHGs compared to
250 planned). Further, available project resources were used to implement DPR interventions in a saturation




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



zone—an activity which was not budgeted originally, due to project efficiency measures and other aspects,
/actions, including: several key items purchased at a lower price; and depreciation of the Indian rupee;

(b) The ICR also noted in paragraph 45 that the project generated efficiencies for the GoK in watershed
management planning and implementation (ICR), and also demonstrated cost efficiency in implementation (e.g.,
management and coordination costs were 6.47 percent of the IDA amount, compared to 8.50 percent allocation
at appraisal; and 6.32 percent of both the IDA and government allocations compared to 7.29 percent at
appraisal, which was commendable considering the additional year of project implementation);

(c) The project also contributed to more efficient targeting of soil and watershed investments once the DPR was
completed, based on the different Decision Support System (DSS) tools that were developed under the project.

The ICR does recognize some inefficiencies, although not major, mentioned in para. 45: Some inefficiencies
were observed in the advertisement of procurement items above US$10,000 in national and local newspapers
despite a World Bank threshold of US$100,000, which was subsequently rectified, in accordance with Bank
procurement guidelines. There was also frequent turnover of senior officials during the first two project years
and of procurement staff throughout implementation, which contributed to implementation inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                 17.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                              27.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Outcome Rating is based on a split evaluation of the performance of the project's objectives, for reasons
stated in Section 2e, and influenced by the features of the three restructurings during the implementation period,
such as reduced levels of ambition for some of the key indicators and their targets, albeit the project's objectives
remained the same. Based on the project’s high relevance, a range of ratings for efficacy, and substantial
efficiency this review concludes that the project’s overall outcome is rated “Moderately Satisfactory”. Table 1
provides the basis for this assessment.

The broad evidence used for the ratings of the three core elements cited above as determining the project's
overall outcome rating are as follows:


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



(1) High rating for relevance of the PDO, based on the project's strong alignment with (a) Government
national and state-level policies and strategies for enhancing watershed development, especially in watersheds
supporting highly populated rainfed agriculture areas; and (b) IDA’s country partnership strategy/framework,
while building on the lessons of previous extensive investments by the government in watershed management
programs in many states;

(2) Modest and Substantial ratings for efficacy, based on the evidence of the project’s achievements in
meeting the three objectives defined in Section 2a of the review and in light of performance indicators which
were amended by project restructuring during project implementation.

(3) Substantial rating for efficiency, considering the economic and financial achievements reflected in positive
economic and financial rates of return together with an overall efficient implementation performance, based on
the various cost-effectiveness measures presented in the ICR.

Table 1: Overall Outcome Rating

Rating Aspects and                                Objectives at           Objectives at
                          Original Objectives
      Dimensions                                First Restructuring Second Restructuring
   1) Relevance of
                                                        High
       Objectives
2) Efficacy (with same
objectives, but revised              _                  _                        _
  indicators/targets)
 Objective 1: Greater
      integration of
                                Modest               Modest                 Substantial
 programs related to
      rainfed agric.
       Objective 2:
    Innovative and
                                Modest               Modest                 Substantial
     science-based
       approaches
       Objective 3:
     Strengthened
                              Substantial          Substantial              Substantial
    institutions and
        capacities
 2) Overall Efficacy            Modest               Modest                 Substantial
      3) Efficiency                                 Substantial
                             Moderately            Moderately
  Outcome Rating *                                                         Satisfactory
                            Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
  Outcome Rating
                                     3                  3                        5
       Value
 Amount Disbursed
                                 2.79                 12.57                   24.84
       ($M)
 Disbursement (%)                 6.9                  31.3                    61.8
   Weight Value                  0.21                  0.94                    3.09
Weighted Total Rating                           4.24 (rounded to 4.0)

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



  Overall Outcome
                                              Moderately Satisfactory
      Rating

*For details, see ICR, paras. 25-45, Annex 7, and the disbursement table on p.2).




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There is moderate risk to sustaining the project’s outcomes and contribution to the project’s expected
impacts. The ICR provides sound evidence and rationale for this conclusion, while also highlighting various
mitigation measures promoted by the project during implementation (ICR, paras. 76 and 77),
including:

(a) The 14th Project Empowered Committee (PEC), the project’s Steering Committee, held a meeting in July
2019 (six months before the project was due to close), and approved an exit strategy to ensure continuous
updating and maintenance of key project interventions (including: LRI data and training; digitalized systems,
DSS, hydrological monitoring, key laboratories, supported by a regular budget to be allocated annually;
training provided to extension staff and farmers to use and maintain project interventions; continuation of
animal husbandry demonstrations, and regular maintenance of project investments, supported by a regular
budget and local level sub-watershed
committees.

(b) Evidence that the GoK’s new approach for watershed management planning and implementation is
expected to be maintained and scaled up within the state and in other states, as reflected by budgetary
allocations to relevant activities and complementary projects, and the state government's "exit and
sustainability strategy" for KWDP II (ICR, para. 77); and

(c) Building on the practical technical and institutional findings and lessons from KWDP II, the Indian
Government, including active participation by key counterparts from the Government of Karnataka, the Bank
has supported the formulation of a follow-on program, currently under preparation, called: "Rejuvenating
Watersheds for Agricultural Resilience Through Innovative Development", or "REWARD" (with a Government
program document and draft Project Appraisal Document already prepared). The follow-up program will
address the above risks, while helping to scale-up and sustain the interventions and benefits emerging from
KWDP II.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



  This project design was based on successful experiences and lessons from previous World Bank-
  financed investments in watershed development in India (for cumulative investments of about US$800
  million). Based on the evidence in the ICR (para 73) the quality-at-entry for this project was arguably
  "satisfactory". Specifically the ICR provided the following evidence.

  (i) Effective Role/Approach of Bank Design team: According to the ICR the project was designed by a
  team comprising the required multi-disciplinary expertise and experience; this team was supported by the
  Region’s quality assurance unit and various experts from the FAO Investment Center, thereby helping to
  ensure integration of relevant cross-country lessons/good practices. The Bank’s team worked closely with
  the Government’s counterpart team to apply lessons learned and good practices from the first KWDP,
  while establishing a new model of watershed management support, which was highly innovative and
  relevant to the GoI/GoK and World Bank strategies. Also, the Bank’s team carried out multiple missions
  and meetings with stakeholders both at the national and state levels to make sure that the design was
  technically sound and widely endorsed by key
  stakeholders.


  (ii) Sound Bank Fiduciary Assessments: The World Bank adequately fulfilled its fiduciary role by: carrying
  out procurement and financial management assessments of the implementing agencies; ensuring the
  development and disclosure of necessary safeguard documents before appraisal; ensuring that funding
  was available to generate missing background information and knowledge, and to conduct a
  socioeconomic assessment of and consultation with affected communities.

  However, a number of quality-at-entry weaknesses created significant problems for this project. From the
  start, the three elements of the PDO were imprecisely defined with over ambitious expectations of their
  impact . As elaborated in the discussion of M&E in the next section of this review, this led to a results
  framework which was weak because it was not clear what was meant by and how to measure the
  achievement of “integration and convergence”, “innovative and science-based approaches to watershed
  management”, what were the requirements for achieving “effective watershed management through
  strengthened institutions and capacities”, and how to calibrate appropriate indicators. Evidence of the
  lack of clarity of the original three-part PDO was that PDO indicators and targets were revised during
  implementation and ultimately abandoned and replaced in a series of restructurings. Finally, as noted by
  the ICR, there were no mitigation measure proposed in the PAD for the changes that occurred (and might
  have been foreseen by local Bank staff) in the national IWMP (para. 73).

  On balance this review rates this project's quality at entry as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision support was satisfactory, based on the evidence provided in the ICR (para. 74),
 and other supporting project documentation, especially Implementation Support Reports/ISRs, which
 included:


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



 (i) two to three implementation support missions annually, including technical and fiduciary reviews with
 relevant stakeholders, as well as Aide Memoires, ISRs, with justified and evidenced-based project
 performance ratings;



 (ii) official communications between central and state government authorities and Bank management,
 addressing key issues, agreed actions and improved results; and continuity of the Bank’s TTL/technical
 team, from concept to closing, which also enabled application and preservation of institutional
 memory;

 (iii) Bank project team initiatives to share and apply good practices and learning from other countries;



 (iv) provision of training of key officials in fiduciary practices, and using the Bank supervision missions to
 ensure sound fiduciary practices, compliance and proper use of Bank proceeds;



 (v) the Bank’s project team used three project restructurings to adjust the project to national and local
 contexts, overcome delays, and to use project resources more effectively and efficiently; and



 (vi) the Bank team ensured that a sound exit strategy was formulated and approved by the GoK before
 project closure (ICR, para. 76).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR noted that the project’s M&E design provided a basis to guide implementation and served as a
 tool to track and generate expected results, based on the following evidence (ICR, para. 64); (i) the project
 was designed to support an effective M&E system, including the assessment of ongoing progress and
 results monitoring, thematic studies, and impact evaluations by third-party agencies; (ii) the KWDP’s M&E
 cell was re-established to gather information from stakeholders and executing entities and produce
 consolidated semi-annual progress reports; and (iii) adequate IDA and government funds were allocated
 from outset for the execution of the M&E system.


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



 However, the project Results Framework presented several weaknesses: (i) the PDO-level indicators
 included a measurement of the long-term outcome (increased productivity), going beyond the PDO; (ii) the
 PDO-level indicator for the increased institutional capacity outcome measured a narrow capacity aspect
 (M&E capabilities); (iii) several central project-funded activities were not captured through indicators (e.g.,
 LRI and support to SHGs and the GIS laboratory); (iv) linking results to measurable outcomes was
 complicated due to the unclear PDO and their indicators, also unclear component structure, which the M&E
 system had to address during implementation. Overall, the project restructurings: improved the ability to
 measure the most relevant outputs and outcomes; adjusted measurements and targets, based on
 increased knowledge of costs, timelines, and national and local settings; and added indicators to measure
 additional results. However, the revised Results Framework did not adjust all the relevant targets.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR stated (para 65) that the M&E system/activities were implemented as planned, as follows; (i) the
  M&E cell collected data on project-supported activities on an ongoing basis and, in 2016, when the
  project began to show results, third-party agencies began to conduct impact evaluations; (ii) semi-annual
  progress reports provided detailed information on the progress of all activities, while the evaluations
  assessed progress based on enhanced Results Framework indicators; and (iii) thematic studies were
  prepared on a variety of project-financed interventions (e.g., benefits of livestock/feed management
  activities supported by the project). The monitoring of demonstration sites did include arrangements for
  the tracking and assessment of productivity changes for various crops, which provided useful data for the
  follow-up activities of this project. However, as mentioned in Section 4 of this review, the indicator
  tracking agricultural and horticultural yields was eventually abandoned.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 66) concluded that there was effective utilization of the information generated by the M&E
  system, as follows; (i) the information presented in the progress reports and impact evaluations informed
  the World Bank team on project progress and aspects requiring and basis for restructuring decisions; (ii)
  supported decision-making during semiannual PEC meetings; (iii) informed quarterly interim unaudited
  financial reports (IUFRs), work plans, and budgets; (iv) provided information for the technical project
  partners conducted monthly monitoring meetings to discuss the physical and financial status of activities,
  and the PTC met every two to three months to discuss activities’ technical soundness; (v) as stated
  above, there were arrangements for tracking of the productivity trends in the project-supported
  demonstration plots, which provided useful inputs for the follow-on “Rejuvenating Watersheds for
  Agriculture Resilience through Innovative Development (“REWARD” - see ICR, para 77); and (v) project
  information was used by the GoK to produce quarterly electronic newsletters, showcasing progress and
  early success stories to government stakeholders.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)




a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as environmental category B (partial assessment), and triggered the
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) policies due to potential
  impacts of horticultural activities. When soil- and conservation-related works in the saturation area were
  added, the Environmental Assessment category was maintained without triggering additional environmental
  policies. Social policies were not triggered because land acquisition and impact on tribal communities were
  not expected. The required safeguard instruments, a project-level Environmental Management Framework
  (EMF), and a supplementary EMF for horticulture activities were prepared and disclosed ahead of project
  appraisal.

  With respect to safeguard policies, the project was in compliance, including: (i) the provisions of the EMF,
  including for pest management, were implemented, and works in saturation areas were carried out using
  international good practice construction management measures; (ii) the DoH installed fire safety equipment
  in the soil, water, and leaf laboratory and post- harvest facilities, and on-site fire safety training was provided
  to the facilities’ users; (iii) grievance redress was implemented, using the Government’s systems. All
  applications and complaints (37 in total) were recorded and addressed satisfactorily (ICR, para. 69).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management (ICR, para. 71): The GoK’s financial management system was used in full
  compliance, as reflected by the following actions: (a) quarterly IUFRs and annual external audits were
  produced by both the WDD and DoH until FY15, and merged into single reports/audits at the request of the
  World Bank afterward; (b) audits were submitted on time and audits’ findings were addressed timely by the
  GoK; and (c) staffing was adequate, with low turnover and no issues were identified, except an erroneous
  payment to government staff in 2015 using the IDA Credit, which was resolved.

  (ii) Procurement Aspects (ICR, para. 70): The project complied with procurement procedures.
  Weaknesses during implementation included: (a) delayed processes and frequent turnover of procurement
  staff; (b) notable procurement delays included the development of the digitized library, DSS tools, and
  portal, which was resolved during implementation, with the new counterpart team in place (fall of 2016). No
  mis-procurement was reported during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR highlighted 6 other positive aspects, contributed by the project. While recognizing some attribution
  challenges with respect to the precise role and contributions of this project, the nature/scope of these other
  benefits are summarized below, based on evidence presented in the ICR (paras. 47 to 52).

  (i) Gender (para. 47): Although gender was not an explicit part of the PDO and components, it provided
  various tangible gender benefits, as follows (ICR, para. 47): (a) the project provided women and men
  farmers equal access to extension services’ advice and inputs; (b) enhanced women’s voice in the
  preparation of watershed management plans through participatory and inclusive local consultations; (c)
  supported job creation for marginalized women in the communities by providing training on income-

                                                                                                      Page 22 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



generating activities to women SHGs (i.e., 2,194 women SHG members benefited from training, 22 percent
of whom were landless); (d) usefulness of women trainees in empowering them and providing them with
new employment opportunities.

(ii) Youth (para. 48): Youth were engaged in the project as students (52) using the LRI data to conduct
postgraduate-level research, and 586 young graduate students were trained on the LRI fieldwork,
conducting soil profiles in laboratories, preparing GIS maps and atlases, and conducting socioeconomic
surveys. These skills are expected to help them find jobs in Karnataka’s highly competitive job market.

(iii) Institutional Strengthening (para. 49): In addition to the achievements described under Objective 3,
several institutional changes took place, due to the project, especially changes reflected in the GoI’s new
watershed management guidelines, including: (a) an increase in cost norms to accommodate a wider
range of watershed management aspects; (b) a reduction in the planning and implementation period from
7 to 4–5 years; and (c) the use of science-based planning, management, and monitoring based on
evidenced-based data. In addition, the GoK is launching a ‘center of excellence’ to build the capacity of
FPOs in Karnataka in a way similar to that undertaken by the project, to be incorporated into the state’s
FPO Policy (2018).

(iv) Mobilizing Private Sector Financing and Partnership Agreements (para. 50): The project did not
intend to mobilize financing from the private sector. Nevertheless, it created partnerships between project
supported FPOs and horticulture commodity vendors and companies. Four functional partnerships were
formed under a private-public integrated horticulture development marketing model, where companies
provided government-subsidized training and inputs and post-harvesting technical services and bought
outputs from the FPOs. This scheme secured supply and markets, and also increased the post-harvest
value of commodities. Several FPOs also registered as vendors with the Agricultural Produce Market
Committee and signed agreements with large retail companies, mainly for horticulture products.

(v) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (para. 51): The project’s activities contributed to poverty
reduction, especially by vulnerable groups, as reflected in the following evidence presented in the ICR: (a)
innovations and training extended to farmers enhanced their ability to select optimal crops, cropping
patterns, and soil and water conservation actions and inputs and adjust agricultural activities and practices
to potential climate change impacts; (b) an impact study in 9 of the 11 project-supported sub-watersheds
showed that the average annual income of families increased by 18 percent, compared to an 11 percent
increase in control areas; (c) the average value of durable assets owned by communities increased by 31
percent, compared to a 23 percent increase in the control areas; (d) saturation activities were carried out in
areas where small and marginal farmers resided; (e) an impact study specific to this area showed a 33
percent increase in the average household income primarily because of a change in cropping patterns and
introduction of new crops and technologies; (f) in 2018, the project shifted its horticulture support focus,
from larger farmers to small and marginal farmers in FPOs to enhance equity; (g) at project closure, the
DoH reported 9–10 percent average profitability of the new FPOs, which was considered positive
compared to mostly unprofitable FPOs across India; and (h) the project generated a total of 1,150 short-
term and 1,611 long-term jobs, including for farmers, SHG and FPO members, students, and new
extension and demonstration personnel.

(vi) Other Unintended Outcomes and Impacts (para. 52): There are 3 notable other impacts arising
from the project, which are also generating wider spill-over benefits: (a) the project resulted in a consortium
of 14 expert state-based agencies, the first of its kind in Karnataka. The group exchanges among state
agencies technical information on key aspects of watershed management and agricultural


                                                                                                 Page 23 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



   development; (b) the project also generated a direct dialogue between the technical partners and farmers
   because of their interaction during the development of the LRI (which has won several awards); and (c) the
   solar vending vans that were provided to the FPOs have proven useful in the context of the COVID-19
   lockdown as produce is being supplied directly to consumers.



d. Other
   Not Applicable



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               There were lower ratings for
                                                                               efficacy in this review at various
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   stages of the project's
                                                                               implementation compared with
                                                                               efficacy ratings in the ICR.
                                                                               The three restructurings
                                                                               reflected quality at entry
                                                                               weaknesses, including the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               unclear objectives and the poor
                                                                               framing of PDO indicators and
                                                                               realistic targets.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents seven relevant lessons and their aspects which have broader application beyond
this project. According to this review, the key lessons and broader aspects are summarized below
(ICR, paras. 74 – 84).

(a) Science-based approaches can be a central element in the next generation of integrated
watershed projects. The project successfully demonstrated a new model for integrated watershed
development support, based on stronger science-based evidence. Previous World Bank-supported
watershed development projects in India, including the first KWDP, pioneered and scaled up
participatory watershed improvement and improved M&E. KWDP-II improved the effectiveness of
integrated watershed management by developing, through technical partners, better science-based
planning, decision support tools, and the capacities to use them. The GoK now has better systems
and capacities to conduct improved watershed development and disseminate this knowledge to
other states and countries. This enhanced model of watershed development is of particular
relevance in states/countries where development planning is integrated with livelihood interventions,

                                                                                                  Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



and where integrated watershed management programs can be supported by the required technical
and financial resources.

(b) A Land Resource Inventory (LRI) is a valuable tool for managing watersheds effectively.
The project was successful in developing a LRI at the micro-watershed (MWS) level and combining
it with additional layers of data in a digitized library and using decision support system (DSS) tools.
This multi-layered database resulted in a 35–40 percent reduction in watershed planning time and a
70 percent reduction in planning costs per detailed project report and per hectare. It also made
watershed management interventions more relevant to the specific conditions in the field and made
better use of government resources because of the targeting accuracy at which investments could
be made. The lesson is that future watershed management projects could benefit by adopting this
LRI tool and approach, as a core element in their design, adjusted as needed for local conditions,
capacities, and data availability.

(c) The LRI can also integrate/converge government agencies’ interventions around a useful
extension tool. The establishment of the portal and the dissemination workshops carried out within
the GoK allowed government agencies to access the digitized library and make use of the
information to plan their watershed development interventions in an integrated manner. The wide
outreach to farmers through RSKs enabled farmers to access plot- level information from their
mobile phones and use it to better manage their lands in terms of crop and soil conservation
techniques, selection of crops and inputs, and timing of interventions. The lesson is that agricultural
development projects, through the extension component, consider the benefits, rationale of and
most suitable approach for establishing LRIs as sound measures of integration and extension, while
contextualizing/adapting them to local conditions.

(d) Establishing a “consortium” of qualified local scientific and technical partners can be an
effective arrangement for supporting the Government in the design and implementation of
watershed management investments. Instead of hiring consulting firms, this project partnered
with a group of highly capable state-based scientific and technical agencies, which took an active
role in the design, development, and implementation of key project activities. This project experience
demonstrated that this structure had several advantages, pertinent to the context of watershed
management. . For example, the consortium approach, contextualized for each case, can lead to
better coordination of implementation and enhanced cost savings in project management.

(e) In countries where government staff turnover is frequent, the project shows the benefit of
allocating additional implementation time to accommodate repeat trainings and learning
curves, and to work out a delegation of the procurement clearance authority. Implementation
delays occurred due to frequent turnover of senior officials and of trained procurement staff in key
departments (WDD and DoH). A key lesson was the value of issuing a Government Order which
gave the procurement clearance authority to other key actors (in this instance, the WDD
Commissioner, PEC, and PPMU). The project also showed the benefit of providing a one-year
extension to complete key project activities and accommodate the GoK staff and management
learning curves.

(f) Using existing government training centers can reduce capacity building costs. The project
showed that it was able to take advantage of existing and new government training centers/facilities
for much of the capacity and institution building. This approach illustrates the lesson of saving



                                                                                                    Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



project funds compared to using and paying for private sector suppliers, provided the government
centers are high quality and can develop suitable programs.

(g) Since national programs may change over time (because of changes in the Government
and/or setting of new national priorities), this project showed that projects which rely on the
implementation of national programs should remain flexible to accommodate unforeseen
changes. The 2014 general elections resulted in the (apparently) unforeseen closing of the
Integrated Watershed Management Program (IWMP) and the launch of the Prime Minister Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana Plan (PMKSY - another government initiative), which threatened the financing
and implementation of physical conservation investments. This challenge was eventually overcome
by making use of and/or reallocating available project resources to implement essential physical (or
other) interventions in sample micro watersheds( MWSs).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the quality of the ICR is "Substantial". The ICR is well written, consistent with the ICR guidelines,
analytical (including the inclusion of two versions of the Theory of Change/ToC (at design and following the
project's last restructuring) and sound Economic and Financial Analysis/EFA aspects), candid, results-focused,
and generally supported by adequate evidence to justify the assessment and proposed ratings. The main
evidence integrated and included the results of the analyses of data presented in the: Results Framework
(Annex 1); changes in the Results Framework and corresponding indicators, targets and rationale, arising from
the 3 restructurings (Annex 7); and the Project’s Impact Evaluation Studies (two independent third party
studies, in addition to the project's final and comprehensive M&E report; all three reports are consistent and
complementary).

While the three project restructurings improved the clarity and corresponding performance indicators (outcome
and output levels), consistent with adjustments in the project’s theory of change/ToC, the ICR presented some
aspects of the RF (Annex 1) in which various elements were not properly aligned and formulated (e.g., some
indicators were presented as outcomes, when actually they were outputs; some outputs/outcomes where
presented under a particular outcome/objective, rather than being presented under the appropriate
objective/outcome). However, Annex 7 of the ICR provided a useful summary of the changes of the key
performance indicators and their rationale for each of the three restructurings, hence, providing further clarity,
especially to help assess the project's efficacy, and the split evaluation. There were some inconsistencies in
some of the revised indicators in the text and in Annex 7. While it is recognized that these indicators were
system generated, they could have been corrected during the project's restructurings to become more
appropriate and precise indicators, making clear distinctions between outputs and outcomes.

Also, the ICR, Annex 1, under outcomes 2 and 3, included outcome and output indicators for components 4 and
5, which accounted for significant project costs, and contributed to the 3 core objectives (ref. "Strengthening



                                                                                                     Page 26 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Karn Wtrshed II (P122486)



Horticulture in Rainfed Areas" and "Institutional Development"). It was useful that Annex 7 also presented the
original and revised key output and outcome indicators for these two key components 4 and 5.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 27 of 27
