     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0022563

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P119737                                      UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                       Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49880                                    28-Feb-2017                                             60,555,064.25

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2011                                  31-Jan-2019

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             120,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               76,040,785.49                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           60,555,064.25                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Kishore Laxmikant            Dileep M. Wagle               Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the Project is to improve the reliability of, and increase access to, electricity supply in the
   southwest region of Uganda. (Schedule 1 of the Financing Agreement dated September 2, 2011).

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) defined the project development objective (PDO) as above.




                                                                                                        Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



   Although three restructurings were undertaken during implementation, the PDO remained unchanged. The
   restructurings resulted in an increase in the ambition of the project with associated changes in some PDO and
   intermediate results indicators (IRIs). Therefore, a split evaluation is not carried out in the ICRR.

   For the ICRR, the PDO are parsed as follows:

   Objective 1: To improve the reliability of electricity supply inn the southwest region of Uganda.

   Objective 2: To improve access to electricity supply in the southwest region of Uganda.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-May-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 17 to 20)

   Component A. Construction of a 220 kV Kawanda-Masaka transmission line and associated
   substation works: (estimated cost US$128.3 million; revised cost US$109.9 million; actual cost
   US$60.8 million).

   Subcomponent A.1: Completing and replacing the unreliable 132 kV transmission line between Mutundwe
   substation and Masaka West substation with 137 km of a new double circuit 220 kV transmission line
   between Kawanda and Masaka substations.

   Subcomponent A.2: Upgrading of the existing 132 kV substation at Kawanda to 220 kV to accommodate
   both incoming transmission lines from Bujagali and the two outgoing transmission lines to Masaka.

   Subcomponent A.3: New 220 kV substation to be constructed at Masaka.

   Subcomponent A.4: Addition of shunt reactors for Mbarara substation.

   Component B: Technical assistance to UETCL (Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd.):
   (estimated cost US7.6 million; revised cost US$6.7 million; actual cost US$6.5 million).




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



  Subcomponent B.1: Financing of feasibility and other preparatory studies for other essential segments of
  the transmission network requiring expansion/reinforcement (including the 132 kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua
  transmission line).

  Subcomponent B.2: Financing of consultancy services for procurement and construction supervision for
  works under the project.

  Subcomponent B.3: Financing of capacity building and institutional strengthening in UETCL.

  Component C: Financing of community support projects and technical assistance support to MEMD
  (Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development): (estimated cost US$11.7 million; revised cost
  US$11.7 million; actual cost 9.5 million).

  Subcomponent C.1: Carrying out of community support projects.

  Subcomponent C.2: Providing lighting for selected streets and market places in Masaka municipality.

  Subcomponent C.3: Enabling peri-urban electrification along the transmission line route and affected areas
  of Kawanda and Masaka.

  Subcomponent C.4: Establishment of a Power Sector Information Center (PSIC) in the MEMD.

  Subcomponent C.5: Provision of technical assistance to MEMD for (i) review of Power Sector Reform
  Program, (ii) consultancy support for development and implementation of the investment subcomponents,
  (iii) support to the Sector Working Group, and (iv) other capacity building and training for MEMD staff.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The estimated cost at appraisal was US$153.20 million. The cost was revised at the second
  restructuring (May 2017) to US$109.24 million. The actual cost at completion was US$81.75 million (ICR
  Annex 4). There are some discrepancies in the project cost as reported in the ICR Data Sheet (estimated
  US$153.20 million, actual US$79.16 million) and Annex 4 (US$147.60 million and US$81.75 million).

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA loan of US$120 million. At completion, US$60.55 million
  was disbursed and the balance of US$59.45 million was cancelled.

  Borrower's Contribution: The planned contribution of the Government of Uganda (GoU) was US$33.20
  million. The amount contributed was US$18.60 million.

  Dates: The project was approved by the IDA Board on June 30, 2011. The planned effectiveness date was
  November 30, 2011; the actual effectiveness date was October 23, 2012. The original closing date was
  February 28, 2017. It was extended twice - the final closing date was January 31, 2019. The ICR for the
  project was posted in February 2021 (i.e. 25 months after closing). The project TTL informed IEG that the
  period of submission was extended to allow for resolution of some ongoing RAP-related issues that were
  not resolved as of the date of project closing.


                                                                                                Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



Mid-Term Review (MTR): A MTR was carried out in October 2015.

Restructurings: The project underwent three restructurings. All were Level 2 restructurings. There were no
changes in the original PDO. Reflecting the use of cost savings realized during implementation, activities
were added and associated revisions made in some PDO and IR indicators and targets, including addition
of new indicators. The closing date was extended twice.

First Restructuring (February 14, 2017 - disbursed amount US$43.47 million). The closing date was
extended by 11 months from February 28, 2017 to January 31, 2018 to allow time for completion activities
under Components A and C which were affected by delays resulting from a slow start of implementation
and issues related to land acquisition and compensation to Project Affected Persons (PAPs).

 Second Restructuring (May 24, 2017 - disbursed amount US$43.92 million). The restructuring was
made to respond to a GoU request to utilize the funds made available by cost savings in the amount of
about US$41 million realized during implementation of Component A. The cost savings resulted mainly from
a reduction in international prices of steel and aluminum which were the principal materials used in the
construction of the transmission towers and lines (Restructuring Paper, Section on Proposed Changes).

Components were expanded to include new activities (consistent with the original objective of the project)
as follows:

      Under Component A: (i) Construction of two 220 kV transmission line bays at at Bujagali substation
       (estimated cost US$5.7 million) and (ii) upgrade of the UETCL SCADA (Supervisory Control and
       Data Acquisition System) network (estimated cost US$9.18 million).
      Under Component B: Feasibility study and design review for the proposed Hoima-Kinyara
       transmission line and upgrade for the Nikenda substation (estimated cost US$2.0 million).
      A new Component D was added: Social Risk Management Safeguards to enhance the GoU's
       capacity to deal with Gender Based Violence (GBV) and Violence Against Children (VAC) issues
       that had been seen to occur in other (non-energy) projects in the World bank's portfolio in
       Uganda. (estimated cost US$0.9 million).

Changes in indicators and in the Results Framework (RF) were made as follows:

      The core indicator "Direct project beneficiaries, of which female" was dropped and replaced by a
       new corporate results indicator "People provided with new and improved electricity service" which
       was judged to be a more relevant indicator of the project's outcome.
      For the new Component D, indicators were added in regard to completion of activities (surveys and
       Policy and Code of Conduct) related to helping address GBV and VAC related issues.
      Targets were revised upwards for the number of resettlement packages to be provided to PAPs
       under the project.

The loan closing date was extended by 12 months to January 31, 2019.

Third Restructuring (July 18, 2018 - disbursed amount US$49.23 million). At the request of the GoU,
some actvities that had been added under the Second Restructuring were dropped along with a
cancellation of SDR 25.37 million (US$41.07 million) from the IDA grant. The activities dropped were:

      Supply and installation of upgrading equipment for the SCADA system.

                                                                                               Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



         Funding of the proposed Hoima-Kinyara transmission line and upgrade of the Nikenda substation.

   Some reallocations were made within existing disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: (PAD paras. 1 to 11 and ICR paras. 1 to 11): During the decade 2000-2010
preceding the project, Uganda experienced strong economic growth. The discovery of oil resources added
to Uganda's possibilities to further accelerate and consolidate the economic gains. However, capacity to
provide reliable and cost effective electricity supply lagged significantly behind the demands of a growing
economy. In the 1990s, the GoU had implemented a power sector reform program that had included
placing the power sector under private management on commercial principles. This included unbundling of
the integrated utility, with the main generation and distribution assets turned over to the private sector under
long term concession contracts. The transmission system continued to be operated by a state sector
company. Although some gains were realized as a result of these reform measures, it was acknowledged at
appraisal that some significant issues remained that included: (i) lack of adequate and reliable power
supply; (ii) poor operating performance and unsustainable operations; (iii) weak sector finances; (iv) lack of
adequate institutional capacity to deal with issues such as integrated least-cost planning, increased access,
and sustainability of hydro-electric resources; (v) high distribution system losses of more than 30 percent;
(vi) insufficient reliability of the power system with high rates of technical and non-technical losses; and (vii)
low levels of access to electricity - with access available to less than 10 percent of the total population.

The GoU's strategy to address the sector issues included: (i) attempting to strengthen both public and
private sector institutions involved in the sector; (ii) increasing electricity supply through developing a more
diversified generation mix, including renewable energy sources; (iii) strengthening the national transmission
grid, including links to neighboring countries, to ensure security of supply; (iv) promoting energy efficiency in
production and consumption; and (v) implementing a Rural Electrification Strategy to increase access to
electricity outside major urban areas.

The IDA-financed Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP) was developed to support the GoU's
strategy by helping to address issues related to the reliability and capacity of the transmission system by::

      helping to improve reliability and service quality to existing customers by replacing poorly functioning
       segments of the existing transmission system.
      helping to expand capacity of the transmission system to meet growing regional power demand.
      reducing system losses.
      supporting community projects through provision of low-cost electricity connections to poorer
       sections of society living in the project area.

Alignment with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF): The project objectives were consistent with
the priorities under the CPF (FY2011-2015) that was in in effect at the time of appraisal, and continue to
remain substantially relevant under the CPF (FY2016-FY2021) that is currently in effect. The CPF
acknowledges that increased availability and quality pf electricity supply and increased access are

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



               important contributors to each of the three focus areas under the CPF: (A) strengthening governance,
               accountability, and service supply: (B) raising incomes in rural areas; and (C) improving access in urban
               areas.The CPF (para. 69) indicates that the GoU has continued, or increased, its demand for World Bank
               Group (WBG) support to some sectors including power transmission, and the CPF (para. 80) confirms that
               the WBG will support infrastructure investments in urban development and in energy transmission and
               distribution. The CPF (paras. 87 and 88) acknowledges under its Sixth Objective - improving access to
               urban services - that Uganda needs to improve electricity access and ICT services to be able to accelerate
               urbanization and to improve living standards in urban areas. The CPF confirms that provision of public
               goods and services such as electricity access will remain priority areas for WBG support. IDA's Indicative
               Program for FY2016 to FY2021 includes a Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (planned IDA
               financing of US$100 million).

               Alignment with National Priorities: The ESDP was consistent with the national priorities under the
               National Development Plan (NDP) for 2010/2011 to 2014/2015 prevailing at the time of appraisal and
               remains so with the national priorities reflected in the GoU's NDP for the period 2015/16 to 2019/20. These
               priorities include: (i) increasing stock and quality of strategic infrastructure to accelerate the country's
               competitiveness and (ii) strengthening mechanisms for providing quality, and efficient and effective service
               delivery. Under Uganda's Vision 2040, the GoU has recognized that the country must be propelled by
               electricity to drive the industry and service sectors. The GoU has also set targets of increasing electricity
               access levels to 60% by 2027 and 80% 2040.

               Prior IDA Experience: IDA has been involved in Uganda's electricity sector since the1960s. Prior to 2010,
               IDA had financed investments in thermal power generation, hydropower generation, transmission and
               distribution. Post-2010, IDA-financed projects have included the Power Sector Development Project and the
               Energy for Rural Transformation APL (in three phases). Experience under these projects contributed to the
               design of the ESDP.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the reliability of electricity supply in the southwest region of Uganda.

                             Rationale
                             The overall theory of change (TOC) was that provision of sufficient and reliable power to existing customers,
                             and increasing access to new customers, including in peri-urban and rural areas, in the southwest region of
                             Uganda was constrained by operational deficiencies and lack of transmission capacity in the existing

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



transmission lines and associated substations. The project would provide inputs to finance (i) construction of
new/upgraded transmission lines and associated facilities including substations and bays; (ii) community
subprojects including lighting of selected streets and market places; (iii) technical assistance to UETCL for
capacity building and institutional strengthening; and (iv) technical assistance to MEMD for carrying out
community subprojects, planning for future strengthening of critical segments of the transmission system in
other parts of Uganda, and selected capacity building and training in MEMD. The outputs would be (i)
construction of a new 220kV double circuit transmission line linking the Kawanda and Masaka substations; (ii)
construction of a new 220 kV substation at Masaka; (iii) upgrading of three existing substations at Kawanda,
Masaka and Mbarara; (iv) increase in peri-urban access to electricity; and (v) strengthened planning and
implementation related capacities within UETCL and MEMD. The outcomes would be increased reliability
and transmission capacity, and increased access, thereby contributing to improved quality of electricity supply
to the southwest region of Uganda. The higher level outcome would be an improvement in living standards
and well-being of benefiting population in the project area.

The PDO indicators for Objective 1 were the average number of outages, average duration of outages, and
volume of unmet demand. These indicators were relevant and measurable for assessing the efficacy under
Objective 1.

Outputs (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and ICR paras. 42 to 43).

The original closing date for the project was February 28, 2017. Outputs were completed with some delay as
indicated below:

      A 137 km long new double circuit 220 kV transmission line linking the Kawanda and Masaka
         substations was constructed and became operational as of December 2018. Target achieved with
         delay.
        A new substation was constructed at Masaka and became operational as of June 2018. Target
         achieved with delay.
        Upgrades were made to associated substations at Bujagali, Mbarara North and Kawanda. All were
         operational as of June 2018. Target achieved with delay.
        Two transmission line bays were installed at Bujagali and were operational as of August 2019. Target
         achieved with delay.
        Transmission lines operated at 220 kV as a result of the project (baseline 0; original target 220
         km; actual 220 km; achievement level 100%).
        Resettlement packages provided to PAPs under the project (baseline 0; original target 13,642;
         revised target 14,452; actual 11,197; achievement level 77%).

Outcomes (ICR Results Framework and ICR paras.44 to 45).

The PDO indicators for increased reliability and transmission capacity improvement were:

      Frequency (number) of average transmission line outages (baseline 35, target 10; actual zero; target
       overachieved).
      Unmet demand of existing customers (baseline 2.34 MWh; target 0.20 MWh; actual 0.00 MWh; target
       overachieved)
      Average outage time (baseline 5.70 hours; target 2.60 hours; actual 0.00 hours; target overachieved).


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)




      Increased flow of electricity through the Masaka substation (baseline 381 GWH; target 617.4
       GWh; actual 606.0 GWh; achievement level 98%).
      Households provided with new or improved electricity services (baseline 0; target 16,500, revised
       target 16,500; actual 52,084; achievement level 316%)

Assessment: In regard to increased reliability and transmission capacity, the targeted outcomes were
achieved albeit with some delay in completion of the works due to a slow start of implementation,
procurement issues, and in particular, issues in regard to land acquisition and compensation under the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) under the project. The PDO indicators for the originally included activities
were met in full. The additional activities that were included under Component A at the Second Restructuring
were dropped as the GoU assessed that these could not be completed by the revised closing date of January
31, 2019 and requested cancellation of a substantial part (US$41 million) of the IDA grant amount. However,
these additional activities represented an increase in the ambition of the project and the changes did not
affect the achievement of the originally planned outputs and outcomes. The ICRR rates the overall efficacy for
Objective 1 as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access to electricity supply in the southwest region of Uganda.

Rationale
The overall theory of change (TOC), relevant for both Objective 1 and Objective 2, has been provided under
Objective 1 above. However, in regard to Objective 2, there were some weaknesses in the estimation of the
PDO indicator adopted which referred to the number of people provided with electricity under the project. The
indicator was measured by the number of households connected under the peri-urban electrification part of
the community support projects under Component C. However, the number did not include other beneficiaries
from increased access provided by the increased transmission capacity through the upgrading of the Masaka
substation. These beneficiaries were included under a separate indicator "households provided with new or
improved electricity service" but no separate figures were provided for increased access. The access
indicator also lacked clarity in estimation of the number of secondary beneficiaries under the project.

Outputs: (ICR Annex 1- Results Framework and paras. 44 to 45).

The original closing date for the project was February 28, 2017. Outputs were achieved with some delay as
follows:

      Increased capacity at the newly constructed Masaka 220/132 kV substation that is linked to the
       Kawanda substation by the Kawanda-Masaka 220 kV double circuit line. The substation became
       operational in 2018. Target achieved with delay.
      Community electricity household connections established under the project (baseline 0; original target
       8,000; actual 5,447; achievement level 68%).


                                                                                                Page 8 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)




                                  Social development projects completed as follows:

                                 1. number of streets lit (baseline 0; original target 3; actual 3; achievement level 100%)
                                 2. number of market places lit (baseline 0; original target 3; actual 3; achievement level 100%).

                            Outcomes (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework and ICR para. 46).

                                  Households provided with new or improved electricity services (baseline 0; target 16,500, actual
                                    52,084; achievement level 316%)
                                  Number of people provided access to electricity under the project (baseline 0; target 50,000; actual
                                    34,044; achievement level 68%).

                            Assessment: The output targets related to increased access were substantially met albeit with delay as
                            compared to the original targets. With regard to the single PDO indicator "number of people provided access
                            to electricity under the project", the ICR reports an achievement level of 68% starting from a baseline of zero.
                            The beneficiaries of increased access included those under the community support peri-urban electrification
                            projects (ICR para. 46). The ICR notes that there was some lack of clarity in the design as to computation of
                            the number of beneficiaries. In addition to the increased access provided under this indicator, the ICR also
                            reports (para. 46) that the increase in transformation capacity at the Masaka substation enabled an increase
                            in provision of electricity through new connections as well as improved supply to existing customers. The
                            impacts were measured through the Intermediate Results Indicator "households provided with new or
                            improved electricity service under the project'. This indicator included beneficiaries of increased access but
                            did not specify the number of beneficiaries from such increased access. On balance, taking into account the
                            increased access reported under the PDO indicator, and taking into account other (non-quantified) increases
                            in access, the ICRR rates the efficacy under Objective 2 as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed above in Section 4, with regard to Objective 1, the originally planned outcome targets for
                            improved reliability and increased capacity of electricity supply in the southwest region of Uganda were
                            substantially achieved with some delay as compared to the original targets. Although new activities
                            subsequently added to utilize the cost savings (U$41 million) realized during implementation were later
                            dropped at the request of the GoU (given the lack of time remaining before project closing for their
                            completion), they represented an increase in the ambition of the original project, and their exclusion did not
                            affect the achievement of the originally targeted outputs and outcomes. With regard to Objective 2, the
                            achievement level (with some delay) for the originally planned outcome target of increased access was 68%,
                            but this did not capture in full the extent of the increased access as discussed above. The ICRR therefore



                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



  rates efficacy for Objectives 1 and 2 as Substantial, notwithstanding the moderate shortcomings for Objective
  2 noted above.

  Based on the above, the ICRR rates overall efficacy as Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

(Reference ICR Annex 5 and paras. 52 to 55).

At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was carried out for Component A (accounting for 83% of the project cost).
The indicators used were the Economic Internal rate of Return (EIRR) and Economic Net Present Value (ENPV)
at a discount rate of 12%. Monetized benefits included:

      reduction in unmet demand in the Masaka region service area.
      increased capacity to meet existing and future demand in the region.
      savings in repairs and maintenance costs enabled by the Kawanda-Masaka 220 kV transmission line
       construction.

The appraisal estimates were: EIRR 22.2%; ENPV US$ 133.3 million at a discount rate of 12%.

 At completion, the economic cost-benefit indicators for Component A (accounting for 79% of project cost)
were re-estimated based on actual results during project implementation. The methodology was similar to that
used at appraisal but with some changes in valuation bases. The Willingness to Pay (WTP) was replaced by the
Avoided Cost of Regeneration as this was judged to be a more representative figure. The Long Run Marginal
Cost (LRMC) was used to compute annual savings in losses. Other bases remained the same, including
demand projections (MW), incremental sales projections (GWh), annual savings (GWh), and reduction in unmet
demand (GWh).

The post-completion estimates are: EIRR 32.6%; ENPV US$108.3 million at discount rate of 12%.

No estimates were prepared in regard to the financial efficiency of the project.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Project duration: The planned implementation period of the project was 5 years and 8 months (68 months) (from
June 30, 2011 to February 28, 2017). A slow start of project implementation, with delays in recruitment of key
PMU staff and specilized consultants (ICR para. 56), and subsequent delays due to procurement-related and




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



land acquisition/compensation issues, led to extension of the closing date to January 31, 2019. The actual
implementation period was 91.5 months (23.5 months longer than originally planned).

Project cost: The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$153.16 million. This was revised downwards to
US$109.24 million at the Second Restructuring in May 2017 reflecting cost savings realized during
implementation. The actual cost at completion was US$81.8 million.

Assessment: Regarding economic efficiency, although the post-completion EIRR (32.6%) is significantly higher
than the appraisal estimate (22.2%), the post-completion ENPV (US$108.3 million) is lower than the appraisal
ENPV (US$133.3 million). The ICR points out that the increase in EIRR has been significantly influenced by the
substantial reduction in the overall project cost (US$81.8 million compared to the appraisal estimate of
US$147.6 million) However, a large part of the cost savings was fortuitous - due to steep declines in
international prices of steel and aluminum. Had the project cost remained at appraisal levels, the EIRR would
likely have been lower than the appraisal estimate given the significant delays in project implementation
resulting in completion being delayed by nearly two years. Regarding administrative and operational efficiency,
the project took nearly two years longer to implement which delayed realization of the planned benefits. The
ICRR therefore concurs with the ICR rating and rates the efficiency of the project as Modest..




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    83.00
 Appraisal                                                22.20
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    79.00
 ICR Estimate                                             32.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were substantially relevant to the World Bank Group's Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for FY2016-2021 (the latest available at project closing) under which improved availability and quality of
electricity services and increased access to electricity were recognized as important contributors to each of the
focus areas under the CPF. Overall efficacy was Substantial based on underlying ratings of Substantial for

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



Objective 1 (to improve reliability of electricity) and Substantial for Objective 2 (to increase access to electricity
supply). Efficiency was assessed to be Modest since the cost savings realized during implementation were, to a
large extent, fortuitous as they resulted from unplanned substantial declines in international prices of steel and
aluminum, whereas realization of project benefits was lowered by the substantial delays in completion of project
implementation. Based on the foregoing, the overall project outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

(Reference ICR paras. 137 to 138).

Technical and operational risk: The technical risk is assessed as low given that UETCL has considerable
experience in operating the Ugandan transmission system. The operational risk is assessed as moderate
given that reliable and efficient operation of the system will depend upon timely and adequate upkeep
including repairs and maintenance. UETCL's ability to undertake this will depend upon availability of timely
and sufficient resources to achieve this responsibility. The degree to which UETCL is able to utilize the
increased capacity of the transmission system will also depend upon the extent of electricity supplied to it by
generating plants.

Financial risk: This risk is considered substantial. UETCL's revenues depend upon the levels of the Bulk
Supply Tariff (BST) that is subject to approval by the GoU and the Energy Regulatory Authority. The GoU
has been setting the levels of the BST at below full cost recovery levels on socio-economic considerations
for the population, and compensating UETCL by way of subsidies which have not always been timely or
sufficient.

Policy risk: This risk is considered moderate. The GoU policies regarding electricity generation and
distribution and trade in electricity, will impact the extent to which the capacity of the transmission system will
be utilized. While the GoU is giving priority to electricity availability and access issues in its national
strategies and plans, its ability to follow through on its intentions will depend upon sustained political will and
adequacy of resources to devote to attainment of these objectives. Past experience has shown that the gains
from intended reforms have lagged behind targets.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach were well-considered and consistent with the national and CPF
  priorities at the time. The project components were reasonable in relation to the objective of increased
  reliability and capacity of the transmission system but the components in regard to increased access

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



  were relatively modest in relation to the overall needs for increased access. There was also a lack of
  clarity in specifying how the number of beneficiaries from increased access were to be estimated (ICR
  para. 105). The institutional strengthening components were adequate in scope but their impact was
  affected by significant delays in appointment of key implementation staff and specialist consultants in the
  PMUs (ICR para. 132). Technical aspects were well-considered. Environmental and social safeguards
  aspects were well-considered with special attention to resettlement issues. This included the preparation
  of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environmental and Social Management Plan
  (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), supported by a dedicated escrow account, as a condition
  of effectiveness (ICR para. 125). However, the ICR reports (para. 101) that the M&E design could have
  been stronger in regard to monitoring of environmental aspects. The main risks associated with
  implementation, including resettlement, were well identified and mitigation measures provided. The
  Results Framework (RF) was adequately defined, and the PDO and Intermediate Result indicators were
  generally appropriate and measurable, except as mentioned above. While the need for adequate
  implementation capacity in the key implementing agencies (UETCL and MEMD) was recognized,
  including the creation of a Power Sector Working Group, adequate staffing of the PMUs, including
  appointment of key PMU staff, was not in place at the start of project implementation. This, together early
  weaknesses in project supervision, contributed significantly to the delays of over two years in an
  adequate start of implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision during the early stage of implementation (2013 and 2014) was weak as reflected in the time
 taken to address key weaknesses in the counterpart agencies that significantly hampered project
 implementation (ICR para. 128). These included (i) capacity constraints in the PMUs including lack of key
 staff and specialized consultants, including a full-time project manager in UETCL (appointed only in
 January 2014), and MEMD recruitment of consultants for procurement,, resettlement issues, and
 community projects (only in mid-2014). The ICR reports (para. 93) that only two supervision missions were
 carried out during this period and Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were not filed regularly.

 Supervision during implementation picked up beginning in 2015. A Mid Term Review (MTR) mission was
 carried out in October 2015 and the project was restructured in May 2017 to utilize cost savings realized
 during implementation (see Section 2). Between 2015 and 2019, supervision missions were carried out, on
 average, twice a year. The project team was engaged more proactively with the counterparts, particularly in
 regard to resolution of RAP-related issues that were seriously hindering implementation. Nevertheless, due
 to the multiplicity of issues related to land acquisition and compensation, this remained a significant
 constraint even at project closing. The project team also monitored adherence with the WBG's guidelines
 and policies on health and safety issues, including through monitoring the development and approval of
 contractor and social management action plans to ensure adherence to good practice. When a case of
 contractor and PIA non-compliance emerged that involved a fatality (see section on Unintended Impacts),
 the project team reacted quickly to ensure that corrective actions and measures were strengthened and
 monitored y the PMUs. The project team was also proactive in modifying some shortcomings in
 specification of some indicators, including the inclusion of a new "corporate results indicator " to estimate
 the number of beneficiaries under the project. ISRs were filed regularly. The reporting was candid, in

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



 particular, in acknowledging the persistence of the land acquisition/compensation issues. As a result, the
 ratings for Development Objectives (DO) and Implementation Progress (IP) were assessed at
 Unsatisfactory or Moderately Unsatisfactory for a number of years.

 The project had three Task Team Leaders (TTLs), supported by Co-TTLs, during the implementation
 period. Regarding the quality of supervision by the Bank team, the Borrower's Report (Annex 6 of the ICR,
 para. 3.2.2) observes that the quality of supervision inputs and processes was Moderately Unsatisfactory
 since changes in TTLs created many delays during the transitions.

 On balance, the ICRR rates the quality of supervision as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's theory of change (TOC) in relation to key activities, outputs and outcomes was adequately
 reflected in the design of the Results Framework (RF). The PDO and Intermediate Result indicators were
 relevant and measurable, and most output targets well-defined. Baseline values were provided in all cases.
 Monitoring and reporting requirements in regard to resettlement-related issues were adequately developed.
 The data collection was based on periodic data to be submitted by UETCL and MEMD to their respective
 PMUs. There were, however, some weaknesses in specifying how the indicators were to be calculated. For
 example, as discussed in the ICR (para. 97), no clear basis was provided for computation of the number of
 beneficiaries under the urban electrification component. The ICR (para. 101) also indicates that design
 could have been stronger in regard to monitoring of environmental aspects.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system relied upon timely reporting of data by UETCL and MEMD. During implementation,
  some of the indicators were found to be not suitable and were replaced by others judged to be more
  relevant e.g. replacement of the indicator "direct beneficiaries supported by the project" by a new
  corporate results indicator " people provided with new and improved electricity service" which was
  assessed to be more appropriate in the project circumstances. The M&E paid particular attention to
  gathering and reporting data in regard to resettlement issues (land acquisition/compensation of PAPs)
  that was used by the project team for proactive dialogue with the GoU agencies concerned.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



c. M&E Utilization
  The results from the M&E system were used by the project team to assess implementation progress,
  identify emerging issues, and discuss remedial actions with the GOU counterparts. In regard to RAP-
  related issues, the M&E system provided an ongoing means for tracking progress (or lack thereof) and
  provided a basis for the project team to engage in extensive discussions with the Government
  counterparts for remedial actions. Regular tracking of project costs by the M&E system enabled an early
  identification of potential cost savings during implementation which was used to scale up activities at the
  time of the project restructuring in 2017. Implementation progress tracking under the M&E system was
  also used by the project team for candid reporting of Development Objectives (DO) and Implementation
  Progress (IP) ratings in the ISRs. The M&E system adequately tracked progress in project
  implementation aspects including procurement, project costs, and achievement of project targets.

  On balance, the ICRR rates M&E quality as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   (Reference ICR para. 116 to 118).

   Environmental and Social Safeguards: The project was assigned Category A (full assessment). The
   project triggered the following safeguards:

           EA - Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
           NH - Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
           PCR - Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
           IR - Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
           Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

   Environmental safeguards: Key issues were air and water pollution; disturbance and degradation of forests
   and wetlands ecosystems; solid and liquid waste management; and alteration of
   landscapes. Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) were carried out covering EA, NH,
   PCR and Forests requirements. Potential impacts and mitigation measures were identified and agreed.
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Construction Environment and Social
   Management Plans (CESMPS) were prepared and implemented was monitored. The ICR reports (para. 90)
   that there were a number of non-compliance issues:

         Under the Grievance Redress Mechanisms, no Grievance Redress Committees were formed and
            the project lacked proper grievance handling procedures such as a data base for records regarding
            complaints, response times, and resolutions.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



        Regarding Community Health and Safety, there was a case of fatality of a 17 year old boy which
         was ascribed to the PIU's lack in supervision. The ICR reports corrective actions were taken
         subsequently.
        The transmission line was energized on June 1, 2018 without informing the Bank and without
         consulting the PAPs still under the line. When informed, the Bank intervened and the line was de-
         energized on Jul 23, 2018 to allow for safe relocation of the PAPs.
        There were a number of instances of non-compliance with national environmental regulations.

   The ICR reports (para. 90) that an Environmental and Social Audit was carried out to ensure compliance
  and the report was issued in January 2019. The ICR reports (para. 90) that UETCL was found to have
  partially complied with the requirements, but does not elaborate further on the specifics of non-compliance
  or partial compliance as well as on the remedial actions agreed with UETCL.

  Social safeguards: A RAP was prepared and disclosed for the Kawanda to Masaka 220 kV transmission
  line. It outlined principles and procedures for resettlement and compensation of Project Affected Persons
  (PAPs) under the project. The RAP was supported by a dedicated escrow account established by the GoU
  to fund compensation payments to PAPs. Nevertheless, during implementation, a number of issues
  hampered progress:

          disputes with landowners in regard to compensation offered
          delays in mutation of land titles establishing legitimacy of ownership
          inadequate replenishment of the escrow account by the GoU
          lengthy delays in processing of payment claims made by PAPs

  As a result, at project closing, 280 (out of a total of 2,542) cases were still unresolved. By November 2020,
  the number of unresolved cases had decreased to 197.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (Reference ICR paras. 80 to 86)

  Procurement: In the early stages of implementation (2013 and 2014), there were significant weaknesses
  in procurement management that resulted in significant delays in implementation. The deficiencies
  included:

        capacity and staffing weaknesses in the PMUs.
        delays in hiring key staff including specialized consultants (some of the required consultants were
           hired only in 2014)
        delay in appointing a full-time project manager at the UETCL MPU (done only in June 2014)
        lengthy procurement processes in UETCL
        although a procurement monitoring and contact management system was installed in 2012,
         utilization initially was low
        lengthy payment processes in UETCL


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



  The ICR does not provide information on the progress in Procurement ratings over time, and particularly at
  project closing. It also does not indicate any issues of non-compliance or ineligible expenditures.

  Financial Management (FM): The ICR does not include any substantial discussion of FM aspects
  including identification and resolution of any issues that may have been encountered. It does not provide
  an indication of the progress in FM ratings over time, including mentioning the FM rating at project closing.

  The ICR does not include a discussion of the compliance with applicable financial covenants by UETCL
  The Financing Agreement had specified two financial covenants, namely, UETCL to maintain (i) a debt
  service coverage ratio (DSCR) of not less than 1.0 and (ii) an EBITDA margin of at least 1.0% in FY11,
  1.5% in FY12 and FY13, 2% in FY14, and 3% thereafter. It is not clear whether or not UETCL complied
  with these covenants.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (para. 90) mentions that, under the community projects subcomponent, one case of asbestos
  roofing was discovered under the market place subcomponent. The ICR confirms that steps were taken to
  resolve the issue.

  During the construction of the 220 kV Kawanda to Masaka transmission line, the ICR reports (para. 90)
  that there was one fatality involving a 17 year old boy. This was determined to be due to negligence on the
  part of the contractor. The ICR reports that steps were taken to prevent such non-compliance during
  construction.



d. Other


  Gender: (ICR paras. 63 and 64): Although the project did not specifically target women as beneficiaries,
  significant measures were introduced under the Second Restructuring in May 2017 to address issues of
  Gender Based Violence (GBV) and Violence Against Children (VAC) that had been observed to occur in
  other (non-energy) projects in the WBG portfolio in Uganda. A new component (Component D) was added
  to the project - Social Safeguards Risk Management (SSRM). The GoU recognized the need to develop an
  institutional structure. The ESDP was selected as a pilot. The SSRM includes (i) mechanisms to prevent
  and respond to GBV and VAC issues, including guidelines and toolkits; (ii) strengthening GRMs to address
  GBV and VAC issues; and (iii) implementing social awareness campaigns to prevent GBV and VAC. The
  RAPs prepared under the project include features that require spousal consent.

  Institutional Strengthening: (ICR paras. 66 and 67): Capacity building and institutional strengthening was
  an area of significant focus under the project. In UETCL, a total of 55 staff received taring in various aspects
  related to project design and implementation including:

        Safety, health, environment, and quality management
        Design and construction of High Voltage transmission lines and substations
        Advanced GIS

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



           Procurement
           Financial Management
           Contract management and disbursement monitoring
           Monitoring & evaluation
           Land acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation

   For MEMD, a total of 38 staff received training in aspects that included:

           advanced issues in regulating electricity utilities and energy networks
           energy management and planning
           monitoring & evaluation
           data management and statistical analysis
           feasibility study preparation and analysis
           land acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation
           GBV related training

   Other important contributions under the project included:

         A review of the GoU's power sector reforms program. The review was completed in July 2017 but
          the ICR does not discuss the outcome. (ICR para. 49).
         Preparation of an SSRM plan, and ESIAs and RAPs that could serve as models for other projects in
          future.

   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity: (ICR paras. 69 and 70): The project provided new and
   improved electricity service to an estimated 244,494 electricity consumers in the Masaka area. This
   included beneficiaries in the rural areas along the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line corridor, estimated at
   about 5,447 households, enabling increased access to an estimated 34,047 people. The street and market
   place lighting provided under the project enhanced livelihoods by enabling an increase in economic activity
   from longer business hours.




11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



Quality of M&E                    Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons, based on the ICR:

1. In estimating the benefits of increased access under electric power projects, estimates of the
number of project beneficiaries should include both primary as well as secondary beneficiaries, and
a clear methodology should be provided in regard to estimation of the beneficiaries. In the case of
the project, there was no clear methodology during project design to estimate the number of
secondary beneficiaries. This led the ICR team to make assumptions that may not have been fully
consistent with those used in the appraisal analysis.

2. Projects that include social electrification aspects should also include design and implementation
of appropriate social economic assessments to assess the benefits of the adopted initiatives in
improving the well-being and livelihoods of the direct beneficiaries. In the case of the project, the
lack of such surveys and assessments prevented an assessment of the impact of the project
interventions as perceived by the targeted beneficiaries.

3. Appointment of key project implementation staff in the PMUs, supported by specialized
consultants as appropriate, should be ensured at early stages of project preparation, including
through project preparation advances where possible. The project was adversely affected by
significant capacity related constraints, including delays in appointment of key managerial and
technical staff, and specialized consultants' in the project PMUs which resulted in substantial delays
in the earlier parts of project implementation.

4.. Social safeguard activities, particularly for Category A projects as in the case of this
project, require substantial lead times for preparation. This includes mechanisms for compensation
of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) and land title mutation. In the case of the project, resettlement
related issues were determined to be the main reason which delayed the schedule for activation of
the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line by nearly three years.

5. In the case of the project, effectiveness was significantly delayed in part by the need for
Parliamentary approvals. In such cases, preparation of the necessary documents and
internal approvals by the GoU agencies concerned need to be assessed at an early stage, and
required actions on the part of the Government counterparts be appropriately structured as
conditions of appraisal or negotiations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                     Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Electricity Sector Development Proj (P119737)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and outcome-focused. It generally follows the OPCS guidelines for preparation
of ICRs except for length (being 50 pages long against the prescribed length of 15 days).The ICR provides a
clear theory of change, and the analysis is evidence-based although constrained to some extent by the delay in
completion of the project. This resulted in shortening the time available to observe and evaluate the impacts of
the completed activities. In particular, there were not enough surveys to assess beneficiary perceptions of the
project's impacts on their well-being and economic improvement. While the ICR refers to completion of
important institutional strengthening outputs, e.g. a review of Power Sector Reforms, preparation and
implementation of a SSRM plan, and establishment of a Power Sector Information Center, it does not elaborate
further on the outcomes of these actions. One significant area that was not touched upon was the compliance
with financial covenants by UETCL (discussed in Section 5 above). The ICR has some minor inconsistencies,
e.g. in reporting project cost (differences between the Data Sheet and Annex 4), but these do not affect the
analysis or conclusions in a significant way.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
