     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022594

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P143940                                 Flood Emergency Project

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52760                               30-Jun-2017                                       100,124,713.90

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jun-2013                             31-May-2020

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        108,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                         107,520,474.84                                             0.00

 Actual                                     100,124,713.90                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally               Fernando Manibog           Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Flood Emergency Project as articulated in the Emergency
   Project Paper (paragraph 25) was to:

   "to rehabilitate key hydraulic infrastructure and improve disaster-preparedness in target areas in the
   Far North Region of Cameroon."



                                                                                              Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)




   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Flood Emergency Project (PULCI) as articulated in the
   Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was to:

   "to rehabilitate key hydraulic infrastructure and improve disaster-preparedness in the Target Areas of
   the Recipient's Far North region."

   The two PDO statements are almost identical except where underlined.

   The Emergency Project Paper did not explicitly state who were the expected project beneficiaries, but stated
   that "in case of a potential failure of Maga dam it is estimated that about 150km2 would potentially be flooded,
   putting at risk up to 120,000 people (paragraph 19)."



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Rehabilitation of key hydraulic infrastructure for flood protection and rice production (appraisal
   cost: US$ 99.2 million, cost at 2017 restructuring, US$95.7 million, actual cost: US$95.48
   million). This component would finance the rehabilitation of flood affected infrastructure, notably the
   rehabilitation of Maga dam, 70km of the Logone dyke and related infrastructure for flood protection, as well
   as the rehabilitation of the irrigation infrastructure for SEMRY rice schemes (7,500ha). This
   component included three sub-components:

   1.1. Rehabilitation of the Logone embankment. The sub-component would support the following
   activities: (i) Strengthening the embankment along the entire 70km length, from Pouss to Yagoua by
   restoring the embankment profile; and (ii) Slope protection, including vegetation along upstream and
   downstream slopes to protect against surface erosion and rip rap/gabion protection at critical points.

   1.2. Rehabilitation of Maga dam and related infrastructure. This sub-component would support the
   following activities: (i) Strengthening the embankment structure by rehabilitating damaged sections, fixing
   internal erosion / piping, and restoring and amending the embankment profile, including possible upstream
   blanket, for critical areas along the entire 27 km length in accordance with the improved design; (ii)
   Installation of adequate drainage in the dam structure to reduce the pore water pressure in the body and
   foundations of the dam, including downstream shell drainage /channels along the toe of the
   embankment; (iii) Installation of slope protection, where necessary, including vegetation along upstream
   and downstream slopes and gabion walls on the downstream slope and in the toe area to protect against
   wave impact and surface erosion and enhance overtopping resistance; (iv) Rehabilitation of spillway
   including gates and concrete structures and widening and deepening the Mayo Vrick channel to its original
   design; (v) Construction of an additional emergency spillway if needed as recommended by the

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



  feasibility study. Additional works at the Pouss weir along the Logone River, including the installation of gate
  structures to manage flows between the Logone River and Maga dam, as a future option may also be
  recommended; and (vi) Complementary works (seepage control, drainage, protection works) as required in
  high risk sections, for example in sections of the embankment at high-risk of piping failures.

  1.3. Rehabilitation of irrigation areas. This sub-component would finance the rehabilitation of
  approximately 7,500 hectares of existing irrigation schemes (out of a total 11,500 ha), which are connected
  to the Logone embankment and Maga dam. Of these 7,500 ha, 3,200 ha are located at SEMRY I at Yagoua
  and 4,300 ha are located at SEMRY II at Maga. The rehabilitation works focus on the sites, which are
  particularly degraded and play an important role for the drainage and rapid evacuation of water in this
  hydraulic system. Rehabilitation works consist of rehabilitating channels, access routes and other related
  infrastructure as well as re-leveling irrigation fields.

  2. Disaster risk and emergency management (appraisal cost: US$2.60 million, cost at 2017
  restructuring: US$4.3 million, actual cost: US$2.87 million). This component would support SEMRY to
  develop and implement a contingency plan for the hydraulic infrastructure and adequately inform potentially
  affected communities, as well as collaboration with the corresponding central and decentralized authorities.
  The acquisition of equipment including installation of hydro-meteorological equipment at Lake Maga to
  better monitor the water levels at the lake would also be financed. The component included two sub-
  components:

  2.1. Strengthening Hydro-meteorological Data Management. This sub-component would support the
  design and installation of a hydro-meteorological monitoring system in the three main tributaries to Lake
  Maga, and rehabilitation of existing weather stations in the project area to better plan, operate the hydraulic
  infrastructure and be prepared for potential emergencies.

  2.2. Strengthening Emergency Management. This sub-component would support SEMRY and local
  authorities to develop an operational contingency plan and ensure its full implementation and dissemination
  to population.

  3. Infrastructure Operation and Maintenance, Project Management (appraisal cost: US$2.90 million,
  cost at 2017 restructuring: US$8 million, actual cost: US$9.65 million). This component would provide
  institutional support for strengthening the capacity of SEMRY to sustainably manage, maintain and operate
  the hydraulic infrastructure. This would support the development of an operation and maintenance plan for
  the hydraulic infrastructure, including recommendations to ensure operation and maintenance beyond the
  project lifetime. This plan would include among others (i) a systematic review of current practices and
  systems; (ii) definition of the requirements for the new systems; and (iii) extended on the job training and
  support so that maintenance systems and techniques would be embedded in the institution. This
  component would also finance project management and coordination. It included two sub-components for
  institutional strengthening and implementation support.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$108 million equivalent. The actual cost according
to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$100.12 million. The ICR did not explain the US$8.00 million
difference between the appraisal estimate and the actual amount.



Financing. The project was 100% financed by IDA through a standard IDA Credit in the amount of SDR
71.6 million (US$108 million equivalent). The credit had a grace period of 10 years and a final maturity of 40
years. A service charge of three quarters of one percent (3/4 of 1%) would accrue on the amount disbursed
and outstanding.



Borrower Contribution. The co-financing of the State of Cameroon included the financial responsibility for
the following: (i) the implementation of environmental and social safeguards (RAP, ESMP),
for approximately CFAF 4.5 billion (or about US$8 million); (ii) the assumption of taxes and customs duties,
for approximately CFAF 2,693,923,269 (or around US$4.8 million); and (iii) counterpart funds in cash, for
approximately CFAF 1,686,320,833 (or about US$3 million). The total Borrower contribution is
approximately US$15.8 million.



Dates. The project was approved on June 11, 2013 and became effective five months later on November
21, 2013. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on January 16, 2017 compared to an estimated
date on September 2015. The project closed on May 31, 2020, which was thirty five months or almost three
years later than the original closing date on June 30, 2017. According to the ICR (paragraphs 31 and 33)
the closing date was extended to accommodate implementation delays and complete ongoing project
activities.

The project was restructured three times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring as follows:

1. On June 14, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$37.71 million, in order to extend the loan closing
date by 23 months from June 30, 2017 to May 31, 2019, "primarily to address considerable implementation
delays (ICR, paragraph 31)", reallocate among disbursement categories, and change the implementation
schedule.

2. On June 26, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$80.30 million, in order to change the Results
Framework, change components and cost and reallocate among disbursement categories.

3. On May 22, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$93.64 million, in order to extend the loan closing
date by 12 months from May 31, 2019, to May 31, 2020, "in order to complete ongoing project activities
(ICR, paragraph 33), change the Results Framework, reallocate among disbursement categories and
change the implementation schedule.

The above-mentioned restructurings were justified and facilitated the completion of the project activities.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The Maga dam was the largest piece of infrastructure in the Logone-Chari River
system, with a maximum capacity of 620 million cubic meters. The system also included 70 km of
embankments constructed along the Logone River to prevent the irrigated rice fields to the west of the
Logone River from being flooded from over-bank flow. However, wave erosion at high water levels of the
lake Maga, sedimentation, erosion, and lack of routine and periodic maintenance substantially weakened
the structure of Maga dam and the Logone dyke over the past decades. The hydraulic infrastructure of the
Maga dam faced a critical situation on the heels of exceptionally high rainfall between August 15 to
September 17, 2012 in Northern Cameroon. This caused floods and substantial damages to the hydraulic
infrastructure of the Maga dam, putting the local population at risk of a potential dam failure. The failure of
Maga dam would result in flooding of an estimated 150 km2 and impacting up to 120,000 people. This
emergency project aimed to rehabilitate key hydraulic infrastructure and improve disaster-preparedness in
target areas in the far north Region of Cameroon.

Previous Bank Experience. The design of the project builds upon past and ongoing projects in Cameroon,
particularly the Agricultural Competitiveness Project (PACA , P112635). Under PACA, the detailed
engineering studies for the rehabilitation of the irrigation areas and the rehabilitation of the Logone
embankment and Maga dam rehabilitation were prepared. PACA also supported the institutional
development of Society for the Expansion and Modernization of Rice Cultivation in Yagoua (SEMRY),
which is the main agency involved in the preparation and implementation of the project. The
project also builds on the findings of a flood impact assessment carried out in September 2012, which was
technically and financially supported by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR)
(Emergency Project Paper, paragraph 3). In addition, the Bank experience is evident with similar Bank-
financed projects that involve rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure across Africa as well as other places
in the world.



Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, objectives were in line with the rural
sector component of the Stratégie pour la Croissance et l'Emploi (DSCE)/Growth and Employment Strategy
of Cameroon 2010-2020. This component emphasized the importance of economic diversification with a
strong orientation for agricultural development as the main source of future economic growth and reduction
of poverty in rural areas. At completion, objectives were aligned with the 2035 vision of Cameroon, which is
based on the agricultural revolution that requires the development of agricultural mechanization and
irrigation. The project was particularly aligned with the “rural sector” component of the (DSCE) which
reflected the importance of economic diversification with a strong orientation for agricultural development as
the main source of future economic growth and reduction of poverty in rural areas.



Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, objectives were in line with the Bank's Country
Assistance Strategy for Cameroon (CAS, FY10-FY14). Under the first strategic theme, "Increasing
Cameroon's Competitiveness", the project supported axis (ii) "activities geared toward ensuring the
transparent, equitable, and sustainable use of natural resources, including mining, agriculture, fisheries and
protected areas". Also, under the second strategic theme, "Improving Service Delivery", the project focused

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



               on axis (ii) "local development, through increasing access to basic services through infrastructure upgrading
               and capacity building for improved local governance."

               At completion, the objectives were in line with two out of three focus areas of the Bank's Country
               Partnership Framework for Cameroon (CPF, FY17-FY21). Specifically, objectives were in line with the first
               CPF focus area of “addressing multiple poverty traps in rural areas;” as it targeted rural areas in the far
               northern region and worked to increase productivity by rehabilitating irrigation schemes for rice production
               and ensuring flood protection for the cultivated areas and surrounding communities by rehabilitating key
               hydraulic infrastructures. The project also contributed to the second specific CPF objective falling under the
               first focus area through rehabilitating the irrigated rice schemes and improving the food security for 15,000
               families. Further, the project contributed to the CPF's fifth objective through improving access to local
               infrastructure, and constructing 30 water boreholes to enable people along the Logone river to have access
               to safe water. Also, objectives were in line with the CPF’s second focus area, with a specific contribution to
               the eighth CPF objective on improved business environment and access to financial services. The project
               developed an infrastructure operations and maintenance plan to enable the regional parastatal agency
               SEMRY to explore new managerial and organizational structures.

               The statement of objectives was clear and focused and reflected an appropriate level of ambition.
               However, the definition of the PDOs and its indicators related more to intermediate results rather than
               outcomes (ICR, paragraph 15). Objectives were also in line with the Government priorities and the Bank's
               strategies. On balance, the Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To rehabilitate key hydraulic infrastructure in the Target Areas of the Recipient's Far North region.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would support the rehabilitation of the
                             flood protection infrastructure, and the rehabilitation of the water conveyance/irrigation infrastructure for
                             SEMRY rice schemes of approximately 7,500 ha. These activities were expected to lead to the rehabilitation
                             of 70 kms of the Logone river embankment between Yagoua and Pouss; the rehabilitation of 27 km of the
                             Maga Dam; the increase of the Maga dam spillway capacity to a level of 100 m3/s; and the rehabilitation of
                             7,500 ha of irrigation area in selected schemes. The short term physical outcome, namely, the rehabilitation
                             of 97 km of flood protection infrastructure in the Far North Region of Cameroon, was expected to result
                             in longer term development outcomes including:(i) the restoration of physical, social, and economic
                             infrastructure in the targeted areas; (ii) improved food security and significant job creation in the project area


                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



as a result of the rehabilitation of the rice schemes; and (iii) rice production and communities becoming more
resilient to climate change experienced in this area.

The activities included in the ToC were directly linked to the stated PDO in a valid causal chain. However,
the ToC did not delineate the key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO. Also,
the definition of the PDO and its indicators related more to intermediate results rather than outcomes.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      27 km of Maga dam were rehabilitated and strengthened (target achieved).
      70 km of the Logone embankment were rehabilitated and strengthened (target achieved).
      7,500 ha of surface of irrigation area rehabilitated for which 3,200 ha are located at SEMRY I at
       Yagoua, and 4,300 ha are located at SEMRY II at Maga. The rehabilitation consisted mainly of
       rehabilitating channels, access roads, and other related infrastructures. (target achieved).
      The Maga dam was raised by 1.5 m; slope protection with upstream and downstream vegetation was
       installed at critical points; 700 m of the Pouss weir were improved, which allows flow management
       flow from the reservoir to the Logone river; and complementary works for seepage control, drainage,
       and protection in high-risk sections were implemented (ICR, paragraph 46).
      30 bore holes were constructed in the project area (ICR, paragraph 48). It should be noted that an
       additional 51 boreholes were completed in 2020 as the project's contribution to the control of COVID-
       19 in the project area--for a total of 81 boreholes completed as of June 2021.



Outcome

The project completed the rehabilitation of flood protection infrastructure, including the rehabilitation of the
Logone river embankment, the refurbishment of the Maga dam (PDO outcome indicator #1, achieved), and
the rehabilitation of irrigated areas (intermediate outcome indicator #3, achieved). However, the increase of
the Maga dam spillway capacity was dropped after the second project restructuring concluded on June 26,
2018. According to the ICR (paragraph 43): "the cancelation of this activity was technically and economically
justified and supported by the Panel of Experts, and this did not directly impact the flood protection outcome,
as the weir in Pouss allows evacuation of floodwaters and as the dam had been raised by 1.5 meters." The
rehabilitation of the Maga dam and related hydraulic infrastructure contributed to protecting 120,000 people
living in the areas downstream from the dam from flood threats (ICR, paragraph 46). As result of the
rehabilitation of the 7,500 ha, rice yield increased from an average of 5 tons per hectare before the project to
an average of 6.4 tons per ha (ICR, paragraph 47). Finally, the project exceeded its target on direct project
beneficiaries (PDO outcome indicator #3) where it reached 103,615 beneficiaries, of which 30% were females
compared to an appraisal target of 78,000.

In summary, improving the hydraulic infrastructure for flood protection protected the surrounding
communities against the risk of flooding, including centennial floods. These key hydraulic infrastructures are
essential to accommodate the water demand from the rice schemes during the growing season. Also, the




                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



rehabilitation of the flood protection infrastructure allowed the rice production season to continue without
disruption due to flooding.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated High.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve disaster-preparedness in the target areas of the recipient's far north region.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project would elaborate a contingency plan for
the people potentially affected by Logone floods and plan and install of a hydro-meteorological monitoring
system in the Maga dam watershed; and rehabilitate existing weather stations in the project area. Expected
outputs of these activities included: the approval and dissemination of a contingency plan; training of 100
people in disaster preparedness and emergency management; the installation of a hydro-meteorological
monitoring system with 15 operational stations; and the development and dissemination of the operation and
maintenance plan for the rehabilitated dike and dam under the project. As a result the disaster-preparedness
in targeted areas in far north region would be improved. Anticipated long-term outcomes included: increased
productivity in northern regions; improved access to local infrastructure; and increased citizen engagement at
local level.

The activities included in the ToC had credible causal links to achieving the PDO. However, the ToC did not
include the critical key assumptions that underpinned PDO achievement. Also, the PDO and its indicators as
defined were closer to intermediate results rather than final outcomes.



Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

        150 instruments and 64 hydro-meteorological stations were installed, of which 21 were automatic
         hydro-meteorological stations, 11 in Cameroon and 10 in Chad. At the project closure, the 11
         automatic stations installed in Cameroon were fully operational, while the 10 automatic stations
         installed in Chad were not fully functional because of network issues that prevent the transmission of
         data (target not achieved).
        145 key government and community stakeholders were trained on emergency preparedness and
         response (no target provided).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Flood Emergency Project (P143940)




      An operational and maintenance plan was developed and disseminated under Component C of the
       project (target achieved).



Outcome

Assessing the achievement of this outcome is difficult because the outcome indicator #2 (Contingency Plan
approved and disseminated) was at the intermediate outcome level. This outcome was supported by three
sets of activities: (i) strengthening hydro-meteorological data management; (ii) strengthening emergency
management; and (iii) development and implementation of an operational and maintenance plan for hydraulic
infrastructure. The following is a summary of the project achievements under each activity:

(i) Strengthening hydro-meteorological data management. The project was expected to install 15 hydro-
meteorological stations in Maga dam basin. During implementation, an agreement between the Lake Chad
Basin Commission (LCBC) and SEMRY/PULCI the geographical scope of this activity was expanded to cover
both the Logone Basin in Cameroonian and Chadian territories. In total, 150 instruments were installed, of
which 21 were automatic hydro-meteorological stations, 11 in Cameroon (fully operational) and 10 in Chad
(nonoperational due to network issues). The ICR noted that the issues hindering the full functionality of the
system were being addressed. The project also trained 68 field operators among villagers to collect the data
from the pluviometers (to gauge rain) and limnimeters (tide gauge). According to the ICR (paragraph 51), the
absence of a fully operational hydro-meteorological system "impact only the real time monitoring capacity of
the system to track the hydro-climatic parameters."

(ii) Strengthening emergency management. The project supported a number of activities to prepare the
public institutions, civil society organizations and the general population to better respond to crises. These
activities included: technical assistance to SEMRY to formulate a contingency plan, including the definition of
emergency scenarios for the operation of Maga Dam and the dike at the Logone River, identification of areas
at risk, responsibilities, actions to be taken, and communication strategy; purchase of equipment for
emergency interventions (which include tents, boats, first aid kits, essential utensils); capacity building for
SEMRY, government officials, and NGOs for implementing and updating the contingency plan;
and sensitization and training of local communities on how to respond in case of emergencies. The ICR
(paragraph 51) noted that a "further full-scale simulation exercises, following the first one, have not been
carried out at the project completion." This was partially impacted by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.

(iii) Operational and maintenance plan for key hydraulic infrastructure developed and disseminated. The
project supported the following activities: an operation and maintenance plan for the rehabilitated hydraulic
infrastructure was developed by a consultant firm and adopted by SEMRY; a study for SEMRY’s
transformation was completed, and it recommended to transfer the management of rice perimeters to rice
growers and the transfer of land preparation, such as plowing, to the private sector; 8 water user associations
were created and strengthened, and their members were trained in the fundamentals of the operation and
maintenance of tertiary channels; a manual for operation and maintenance of the Logone dike, as well a
manual for the operation and maintenance of the Maga dam, were prepared; and as part of the security
concept, a dam safety panel of national and international experts was set up to review the design, the
construction, and safety measures taken.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the achievements of disaster preparedness were mixed. While
the operational and maintenance plan for key hydraulic infrastructure was developed and disseminated, the

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



                            hydro-meteorological system was not fully operational by project completion. Also, conducting a full-scale
                            simulation exercise by project completion would have been helpful to assess the level of preparedness and
                            reveal any weaknesses that might need to be addressed. Therefore, the efficacy of achievement of this
                            objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The project improved the hydraulic infrastructure for flood protection
                            thereby protecting the surrounding communities against the risk of flooding, including centennial floods.
                            These key hydraulic infrastructures are essential to accommodate the water demand from the rice schemes
                            during the growing season. Also, the rehabilitation of the flood protection infrastructure allowed the rice
                            production season to continue without disruption due to flooding. The project also attempted to
                            improve disaster-preparedness in the target areas of the recipient's far north region, however, results were
                            mixed. While the operational and maintenance plan for key hydraulic infrastructure was developed and
                            disseminated, the hydro-meteorological system was not fully operational by project completion. Also,
                            conducting a full-scale simulation exercise by project completion would have been helpful to assess the level
                            of preparedness and reveal any weaknesses that might need to be addressed. PDO 1’s efficacy is
                            Substantial, and on balance, when the positive outputs achieved under PDO 2 are taken into account (despite
                            its Modest efficacy due to weak outcomes), the overall efficacy rating is Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   ex ante

                               The economic and financial analysis (EFA) showed that the project would have an estimated Economic
                                Rate of Return (ERR) of 16% and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$ 14.6 million. The analysis was
                                carried out for a 25-year period including the four-year project implementation period. The analysis used
                                a with and without project model to estimate benefits for the irrigation schemes.




                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



      Quantified economic benefits were mainly derived from: (i) the increased value added of rice production
       through the rehabilitation of irrigated schemes (55% of total benefits); and (ii) economic cash-flows from
       SEMRY services (45%) on the rice perimeters.
      A sensitivity analysis was carried out to assess the impact of changes in costs or benefits. The analysis
       showed that a reduction of benefits or an increase of costs by 20% would still yield ERR of around 13%.

ex post

      The EFA followed the same approach at appraisal. The economic rate of return (ERR) was estimated at
       10.7% and a net present value (NPV) US$24.5 million, with a 6% discount rate. According to the ICR
       (paragraph 58), the ERR at completion was lower than the one at appraisal because: "(i) the resettling of
       the level of production of rice at a minimum threshold of 100,000 tons for the dry season campaign and
       the double cropping with rice in the project area were advancing below expectation; and (ii) the economic
       cash flows from SEMRY services on the rice perimeters (which would contribute to 45% of the Project
       benefits) were not realized." The ICR (footnote #13) noted that despite farmers realizing better incomes,
       their contributions to SEMRY remained the same and "levels of default on payment have been
       maintained."
      A sensitivity analysis showed that if the price of rice would increase by 10 or 20%, the ERR would
       improve from 10.7% to 12.6 and 14.4%, respectively, but if average price would decrease by 10 or 20%,
       the ERR would drop to 8.6 and 6.5%, respectively, while the NPV would remain positive in all cases.
       Also, if the cultivated rice area remained constant at the 2020 attained level, instead of the assumed 10%
       increase for the base case scenario, the ERR would drop to 9.6%, and the volume of production in the
       project area would be only 81,920 mt per year instead of 88,830 mt assumed in the base case scenario.
       While if the rice area increased by 20% as compared from the year 2020 level instead of 10%, then the
       resulting ERR would increase to 12.3% with an annual production of 100,200 mt of paddy rice.
      The ERR at completion was lower than appraisal (10.7% vs 16%), and the project experienced a two
       year implementation delay that resulted in US$4.7 million cost overrun for project
       management compared to the appraisal cost.



Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

The project experienced a two year implementation delay that resulted in cost overruns for project management
as indicated above. According to the ICR (paragraph 63) these delays were mainly due to "the slow pace of the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) implementation by the government, as well as delays in the hiring of
construction and supervision companies." In addition, security challenges in the Northern Cameroon and rainy
seasons negatively impacted procurement operations, which exacerbated implementation delays (ICR,
paragraph 63).

Overall, efficiency is rated Substantial. While the ERR at completion was lower than the one estimated
at appraisal (10.7% vs 16%), it was still well above the 6% discount rate.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Flood Emergency Project (P143940)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
Appraisal                                                  16.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                               10.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project improved the
hydraulic infrastructure for flood protection protected the surrounding communities against the risk of flooding,
including centennial floods. Also, the rehabilitation of the flood protection infrastructure allowed the rice
production season to continue without disruption due to flooding. The project also attempted to
improve disaster-preparedness in the target areas of the recipient's far north region, however, results were
mixed. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex post ERR (10.7%) was higher than the discount rate at 6%.

With three outcome criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy, and Efficiency) rated Substantial, outcome is
rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed two main risks that could potentially impact the development outcome:

1. The risk related to challenges of sustainability in an emergency and FCV context. This situation
is exacerbated by the precariousness of the national budget, the technical and financial weakness of the
institutions, extreme poverty and unsatisfied basic needs of the people. To address this risk, the
project developed mechanisms for the operation and maintenance of key hydraulic infrastructures and
identified the institutions in charge to finance this maintenance; started the process to empower the private
sector, the WUAs, and farmers; and put in place a prevention plan to respond to disaster with the
participation of local communities and their leaders (ICR, paragraph 108).

2. The risk related to the hydro-meteorological system operation in the Logone basin. According to the ICR
(paragraph 109) the project established an agreement with Lake Chad Basin
Commission (LCBC). However, the operationalization of the network in Chadian territory was still pending
due to restrictions related to COVID-19.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



The ICR (paragraph 107) noted that this project was expected to benefit from the follow-up project. The VIVA
Logone Project, currently with an August 2021 Board date, in three main areas: "(i) Society for the Expansion
and Modernization of Rice Cultivation in Yagoua (SEMRY) reform, (ii) involving the private sector in land
preparation and commercialization, and (iii) strengthening the dike with vegetative methods."




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  On the heels of the 2012 floods, the Government of Cameroon requested international assistance from
  the World Bank, among other international organizations, to secure the hydraulic infrastructure of the
  Maga dam and to bring the irrigation system back into productive use. The Bank responded by launching
  an emergency operation under the Operational Policy on Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies
  (OP/BP 8.00). This ensured that the rehabilitation would commence in the shortest possible time frame in
  order to address the critical situation in the affected areas of the Cameroon. The objectives of the project
  were in line with Government priorities and the Bank strategies as discussed under section 3. Due to the
  emergency situation, the project was designed based on the Agricultural Competitiveness Project (PACA
  , P112635). Under PACA, the detailed engineering studies for the rehabilitation of the irrigation areas and
  the rehabilitation of the Logone embankment and Maga dam rehabilitation were prepared. PACA also
  supported the institutional development of Society for the Expansion and Modernization of Rice
  Cultivation in Yagoua (SEMRY). However, costs of some key project activities were underestimated,
  prompting a restructuring to reallocate costs within and among project components (ICR, paragraph 99).
  Also, according to the ICR (paragraph 76), the project's design had the following weaknesses: "some
  lack of precision on the designs were the undervaluation of some volumes in the Logone dike, and the
  lack of identification of construction materials extraction sites for the construction of the dike."

  The design featured three main activities, the rehabilitation of the hydraulic infrastructure, the restoration
  of productivity of the rice schemes and improving disaster preparedness. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 99) activities to restore rice productivity were "well designed" with attention to poverty, given
  that the far north region had the highest rate of poverty of the entire country. The design also reflected
  attention to social aspects with the inclusion of a resettlement action plan (RAP) and the implementation
  of a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). To speed the launching of the project, implementation initially
  started under the PACA PIU before it was taken over by a dedicated PIU under SEMRY (ICR, paragraph
  99). Twelve risks were identified at appraisal with an overall risk rating of Substantial. Safety and security
  in the far north was identified as a substantial risk. However, this might have been overlooked as during
  implementation it materialized to be a high risk that contributed to implementation delays and cost
  overruns. The ICR did not comment of the relevance of the mitigation measures nor other risks that
  materialized during implementation.

  Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory. This rating reflects the
  success of the Bank to swiftly prepare and launch an emergency operation to address a critical situation
  in the far north region of Cameroon.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was implemented under a challenging security situation in northern Cameroon due to the threat
 caused by Boko Haram. This required the Bank and the project management to carefully prepare each
 physical supervision mission to ensure safety. Among the safety measures applied, missions had to obtain
 several security clearances, and were equipped with armored cars and satellite phones (ICR, paragraph
 101). Further, in high risk areas the project team relied on social media and satellite imagery for monitoring
 purposes. The ICR did not report on the number of supervision missions conducted, but stated that "the
 Bank team conducted several formal and regular supervision missions in the project area (paragraph 101)."

 The project implementation benefited from close follow-up by the supervision team, which attempted to
 keep project costs under control. Also, the presence of a co-TTL in the country office facilitated
 project implementation. According to the ICR (paragraph 77) "the Bank pro-actively supported the
 government with specialized personnel who helped improve the designs and optimized the execution."
 Safeguards and fiduciary aspects benefited from close supervision support to ensure that the project
 complied with Bank's policies and guidelines (ICR, paragraph 101). Upon the surge in the COVID-19
 pandemic, the Bank team was proactive and worked with the project management to construct additional
 water boreholes in the project area to serve the local population.

 While the PIU staff were provided with Geo Enable Monitoring System (GEMS) trainings by the Bank (to
 enable them perform remote supervision of the works and the RAP activities), these skills were not used
 during project implementation. The ICR (paragraph 101) noted that these skills would be useful for the
 preparation (and later implementation) of the VIVA Logone follow-up project.

 Overall, Bank supervision is rated Satisfactory. This rating reflects the focus of the team on the successful
 implementation of activities and eventually the successful achievement of the PDO.

 Based on the assigned ratings for Quality at Entry and Bank Supervision, Bank performance is rated
 Satisfactory despite some shortcomings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Emergency Project Paper (EPA) did not include a Theory of Change as it was not mandated at
 appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR (page 9) included one which reflected the relation between the

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



 planned project activities, its outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts. However, the ToC did
 not include the critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDOs. The achievement of
 the PDO was to be assessed through the following three PDO level indicators: #1. Flood protection
 infrastructure rehabilitated; #2. Contingency plan approved and disseminated; and #3. Direct project
 beneficiaries. The first indicator was directly linked to the first PDO (to rehabilitate key hydraulic
 infrastructure in the Target Areas of the Recipient's far north region). The second indicator was directly
 linked to the second PDO (to improve disaster-preparedness in the target areas of the recipient's far north
 region). The third indicator provides a count of the project beneficiaries; which mainly related to the first
 PDO. While PDO indicators #1 and #2 were clear, measurable and with reasonable targets, both were
 pitched at the intermediate outcome level. The ICR (paragraph 83) correctly noted a discrepancy between
 the PDO-level results indicator “Number of km of flood protection infrastructure rehabilitated” and the first
 PDO objective “rehabilitated key hydraulic infrastructure,” since the latter encompasses not only the flood
 protection infrastructure, but also the rehabilitated irrigated area and associated hydraulic infrastructures.
 Also, the project's economic analysis put the improvement in rice productivity as a project outcome (ICR,
 paragraph 84). However, this was not adequately reflected in the Results Framework. Finally, this review
 agrees with the ICR that rehabilitation of infrastructure was more of an output/intermediate
 outcome. Appropriate outcome indicators for PDO1 were suggested by the ICR (paragraph 84) could have
 been: “restored flood protection” or “improved flood resilience”.

 The Results Framework (RF) included seven intermediate outcome indicators that covered the different
 activities supported by the project. Most of these were clear, measurable and included reasonable targets.
 However, the RF did not capture important outputs that contributed to the sustainability of the rehabilitated
 hydraulic infrastructures and the dissemination of the contingency plan including: the restructuring study of
 SEMRY, the creation of WUAs, and the strengthening of the cooperatives (ICR, paragraph 85). Also,
 some physical outputs that contributed to the PDO were not tracked including: the improvement of the
 Pouss spillway, the elevation of the dam and the provision of water boreholes.

 While the M&E system was barely sufficient to assess the achievements of the objectives and test the links
 in the results chain and the results framework, it could have benefited from further modifications to the RF
 to comprehensively capture the project's outputs. M&E design suffered from notable shortcomings,
 including poorly formulated outcome level indicators, and the lack of important output/intermediate outcome
 level indicators to track a number of important project activities. That said, design weaknesses did not
 prevent the project from assessing the achievement of its objectives and monitoring its results.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was responsible for data collection. M&E activities were negatively
  impacted prior to the first restructuring by "delays and recruitment issues experienced in the setting up of
  the PIU (ICR, paragraph 86)." After the first restructuring, M&E activities were systematically organized to
  focus on: "collection, analysis/interpretation, storage and dissemination of results; financial monitoring, in
  line with technical monitoring; the definition of control points at the entry of data and exit in order to detect
  inconsistencies; archiving of data received, diagnostics and analyses; verification of compatibility with the
  financial monitoring system; and synthesis and editing of information and data (ICR, paragraph 87)." M&E
  implementation benefited from the Bank's monitoring missions where recommendations were transmitted
  to the various stakeholders for action (ICR, paragraph 90).




                                                                                                        Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



  The intermediate indicator “Increase in Maga dam spillway capacity” was cancelled as part of the second
  restructuring due to the cancelation of the related works.

  The ICR provided limited information on the implementation of M&E activities in areas with security
  issues. It is plausible to assume that M&E implementation was extremely challenging in such areas.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 89) "data from the M&E system were utilized by the Client and the
  World Bank team to monitor progress of the key activities of the project." The M&E system produced the
  expected outputs of the monitoring and evaluation, namely, the periodic evaluation reports of the
  implementation of the Work Plan and Annual Budget/plan de travail et du budget annual (PTBA),
  technical and financial monitoring reports, the capitalization document, the RAP monitoring document,
  and environmental and social safeguard measures (ICR, paragraph 90). The data were used to prepare
  the supervision missions, in a region experiencing increasing security issues.

  Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial. while M&E suffered some design weaknesses and
  implementation challenges, these did not prevent the project from assessing the achievement of its
  objectives and monitoring its results.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category A. It triggered the following seven safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37),
   and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). The potential environmental and social impacts
   related to the rehabilitation and improvement works of the Maga dam and Logone embankment were
   expected to be limited in scale and magnitude, as long as the rehabilitation scope did not
   extend significantly beyond the embankments. However, there was a high social risk related to this
   extended area as it could potentially affect several thousands of people. An Environmental and Social
   Assessment (ESIA), Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (PPMP), Resettlement Action Plan(s) (RAPs)
   were prepared and disclosed during the project implementation. The OP/BP 7.50 was fulfilled as the
   notification was sent to the Republic of Chad and the Lake Chad Basin Commission (CBLT). In accordance
   with OP/BP 4.37, a dam safety panel, including geotechnical, dam, and hydraulic specialists was
   established and visited the sites in December 2015 and provided a dam assessment report that guided the
   Client and the Bank’s team with the project implementation (ICR, paragraph 95). According to the ICR
   (paragraph 96) the project implemented several actions to mitigate the negative effects of the
   project including: "(i) awareness campaigns against HIV/AIDS, (ii) awareness campaigns against water-
   borne diseases and the use of latrines, and (iii) compensation for sacred sites/vestiges."



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



  Regarding compliance with Social safeguards, an Environmental and Social Management Plan was
  developed in 2014 and implemented within the framework of the project. According to the ICR (paragraph
  94) mitigation activities articulated in the RAP were implemented. The Implementation of the RAP
  enabled relocating people affected by the project (PAP) and who were in the right-of-way of the dike
  rehabilitation works. Compensation and resettlement minimized the negative effects of the project on the
  local population, and also improving their quality of life. At the project closure, all families received their new
  houses, although some social infrastructure construction component was still in the process of being
  completed. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was setup and no major or unsolvable grievances
  were raised (ICR, paragraph 94).

  According to the ICR (paragraph 96) the project implemented several actions to mitigate the negative
  effects of the project including: "(i) awareness campaigns against HIV/AIDS, (ii) awareness campaigns
  against water-borne diseases and the use of latrines, and (iii) compensation for sacred sites/vestiges."

  The ICR did not provide an explicit statement on whether the project complied with the Bank's safeguard
  policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The ICR did not provide details on FM, but stated that "the project
  experienced compliance challenges, before the recruitment of the qualified PIU experts (paragraph
  97)." Financial management was consistently rated as Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory during the
  course of the project. The ICR did not report on the status of audit reports.



  Procurement. The project faced procurement challenges up to 2019. The project procurement
  management improved after the recruitment of a qualified procurement expert in 2019, and procurement
  was rated Moderately Satisfactory at the project closure (ICR, paragraph 97). The project experienced
  implementation delays due to procurement challenges that stemmed from security issues in the Northern
  Cameroon, a situation that was exacerbated by the rainy seasons (ICR, paragraph 63).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR (paragraph 73) stated that "as a consequence of the Pouss spillway improvement, which
  consisted in the slab strengthening and the protection of the Maga dam, the government decided to build a
  viaduct over the evacuator, which will facilitate transportation in this area. Unfortunately, due to restrictions
  in the government budget, the works suffered delays and were still not completed at the project closure."
  The ICR (paragraph 74) also noted that using of the dike crest and the dam by people and animals for
  crossing during the rainy season could cause damage to these structures.



d. Other

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Flood Emergency Project (P143940)



   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Projects implemented under challenging security conditions need to develop an alternative
methodology for monitoring and data collection. Given the problems of visiting the project area
due to security issues, an alternative methodology was developed to monitor the project by carrying
out activities such as: review of the press and social media in the area where the project was
reported; telephone contact with the communication media in the area to request information on the
status of the project; telephone contact with project beneficiaries, local authorities and others who
can give testimony of the project status and send photographs. In addition to these
informal mechanisms, the ability to monitor the implementation of projects in contexts of restricted
access or risk conditions can benefit today from instruments such as Geo-Enabling for Monitoring
and Supervision (GEMS) or remote sensing techniques with the satellite image utilization.

2. To ensure successful implementation of projects, the financial, technical, and institutional
capacity of fragile and conflict-affected countries needs to be carefully assessed in an
integrated manner, even if there is a base of technical capacity. Countries in an FCV situation
prioritize their resources based on emergencies or needs due to their situation, and the activities of a
project, no matter how important, can run the risk of taking a back seat, thereby jeopardizing their
timely execution and delaying the access of beneficiaries to project results. Thus, it is best to plan to
pay for all critical project activities with loan funds, including the RAP (and ESMP) costs, to avoid
delays often generated by the late availability of counterpart funds.

3. To ensure that communities take ownership of the different rehabilitated
infrastructures, project implementation needs to use inclusive participatory
mechanisms. Cameroon is culturally and geographically a very diverse country. In the far north
region, traditional and religious leaders play a key role in the society and are as much respected as
the governor or other key administrative leaders. It is important to develop strategies to involve and
include the local stakeholders in various ways, to take advantage of their knowledge and capacities.
The project took this aspect into consideration and included those stakeholders to help the
communities take ownership of the different infrastructures that have been rehabilitated.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Flood Emergency Project (P143940)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. While M&E design had shortcomings, these shortcomings did not prevent the project from
assessing the achievement of its objectives and monitoring of its results. Overall, the M&E
system provided important inputs to the ICR.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the two objectives. It provided a well
balanced discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to the indicators and what
the project actually achieved on the ground. However, assessing the second objective would have benefited
from including specific indicators to assess the achievement.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify the assigned outcome
rating. Discussion of outcomes was comprehensive, and the efficiency analysis was robust.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and candidly
reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. However, the outputs in Annex
1 lacked targets. The ICR also could have provided more details on financial management and procurement.
Also, the reporting on safeguards lacked an explicit statement on compliance with the Bank's safeguard
policies. Finally, the ICR could have elaborated more on alternative M&E methods that were used in areas with
high security risk.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Flood Emergency Project (P143940)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
