     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022617

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127876                                   ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Serbia                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82550                                31-Oct-2018                                         63,201,425.10

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Apr-2013                               31-Dec-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           76,428,861.79                                               0.00

 Actual                                       63,201,425.10                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman          Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The first phase of the National Road Network (NRW) Rehabilitation Program refers to two projects: (i) this
   project co-financed by the Republic of Serbia, the European Investment Bank (EIB), and the World Bank; and
   (ii) the project financed in parallel solely by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).

   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs), as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 7) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page ii), were:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



   "To improve the condition and safety of the National Road Network (NRN) for road users by
   supporting the borrower in the implementation of the first phase of the National Road Network
   Rehabilitation Program".

   This assessment is thus based on the two PDOs: (1) to improve the condition of the NRN for road users; and
   (ii) to improve the safety of the NRN for road users.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 6 -7).

   1. Road Rehabilitation and Safety Investments. The estimated cost at appraisal
   was Euro 264.0 million (including IBRD financing of Euro $59.1 million). The actual cost was Euro 39.3
   million (IBRD financing). This component aimed at financing road rehabilitation and safety works, including:
   (i) periodic maintenance and rehabilitation works; (ii) partial pavement widening; (iii) traffic signalization
   improvement; (iv) structural renewal; (v) setting up ancillary road connections and drainage systems; and
   (vi) incorporation of road safety measures recommended by road safety audits.

   2. Institutional Strengthening, The estimated cost at appraisal was Euro 3.1million (including IBRD
   financing of Euro 0.7million). The actual cost was Euro 1.2 million. This component had three sub-
   components:

   a. Support to road safety. Activities in this sub-component included: (i) carrying out road safety
   inspections; (ii) implementing low cost road safety measures (such as, traffic calming and road furniture
   within the NRN; (iii) carrying out road safety awareness campaigns; (iv) supporting the development and
   implementation of strengthening enforcement of road safety regulations; and (v) training and accreditation
   of personnel of safety audits and inspections.

   b. Strengthen road rehabilitation and planning processes. Activities in this component included: (i)
   carrying out a road condition survey of the NRN; (ii) conducting an update of the national road database; (iii)
   establishing a practice of developing a multi-year maintenance plans that prioritizes activities based on
   economic, social and regional criteria; (iv) supporting the implementation of updated design standards for
   national roads maintenance and rehabilitation.

   c. Strengthening maintenance management. Activities in this component included: (i) supporting the
   development of a strategic plan for adoption of a tendering process of the Performance-Based Maintenance
   Contracts (PBMCs); (ii) supporting preparation of model bidding documents for PBMCs; (iii) training the staff
   of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and prospective contractors on PBMCs; and (iv)
   supporting implementation of PBMCs.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



  3. Project Detailed Design, Supervision, Management and Monitoring. The estimated cost at appraisal
  was Euro 18.4 million (including IBRD financing of Euro 4.2 million). The actual cost was Euro 12.7
  million. There were three sub-components: (i) support the design and project supervision activities for
  rehabilitation and safety works on the NRN; (ii) project management support and capacity building of the
  project implementing entity in areas such as fiduciary management, environmental and social safeguards,
  and annual program planning; and (iii) support for monitoring activities and project audits including the
  Independent Performance and Project Financial Audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$393.0 million (inclusive of physical and price
  contingencies and front-end fee). The revised estimate of the project cost was US$338.1 million. The actual
  cost was US$152.6 million (this is the project cost to date. The actual project date is not known as the part
  of the project co-financed by the EIB and the Government is scheduled to close on December 31, 2022).

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$100.0 million. The revised estimate of
  the loan was US$76.4 million. The actual amount disbursed was US$63.2 million. About US$13.2 million of
  the loan was cancelled.

  Co - financing. The EIB was to provide US$135.5 million. The revised estimate of the financing from EIB
  was US$112.0 million. The actual amount provided by them to date was US$62.7 million.

  Borrower contribution. The Public Enterprise Roads of Serbia (PERS) was expected to
  contribute US$157.4 million. The revised estimate of the PERS contribution was US$149.6 million. Their
  actual contribution was US$26.6 million.

  Dates. The project approved on April 26, 2013, became effective 18 months later on October 24, 2014, and
  was scheduled to close on October 31, 2018. The project financed by the Bank closed two years behind
  schedule on December 31, 2020. Part of the project co financed by EIB and the Government is scheduled
  to close on December 31, 2022.

  Other changes. There were three Level 2 restructurings.

  The first Level 2 restructuring on January 13, 2015, responded to the delays in project effectiveness due
  to government changes and parliamentary elections, and addressed the emergency needs resulting from
  the massive floods, which occurred during the period of May 11 -17, 2014. These floods created large
  devastation in the country, and revised the priorities for road network rehabilitation. The main changes
  made through this restructuring are as follows (Restructuring Paper, December 23, 2014):

        The total length of road design works was reduced to 795 km (from 800 - 810 km). This included 125
         km of emergency works and 670 km of other rehabilitation works.
        Changes were made to the annual financing percentages for some road segments, to reflect the
         reduced availability of financing from PERS during the first year after the floods. PERS was
         expected to increase its financing during later years to achieve the originally-defined counterpart
         funding by the end of the project.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



         The closing date was extended by 14 months from October 31, 2018, to December 31, 2019, on
          account of the delays to project effectiveness due to government changes and parliamentary
          elections, and the need to prioritize works as part of flood rehabilitation.
         The results framework and the Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) were updated to reflect the
          revised implementation schedule (the first phase of the Program was designed to utilize the model of
          results-based disbursement with the exception of a few consulting services and technical assistance
          activities).
         Additional procurement methods to allow for the use of Design and Build for the component one
          activities were introduced.

   The main changes made through the second Level 2 restructurings are as follows:

         The project scope was reduced, with the rehabilitation of road sections reduced by almost by a third
          (31%) from 795 km to 249 km, due to the delays associated with completing designs.
         The closing date was extended by six months from December 31, 2019, to June 30, 2020, to provide
          time for verification of the DLIs regarding the road sections that were to be completed by December
          31, 2019.
         The DLIs/DLI caps and some project indicators were revised to rescope the project in line with what
          could be realistically accomplished by the closing date.
         Funds were reallocated from component one to component two and three activities to reflect the
          actual costs, and to support the implementation of the recommendations of the technical assistance
          on the road sector being designed under a prior-financed project (Corridor X Highway Project).
         About USS13.2 million of the Bank loan was cancelled in line with the reduced scope of the project.

   The project closing date was extended by six months from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020, through
   the third Level 2 restructuring on April 24, 2020, to allow time for completing the ongoing construction and
   design, installation of the road weather information and weigh-in-motion systems, and two reform-related
   work items, that had been delayed, due among things to the disruptions caused by the COVID pandemic.

   A split rating is not applied in the assessment; while the intermediate- level targets were revised significantly
   (i.e., roads km), the outcome targets were not revised.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Serbia is at the cross roads of South East Europe, and the international
roads crossing Serbia are the shortest link between Western and South Eastern Europe and
Greece, Turkey and further east. Serbia gained European Union (EU) "candidate status" for membership in
March 2012. Road transport is the dominant transport mode in Serbia, with roads accounting for 80% and
90% of total cargo and passenger transport respectively. Despite the importance of the road mode, the
quality of roads had deteriorated in the years before appraisal due to inadequate maintenance. A 2010
survey indicated that only 48% of the national roads were in good condition, and the 2012-2013 Global
Competitiveness Report (GCR) ranked Serbia 122nd out of 144 countries. Alongside this, there were the
social and economic costs due to the fatalities from traffic accidents. According to the World Health

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



               Organization (WHO), the number fatalities per 100,000 of the population in Serbia was about nine, as
               compared to the EU countries such as the Netherlands, Germany and France where the fatalities were in
               the three to six range. The poor quality of roads manifested itself in high vehicle operating costs and
               inadequate road safety, reducing Serbia's overall competitiveness.

               Government Strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Ministry of Transport's (MOT) ongoing National
               Road Rehabilitation Program (NRNRP) program, aimed at improving the quality and safety of priority roads.
               With support from the EU, the Government developed a road sector Transport Strategy and Master Plan for
               2009 to 2027. This strategy identified 5,000 kilometers (km) of roads (slightly over 50% of the NRR) as high
               priorities for rehabilitation and maintenance. In 2009, the Government adopted the updated the Road Safety
               Law (RSL), which addressed many aspects of the EU Transport Acquis Communautaire, and the
               recommendations made in the Road Safety Capacity Review, funded by the World Bank Global Road
               Safety Facility.

               Bank Strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDOs were aligned
               with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPF) for 2012-2015. The CPS found Serbia's transport infrastructure
               to be inadequate as a result of underinvestment in maintenance. The Bank's Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for 2016 - 2020 also identifies transport infrastructure as one of the top priority areas.
               The PDOs were aligned with the CPF objectives of: (i) more efficient public transport companies and (ii)
               enhanced infrastructure networks. The Bank's current strategy for Serbia is currently under preparation.

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank financed construction of several road segments to motorway standards
               on the Serbia section of the Corridor X Highway Project, and supported road rehabilitation and
               strengthening road sector management through the Transport Rehabilitation Project (TRP). The TRP, In
               addition to financing rehabilitation of 200 km of national roads, supported two pilots using the hybrid
               Performance-Based Management Contracts (PBMCs) that resulted in 40% savings (as compared to the
               Unit Cost approach - an approach used in which the contract is based on unit rates). In addition, the TRP
               introduced systematic maintenance planning and programming based on economic efficiency criteria
               and road condition surveys for the NRN that was used in preparing this project. This project built on the
               TRP, by replicating the PBMCs in the roads to be rehabilitated under this project, incorporated road safety
               features and sought to incentivize for institutional reforms, through linking disbursements to results for the
               first time in Serbia.

               The PDO, however, has not raised the ambition to reflect support to institutional strengthening and reforms
               and is purely focused on the road improvement.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




Objective
To improve the condition of the National Road Network (NRN) for road users.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes are clear, and the
intended outcomes are monitorable. Road rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of roads with incorporated
road safety measures aimed at reducing the average road roughness index on the improved roads. This,
along with a road condition survey for the entire national road network, is likely to improve the condition and
safety of the NRN for road users.

Outputs (pages 14 - 16 and pages 34 - 36)

      416.5 kilometers of roads were rehabilitated, exceeding the revised target of 389.80 km (although well
       short of the original target of 800 km).
      63.7% of the national road network were in good or fair condition when the project closed on
       December 31, 2020, exceeding the revised target of 61.3%.
      A road condition survey was completed on 15,076 km of roads, substantially exceeding the target of
       9,000 km.
      3,000 Performance Based Management Contracts (PBMC) for 3,000 km of Category 1 and 11 state
       roads were implemented as targeted. The type of PMBC introduced was a "hybrid" which combined
       features of both method and performance-based contracts. The contracts were based on the national
       procurement procedures. Some services were paid on a unit rate basis, while others were linked to
       meeting performance indicators.
      A Road Maintenance Circular (RMC) was developed to collect and process the information on
       necessary road maintenance works by the PERS engineers, supervising engineers, and road
       maintenance companies in charge of maintenance activities on the Category 1 and 11 state
       roads. RMC, a requirement for the DLI, was adopted by PERS on January 19, 2021.
      9,431 person month (480 for women and 8,951 for men) in respect of temporary jobs were created
       during implementation.

Outcomes (ICR, page 30)

The project activities were expected to improve the condition of the national road network:

      Based on a road network condition survey, the average International Roughness Index (IRI) road
       improved from IRI average = 5.34 m/km to IRI average = 1.90 m/km. This significantly exceeded the
       target of IRI average = 2.5 m/km. Based on a survey of 55 respondents, 93% of the road users found
       their expectations were surpassed. Results of surveys conducted for the regular works showed that
       60% of users were very satisfied with overall project implementation.
      Though not measured, the project activities contributed to enhance road asset operations and
       maintenance through PBMC, improving capacity for efficient planning and use of funds and managing
       maintenance works through introducing a multi-year PBMC model (based on clearly defined, social
       and regional criteria), adopting updated design standards for maintenance and rehabilitation,
       and developing road maintenance circular.




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2
                            Objective
                            To improve the safety of the NRN for road users.



                            Rationale
                            Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes are logical, and the
                            intended outcomes are monitorable. Activities such as, introducing road safety inspections on roads, trainings
                            on road safety audits, introducing PBMC on roads and a road safety awareness campaign, were aimed at
                            institutional strengthening of PERS. These activities were likely to contribute to reduction in road accidents on
                            fatalities on the road network, and improve road operations and maintenance practices.

                            Outputs (ICR, page 16 and page 36)

                                  The safety inspection of national roads beyond the first phase of the National Road Network
                                   Rehabilitation Program (NRNRP) was carried out on 1,016 km of roads. This exceeded the target of
                                   1,000 km.
                                  Road Safety Awareness Raising Campaign was conducted in 20 elementary schools in four regional
                                   centers (Belgrade, Novi, Nis and Uzice). Through the campaign: (i) 148 teachers completed the
                                   training: (ii) 281 parents were trained: (iii) 441 students were trained by teachers in three months.

                            Outcomes (ICR page 16)

                            The project activities were expected to reduce the road traffic accidents on fatalities on the improved roads:

                                  The ICR notes that based on annual Traffic Police Reports for 2015 -2020, road accidents on the
                                   project intervention areas showed a decreasing trend throughout the implementation period. Data for
                                   2020 were only available for the period of January 1, 2020, to September 30, 2020. These data
                                   showed twenty road accidents with fatalities. If this trend continues as expected, the projected value of
                                   the road crashes would be 32 fatalities, a 78% reduction relative to the baseline, and exceeding the
                                   end target.
                                  As part of the project, the certification of road safety auditors was done for the first time in Serbia that
                                   complemented the holistic approach to road safety management.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  Given that the outcomes for the most part were realized, overall efficacy is rated substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for road rehabilitation activities, using the Highway
Development and Management Model (HDM -4). These activities accounted for 92% of the appraisal estimate
and 70% of actual cost. The analysis was based on only nine sections covering 131.2 km of roads, even though
416.5 km were rehabilitated (ICR, Annex Four). The economic benefits of the project were assumed to come
from: (i) travel time savings; and (ii) savings in vehicle operating costs. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12%
discount rate at closure was Euro 30.6 million, as compared to the NPV of Euro 61.7 million at appraisal, using
the same discount rate. The Ex-Post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 17.6%, as compared to the
ex-ante EIRR of 24.4%. The lower NPV and EIRR at closure was due to the lower than-expected annual traffic
growth on the road sections (the ICR notes that lockdowns due to COVID-19 could be one of the reasons for the
lower- than-expected annual traffic growth).

An ex-post analysis was done for the road safety activities. There was a 22% reduction on road fatalities per
year observed on the project roads after the road improvements, as compared to about 17 fatalities per year on
the roads subject to the economic analysis before the project. Assuming that the economic cost of a fatality
was Euro 0.43 million, the overall ex post EIRR was 21.0%, and the NPV at 12% discount rate was Euro 42.21
million.

Administrative and operational issues. There were several administrative and operational shortcomings. The
project became effective about 18 months after approval, due to a combination of factors, including the
Government's decision-making process, lack of harmonized procedures and lack of agreement among the co-
financiers, exacerbated by the major floods in May 2014. The low quality of road design prepared
by consultants, eventually contributed to the almost 50 percent reduction in the target for road
rehabilitation (from 800 km to 416 km). Challenges associated with the DLI approach, included delays
with hiring a Project Audit Consultant (PAC) with the required expertise to verify the fulfillment of the DLIs, while
lack of agreement amongst the co-financiers on procurement procedures, the necessity to obtain two objections
(one from the World Bank and one from the EIB, delayed implementation by almost a year (the additional delay
was caused by the fact that even contracts that were under the World Bank threshold identified as "post review"
contracts had to be "prior reviewed and approved" by the EIB). This also affected the financial management of
the project as it triggered the reallocation of loan funds and changes to the project financing plans.

In the end, the Bank-funding for the project ended up financing a much-reduced scope of activities, was over
two years behind schedule, and with US$13.2 million of the Bank loan unutilized.

In sum, given the administrative and operational shortcomings, efficiency is rated modest.


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      92.00
 Appraisal                                                 24.40
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      70.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Bank and Government strategy is substantial. Efficacy of the two objectives - to
improve the condition and safety of the National Road Network for road users - are substantial, as the
outcome targets were met. Efficiency is however modest, given the administrative and operational
shortcomings. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Commitment. Government commitment to the National Road Network Rehabilitation Program
(NRNRP) is likely to be high, as evidenced by the fact that despite the completion of this Bank-financed
project, the program is still continuing with the EIB co-financing for the project and the EBRD parallel
financed project (which are scheduled to close in December 31, 2022). Likewise, the Government
commitment to road safety aspects is likely to be strong, given that it is important to the prospects of Serbia's
membership to the European Union (EU). The risk to development outcome from Government commitment
is rated as Low.

Institutional risk. The roads rehabilitated under this project were under Performance-Based Management
Contracts (PBMCs). The risk to development outcome from maintenance of these roads is low in the short
run. There is however modest risk, that there may not be adequate resources for maintaining these roads in
the medium and long terms.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the experiences from prior Bank-financed Road projects in Serbia
  (The Corridor X Highway Project (CXHP) and the Transport Rehabilitation Project (TRP). Lessons
  incorporated at design included incentivizing PERS to undertake institutional reforms through linking
  disbursements to results, using a hybrid PBMCs approach that was proven be cost-effective, and
  incorporating road safety standards in road design.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal including, substantial risks with sustainability and design
  (since DLIs were used for the first time in Serbia). Mitigation measures incorporated at design,
  included holding the Public Enterprise Roads of Serbia (PERS) (the agency in charge of managing
  construction and maintenance of national roads in Serbia) responsible for rolling out PBMC, and support
  to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) during implementation. With mitigation measures, the overall
  project implementation risk was rated moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 15). Given that the project was
  co-financed with other donors, the need for effective agreement on procurement rules and other systems
  was however overlooked.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in PERS was
  responsible for day-to-day implementation (PAD, paragraph 43 and 44). PERS had already executed
  TRP and was familiar with the Bank's fiduciary procedures. Since the DLIs were used for the first
  time, the Steering Committee in charge of oversight included, besides the Ministry of Transport (MoT)
  and PERS, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance and Economy (MoFE), the Ministry of Interior,
  and the Ministry of Regional Development and Local Self-Governance (PAD, paragraph 42).
  Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation, as well as
  for safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in Sections 9 and 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings in quality at entry. One, the Bank underestimated the challenges
  associated with co-financing a project with other donors. The lack of agreement among donors
  significantly affected project implementation, and caused delays that could not be compensated for in the
  later stage of the project. Two, the Bank and the client teams believed that the project would be able to
  tap into the large market for consultants (designers, for undertaking the road condition survey, project
  audits) and contractors in the Balkans. This proved to be incorrect, as the limited pool of local companies
  was overloaded with several large national projects. Three, the poor quality of the original designs
  contributed to delays in the initial years, and eventually to the rather drastic reduction in project scope,
  and four, the Bank underestimated the risks associated with hiring a Project Audit Consultant (PAC) of
  required expertise required for verifying the DLIs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




b. Quality of supervision
 There were fourteen implementation missions, with twice a year supervision missions on average during
 implementation. The missions included site visits and consultations with contractors and consultants. The
 supervision team was responsive in the face of challenges during implementation. For example, the team
 appropriately responded to the emergency needs at government request, in the wake of major floods in
 2014, and to the challenges following the COVID - 19 (discussed in section 10b). The team also supported
 the Government in ensuring the sustainability of project-created assets through the continued support from
 the EIB and EBRD parallel financed projects. The support provided by the team aided in safeguards
 compliance (discussed in section 10).

 The efforts of the Bank team in coordinating activities with other donors to overcome the challenges of
 double no-objections was not very efficient during the early years of implementation. This contributed to
 significant delays. The ICR provides no details on the continuity of leadership.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and the key outcome indicators - reduction in the average International
 Roughness Index (IRI) on the rehabilitated roads and reduction in road traffic accidents with fatalities -
 were appropriate for monitoring project activities.

 The DLIs were appropriate. These were to be based on yearly targets for the number of km of road
 rehabilitated and safety measures, for the km of roads covered by road safety inspection and
 implementation of road safety measures, for capacity building and road safety awareness campaigns and
 for competitive tendering for PBMC contracts. The DLIs for maintenance and management reforms
 included a few binary measures (such as the adoption of revised maintenance and rehabilitation design
 standards and the preparation of a strategic plan for introducing PBMCs).

 The PIU was responsible for collecting the data required for monitoring. An Independent Project Audit
 Consultant (PAC) was responsible for performing audits and disbursements for DLIs was contingent on
 verification by an independent Project Audit Consultant.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 70) notes that monitoring was conducted through regular progress reports by the
  PIU and the Bank supervision team. The ICR notes that the M&E data was collected and analyzed in a

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



  methodologically sound fashion. Although there were delays in hiring a Project Audit Consultant for
  verifying the DLIs, these issues were eventually resolved.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E indicators were used by the PIU and the Bank team to gauge and assess performance and to
  prepare response measures to ensure the project was on track towards achieving its objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B project under the World Bank safeguard policies. Two safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment. The project entailed only rehabilitating existing roads, and no significant
   widening (such as adding more lanes) was envisioned at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 65). An Environmental
   Management Framework (EMF) and three section-specific Environment Social Management Plans
   (ESMPs) were prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 153).

   The ICR (paragraph 74) notes that environmental compliance was rated as satisfactory in the last two
   Implementation Status Results (ISR) Reports. The ICR notes that in the first two years, there were a few
   major non-compliance issues with respect to site-specific ESMPs (such as, traffic safety, cultural heritage
   projection, waste management, and health and safety of workers). These issues were resolved eventually,
   with support from the Bank team. Likewise, there were issues associated with inadequate quality for several
   section-specific ESMPs. Remedial measures were undertaken and there were no environmental or quality
   issues in the last 18 months.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 61) notes that some minor land acquisition was
   envisioned in places where realignments may be required to address road safety issues. A project-specific
   Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) that was acceptable to the Bank, the Government and the EIU, was
   prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address resettlement issues (PAD, paragraphs 61 and 62).

   There was compliance with social safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that PERS addressed
   the impacts relating to land expropriation through proactive measures to avoid economic displacement, and
   minimize the impacts on private assets through using the willing-buyer and willing seller method approach
   to address acquisition requirements outside the Right of Way (RoW) (for activities such as construction of
   bus stops and pedestrian walkways). The ICR (paragraph 79) notes that retroactive expropriation was
   needed to update the ownership records for the existing roads. Where necessary information was missing,
   PERS retroactively updated the ownership records for existing roads, so that the RoW could be legally
   established to obtain usage permits for the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure. The local

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



   communities were engaged in the design process and Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs) were in
   place. The ICR notes that during the project lifetime, 316 requests and complaints were recorded and
   resolved. Of these, 237 (75%) were positively resolved; 79 (25%) were negatively resolved (for reasons
   such as, either they were unfounded or beyond the project domain, or they were not in line with traffic
   safety).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. An assessment of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) conducted at appraisal,
   concluded that the financial managements were satisfactory. The PIU had adequate staff for carrying out
   the financial management functions (PAD, paragraph 57).

   Financial Management was satisfactory throughout implementation (ICR, paragraph 81). The ICR notes
   that the PERS had adequate qualified finance professional staff as permanent employees. No major
   financial issues were identified by the Bank's latest financial management supervision conducted in
   November 2020. There was no disruption of disbursement and all audits (including the last one received in
   My 2020), were unmodified.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment of PERS conducted at appraisal, concluded that PERS had
   adequate experience to implement procurement activities under Bank Guidelines. The procurement risk
   was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 59).

   The ICR (paragraph 84) notes that there was compliance with the Bank's procurement guidelines, although
   there were some issues due to the huge volume of contracts. The procurement plans were updated
   regularly. The ICR (paragraph 65) notes that given that this project was co-financed with EIB, lack of
   harmonized guidelines and lack of agreement between the Bank and EIU, contributed to significant
   procurement delays during implementation. The necessity to obtain two no-objections (one from the World
   Bank and one from EIB) further extended the time for procurement, given that 63 out of 74 contracts were
   awarded using the WB/EIU co-financing. The ICR notes that this project, like all other projects, was
   affected by the COVID -19 pandemic. The Bank was flexible and responded to the challenges through
   measures, such as public bid opening using Zoom (including a video recording of the whole process), and
   extension of the period for contracts. The ICR reports no case of mis procurement. The Bank however
   notes that the supervision team had three procurement specialists during the project lifetime.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings



                                                                                                Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Efficiency is rated modest, in
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory    view of the administrative and
                                                                                   operational shortcomings.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following four lessons from the experience of implementing this project,
presented with some adaptation of language.

1. A modest hybrid approach in introducing Performance-Based Management Contracts
(PBMCs) can be effective in countries with capacity considerations. The hybrid approach
was introduced gradually in this project as capacity was built locally for using PBMCs. The PBMCs
were implemented eventually. The hybrid type of PMBC combined features of both method and
performance-based contracts. Such an approach can be useful in countries with weak capacity at
the outset.

2. Procurement arrangements needs to be carefully considered at preparation in co-financed
projects. This project experienced significant delays in procurement due to the need to secure two-
objections (one from the Bank and one from the European Investment Bank (EIB). The ICR notes
that although the Bank team thought that they had reached an understanding with the EIB on
procurement arrangements, it failed in implementation. A lesson is that the teams at the preparation
stage co-financiers should agree and document the principles of collaboration between the
institutions, and ideally delegate procurement decisions to one of the institutions. Since this will likely
not be the last collaborative project, principles of collaboration between the institutions should be
pursued with senior management and agreement reached at design for future projects.

3. When deciding on whether to use the Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLI), several
factors need to be considered, i.e., assessing whether the Bank and the client have the required
experience, and whether there are sufficient Independent Verification Agents (IVA).

4. Given frequent and intense climate events in a country, it is important to include climate
resilient infrastructure in project design to minimize vulnerability of physical assets to
natural hazards. In May 2014, a state of emergency was declared in Serbia after the heaviest rain
and worst floods since records began 120 years ago. The cross-sectoral coordinated work by the
Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Emergency and other bodies was key in responding to the
events, and extended to the integrated planning and preparedness. It would be also useful to include
the Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) in transport projects to
enable immediate response to emergencies.



                                                                                                       Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT (P127876)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written. The theory of change presents a clear elucidation of the links between project activities,
outputs and outcomes that could be attributed to the project activities. The ICR clearly articulates the issues,
which need to be considered when the Bank finances a project with other donors. It candidly acknowledges the
issues faced in finding an Independent Verification Agent required for administering Performance-Based
Management Contracts (PBMCs). The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this
project. The ICR is presented well, with supporting figures, diagrams, and photographs.

There is an inconsistent use of US$ and Euros throughout the text.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 15
