     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022313

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P113349                                    HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                 Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48960,IDA-52310                        31-Dec-2016                                         115,266,344.59

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Apr-2011                                31-Dec-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            93,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           129,659,097.53                                                 0.00

 Actual                                       115,266,344.59                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg             Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Maria Behrens               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 4), the project's original objectives were to: "(a) improve access to
   quality health care at the primary level and at rayon medical unions (RMUs); and (b) strengthen the
   government's public health response to the rise in non-communicable diseases (NCDs)." RMUs linked rural
   physician centers, multidisciplinary outpatient clinics, and rayon hospitals into single functional units.

   At a 2013 restructuring and additional financing (AF), the objectives were revised to: "(a) improve access to
   quality health care at the primary level, at RMUs, and at selected city medical unions (CMUs); and (b)

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



   strengthen the government's public health response to the rise in NCDs." CMUs perform the same function
   as RMUs, but in urban areas. This revision reflected a decision to cover all RMUs and add some CMUs. As
   the scale-up was commensurate with the AF, no split rating is necessary, and the project will be assessed
   using the revised statement of objectives.

   At a 2018 restructuring, one outcome target was revised to reflect results of a survey that adjusted the
   baseline. This change did not represent a revision in the indicator's scope, and therefore a split rating is not
   performed.

   It is standard IEG practice to unbundle distinct objectives in a PDO statement, which normally would dictate
   separate assessments of achievement in improving access to health care and quality of health care.
   However, in this case, the project's context and design clearly indicate that the issue was not access to care
   in and of itself, but instead access to better-quality care. For this reason, only two objectives, as delineated in
   the financing agreements, are assessed in this review.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Mar-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained four components. Project design was not changed as a result of the 2013 AF, as
   originally planned activities were scaled up.



   1. Improving health service delivery (appraisal: US$ 82.17 million; AF: US$ 171.12 million reflecting an
   additional US$ 88.95 million; actual: US$ 133.27 million). This component was to improve service planning
   at RMUs, refurbishing them with modern biomedical equipment and improving skills and competencies of
   clinical staff in disease case management and treatment. It was to focus on the most frequently recurring
   pediatric and NCDs. It was to enhance primary health care (PHC) reforms by expanding the general
   practice PHC model to urban areas, strengthening the referral system, and improving skills and
   competencies of medical personnel in early diagnosis, screening, and treatment of priority NCDs. It included
   three subcomponents:

         Hospital services improvement, through refurbishing at least 100 selected central rayon hospitals
          with up-to-date diagnostic and waste management equipment and medical furniture; improving
          health service planning at RMUs, including the revision of construction specifications and standards
          and the development of referral guidelines and equipment maintenance systems; and providing

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



       study tours for health administrators. Participating hospitals were chosen according to geographic,
       epidemiological, socioeconomic, and demographic factors.
      Primary health care development, through expanding the general practice health care model to all
       urban polyclinics in three pilot oblasts and Tashkent city; continuing ten-month general practice
       training programs; and providing opportunities for skills development and training on NCD diagnosis
       and treatment.
      Clinical quality enhancement, through providing on-site training of RMUs' pediatric and internal
       medicine doctors and nurses in new clinical treatment standards; training in clinical case
       management and hospital administration; developing and introducing up-to-date relevant and
       effective practical treatment standards for RMUs' internal medicine and pediatrics staff; and
       establishing quality improvement mechanisms to monitor implementation of the new clinical
       treatment standards.

At the AF, this component was scaled up to cover an additional 57 RMUS and 15 selected CMUs.



2. Strengthening health financing and management reforms (appraisal: US$ 4.45 million; AF: US$ 5.95
million, reflecting an additional US$ 1.50 million; actual: US$ 1.48 million). This component was intended to
consolidate and institutionalize per capita-based primary health care financing and management reforms by
developing a strategy for health sector financing and appropriate regulatory measures for the
implementation of that strategy. It was also to strengthen the role of the Ministry of Health (MOH) in health
financing policy formulation and monitoring and local capacity building by conducting health sector
expenditure analysis and medium-term projections; developing national health accounts (NHAs) and studies
on hospital utilization patterns; training relevant staff at MOH, rural PHC clinics, and RMUs on financial
management; and developing a health financing information system to support the implementation of a
hospital financing pilot.



3. Institutional strengthening for NCD prevention and control (appraisal: US$ 2.98 million; AF: US$
3.38 million, reflecting an additional US$ 0.40 million; actual: US$ 1.88 million). This component was to
strengthen the capacity of public health institutions in effective prevention and control of NCDs, with
activities implemented in two pilot oblasts and a third oblast serving as a control. It included two
subcomponents:

      Health promotion and NCD prevention, intended to strengthen the capacity of public health
       institutions in effective prevention and control of NCDs by increasing awareness of and changing
       behaviors associated with increased risk for hypertension, diabetes, and other chronic diseases.
      Strengthening health surveillance systems, through developing an epidemiological surveillance
       system for NCDs, improving the public health system's ability to use collected data in effective policy
       making and program planning, and developing effective health promotion and disease prevention
       programs.



4. Project management (appraisal: US$ 3.4 million; AF: US$ 5.55 million, reflecting an additional US$ 2.15
million; actual: US$ 4.37 million). This component was to strengthen the capacity of MOH and project

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



   implementation bureaus for project management and implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
   environmental management, procurement, and financial management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Financing, costs, and government contribution: The project was originally to be financed by a US$ 93
   million International Development Association (IDA) Credit. The government was to be responsible for
   parallel financing of hospital construction and repair costs as well as US$ 10.1 million in local taxes on the
   project, bringing the original total project costs to US$ 103.1 million. An additional IDA Credit of US$ 93
   million was approved in 2013. An amount of US$ 45 million was cancelled in 2018, and a further US$ 7
   million was cancelled in 2019, all from the first and fourth components, as a result of reallocation of funds to
   another health sector project and savings from undertaking international competitive bidding for the
   procurement of medical equipment. Actual total project costs (excluding the government's contribution to
   local taxes) were US$ 115.3 million, reflecting some exchange rate fluctuations. The government covered
   costs of hospital construction and repair, as well as US$ 32.5 million for other local costs, including taxes.


   Dates: The project was approved in April 2011 and became effective in November 2011. A mid-term review
   was held in November 2015. The project was restructured three times:

         March 7, 2013: to revise the objectives and add AF, adjust the wording of some indicators (replace
          "treatment standards" with the more precise "clinical guidelines"), raise targets commensurately with
          the AF, and extend the closing date by 24 months to December 31, 2018.
         February 8, 2018: to cancel US$ 45 million from the project in order to re-commit Bank resources to
          a proposed Emergency Medical Services project, following some delays in procurement processes
          throughout 2017 and a resulting unused balance; adjust some intermediate results indicators
          accordingly; and extend the closing date by another 12 months to December 31, 2019.
         December 18, 2019: to cancel an additional US$ 7 million, as all project activities had been
          completed, and there were savings (due to efficient procurement processes) that could not be used
          by the closing date.

   The project closed on December 31, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were relevant to country context, though they did not advocate for the kind of deep
restructuring of the hospital network that was recommended by most analyses at the time of appraisal.
Uzbekistan's main health challenges centered around NCDs, which accounted for about 90% of all deaths
in 2009. Poor access to high-quality preventive and treatment services, especially in rural areas, was
greatly affecting health and mortality outcomes. The Bank had been supporting the health sector since the
mid-1990s through reforms aimed at restructuring primary care and establishing an emergency medical
care network. The primary care reforms encouraged efficiency as patients shifted to lower-cost outpatient

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



               services and helped orient health facilities toward local needs and improved accountability. Issues
               remained, however, with the configuration and quality of inpatient service provision. There was
               fragmentation and duplication of services across too many separate hospital facilities, resulting in poor
               quality of secondary care services, lack of institutional and managerial focus on prevention and
               management of chronic illness and non-acute services, and lack of coordination of services for patients with
               multisystem diseases.

               The government's "Welfare Improvement Strategy 2008-2012" identified inpatient and specialized care as
               key areas for the next phase of health care reforms, with the goal of improving the quality of secondary care
               at the rayon and city levels. According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 14), the Bank and other
               development partners recommended consolidation of the hospital network into a smaller number of larger
               multiprofile general hospitals, which would be autonomous units operating under case-based financing, in
               order to achieve gains in both efficiency and quality of care. However, that option was considered to be too
               "radical and politically challenging," and the government opted instead for an evolutionary approach to
               addressing hospital reform, adopting a program for renewal of RMUs and CMUs to promote access of rural
               and other communities to good-quality health services at reasonable cost. The project's objectives were
               reflective of this evolutionary strategy, though the inclusion of a health financing information system to
               support a hospital financing pilot under the second component indicated that the Bank was continuing to
               advocate for more far-reaching health financing reforms. The government's public health strategy for the
               period 2010-2020 had objectives to improve health promotion, especially related to NCDs, and to reduce
               the mortality rate from cardiovascular disease in people under 65 years of age by at least 20 percent
               between 2010 and 2020, indicating that the project remained relevant to government strategy at project
               closing.

               The objectives were well aligned with Bank strategy across the project's lifetime. They were responsive to
               two of the four pillars of the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy at appraisal (FY09-FY11): enabling an
               environment for shared growth (including increasing the efficiency of public financial management for more
               effective service provision), and improving human development and social protection through improved
               basic services delivery. They remained relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at
               closing (FY16-FY20), through its third focus area (public service delivery) and objective 3.1 (improved
               access to quality education and health services). The CPF (p. 21) also identified improved efficiency of
               health services delivery as an important area for Bank support.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve access to quality health care at the primary level, at RMUs, and at selected CMUs


                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)




Rationale
The theory of change for this objective, developed by the ICR (p. 7), held that reconstruction and equipment
of RMUs and selected CMUs, training of staff in those facilities, implementation of enhanced clinical
protocols, and strengthening of MOH capacity in stewardship and management of the sector would lead to
improved quality of PHC services as well as more rational referral of patients from the PHC level to
RMU/CMU hospitals. With better-equipped PHC and RMU/CMU facilities following improved clinical practice
guidelines, there would plausibly be improved access to higher-quality health care at both the primary level
and at RMUs and participating CMUs.



Outputs

All RMUs and 15 CMUs were reconstructed, primarily with government financing. The project supported the
design and layout of this construction. The project also equipped 748 hospitals with medical and waste
management equipment, exceeding the original target of 100 and the revised target of 516 hospitals. A
Republic Training and Production Center for Maintenance of Medical Equipment was established, and RMUs
reported that they are facing no problem with medical equipment maintenance (ICR, p. 16). 933 hospital core
staff received training on waste management, exceeding the original target of 300 and the revised target of
516 staff, though waste management equipment was not purchased until the end of the project period.

22 new clinical guidelines related to NCDs (cardiovascular disease, diabetes, etc.) were developed and
adopted by the MOH by 2019, not meeting the original target of 25 guidelines, but exceeding the revised
target of 20. These guidelines were developed by 11 local experts who were trained by the World Health
Organization (WHO) and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). RMU and CMU staff were
trained for internal monitoring of clinical protocol implementation.

3,067 doctors in urban and rural PHC facilities received training under a ten-month general practitioner
training program, not meeting the original target of 3,670, but exceeding the revised target of 3,000 doctors.

14,824 doctors and 50,018 nurses at PHCs received training under continuous professional education,
partially meeting the original target of 6,000 doctors and 57,000 nurses, and exceeding the revised target of
9,400 doctors and 40,500 nurses.

Some progress was made on laying the groundwork for further health care financing reform. Two Public
Expenditure Review reports and two NHA reports were published, meeting the target. 155 urban family
polyclinics were converted to a per capita financing system following the planned pilot of this model, an
increase of 130 over the 2013 baseline of 25 clinics, meeting the target of 155; this financing system is now
being applied to all RMUs. However, volume and cost contracts were not introduced in three pilot hospitals in
Fergana oblast, not meeting the target of three hospitals doing so, due to lack of adequate in-country capacity
to implement such a complex payment mechanism.



Outcomes




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



The proportion of diabetic and hypertension patients referred from PHC facilities to RMUs in accordance
with clinical protocols increased from zero in 2012 to 88% in 2019, surpassing the original target of 10% and
the revised target of 80%.

The perceived quality of PHC and secondary care services in intervention areas met or exceeded targets. For
PHC, patient satisfaction levels improved from 85.5% in 2011 to 90.7% in 2019, meeting the target of 90%.
For secondary care, satisfaction rose from 69.5% in 2011 to 86.8% in 2019, meeting the target of 85%.

In addition, intermediate results described above on improved and better equipped PHC and RMU/CMU
facilities, and improved clinical guidelines and staff skills, captured the extent of contribution of the operation's
activities and outputs toward achieving improved access to quality health care.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the government's public health response to the rise in NCDs

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective, developed by the ICR (p. 7), held that the development and
monitoring of enhanced clinical protocols, in conjunction with the training of public health staff, healthy
lifestyle promotion activities, and the implementation of WHO NCD prevention, treatment, and counseling
protocols at PHC facilities, would plausibly lead to increased NCD awareness and strengthened data
collection as well as improved implementation of NCD-related referral pathways and procotols, ultimately
contributing to an improved public health response to the rise in NCDs.



Outputs

In addition to the outputs noted under the first objective:

3,833 doctors and 6,158 nurses were trained on clinical case management for NCDs and pediatrics,
exceeding the original target of 2,200 total personnel and the revised target of 1,002 doctors and 2,064
nurses.

177 public health specialists (surveillance staff) and health promotion specialists were trained, not meeting
the original target of 300, but exceeding the revised target of 140.



Outcomes




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



                            The number of hospitals following NCD clinical guidelines developed under the project increased from zero in
                            2012 to 172 in 2019, exceeding the original target of 100 and meeting the revised target of 172 hospitals. The
                            ICR (p. 18) reported that, due to new laboratory equipment, appropriate training, and application of practice
                            guidelines, the detection of diabetic patients has improved, with incidence rates moving from 5% at the
                            beginning of the project to closer to the international average of 25-30% at project closing.

                            A profile of NCD risk factors and burden of disease was published on the MOH website in December 2018,
                            meeting the target.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's interventions were logically and plausibly connected to observed outcomes, which met targets
                            for improved access to quality care for NCDs as well as strengthening the public health response. Although
                            the PAD and the ICR noted that other donors were engaged in Uzbekistan's health sector, and the
                            government was responsible for reconstruction of health facilities under the project, there was no direct
                            discussion in the ICR of attribution. The ICR (p. 19) noted that, at its peak year of disbursement (2016), the
                            project accounted for only 1.77% of general government spending on health. Given the integrity of the
                            project's results chain, however, the financed activities are reasonably considered to have contributed
                            significantly to achievement of both objectives. Efficacy is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, it was estimated that the project's interventions would avert over 980,000 disability-adjusted life
   years (DALYs) over the 2011-2030 period. The main direct benefit of the project derived from the economic
   value of those averted DALYs. The costs and benefits of the project were estimated over 20 years, including the
   five years of project implementation. The future stream of annual DALYs saved (benefits) was discounted at 3%.
   The baseline conservative estimate produced a net present value (NPV) of US$189.6 million and internal rate of
   return (IRR) of 24%. Both NPV and IRR analyses were highly sensitive to the value of a DALY; increasing this
   value from one to three times per capita GDP increased the IRR nearly threefold. By contrast, the IRR was only
   mildly sensitive to the discount rate for DALYs, and minimally sensitive to the deflator (inflation) rate of the
   discount rate for DALYs averted. The IRR was also minimally sensitive to a reduction of 50% in intervention



                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



effectiveness. It was assumed that the overall reduction in DALYs from cardiovascular disease would be only
about five percent over 20 years, which was a modest assumption.

The ICR (pp. 44-52) updated the PAD's analysis, again deriving benefits from the health gains produced
primarily by the first and third components, measured in terms of DALYs averted, using a discount rate of 3%.
Under the most realistic scenario, net benefits were US$ 879.2 million in real terms, translating into an NPV of
US$ 176.5 million and IRR of 199%. The benefit-cost ratio was estimated at 13.7. These results varied with
sensitivity analysis but remained highly positive in all cases. These highly positive results are not surprising,
given the high costs of NCDs.

The ICR (p. 18) also noted that the project's allocative efficiency was high, through its focus on health promotion
and prevention (saving higher-level hospitals from having to provide costly services), clinical quality of care (a
necessary step for converting services to better health outcomes), and the most critical health conditions facing
the country (NCDs).

Financial management and general project implementation were smooth and efficient. Notwithstanding
procurement savings on medical equipment (discussed below), however, there were procurement inefficiencies,
primarily related to two factors: delays in physical construction/reconstruction of facilities and approval of bidding
documents for equipment, driven by long lags gaining required approvals from an inter-ministerial commission
and lengthier-than-expected timelines for actual construction; and a lengthy process of price verification for
import contracts that was in place until 2017 (a process carried out by the Ministry for Foreign Economic
Relations, Investments and Trade (MFERIT) for all Bank-financed projects that was in violation of Bank
procurement guidelines). In 2017, the government adopted a reform agenda that modernized the bureaucratic
system, restructured MFERIT, and abolished the price verification practice. Ultimately, procurement of medical
equipment for all facilities constructed or renovated under the project produced significant savings through the
use of international competitive bidding (ICR, p. 13).

Due to evidence of strong economic returns, high allocative efficiency, and moderate implementation issues
that imposed some opportunity cost but were eventually resolved, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        100.00
 Appraisal                                                   24.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                199.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



6. Outcome

The project's objectives were strongly relevant to the country's disease burden, government strategy, and Bank
strategy at appraisal and closing, though -- given capacity and political constraints -- they did not follow
recommendations from the Bank and other development partners to pursue hospital rationalization. Relevance
of objectives is rated Substantial. Efficacy was Substantial, as the project's interventions contributed to
achievement of improved access to quality health services and an improved government public health response
to NCDs. Efficiency was also Substantial, with high rates of return, strong allocative efficiency, and moderate
implementation inefficiencies. These ratings indicate that there were only minor shortcomings in the operation's
relevance, achievement of objectives, or efficiency, leading to an overall Outcome rating of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The government's and health institutions' ownership and commitment to sustaining the gains achieved by the
project are strong. The Bank continues to support the sector through the Emergency Medical Services
project (US$ 100 million, 2018-2021) and health financing advisory services and analytics. Ongoing
maintenance of the medical equipment provided by the project is supported by dedicated maintenance
training centers and processes. The project's achievements in institutional strengthening, including building
MOH capacity to produce public expenditure reviews and NHAs, will continue to give health decision makers
thorough insights into the financial status of the health sector. Increased capacity to monitor the burden of
disease, including NCDs, should contribute to the sustainability of a coordinated and informed response to
addressing this challenge. The primary risks are two-fold: technical and political risks stemming from the
reluctance of key actors to pursue further health financing reforms at the secondary level of care, and the
effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the functioning and financing of the health care system. The Bank is
mitigating the latter risk through a US$ 95 million Emergency COVID-19 Response Project (2020-2022), with
US$ 4 million in AF approved later in 2020.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives and design were responsive to the situation in Uzbekistan's health sector at
  appraisal, the government's policy priorities, and the advice and knowledge of the Bank on international
  experience in undertaking similar reforms in similar contexts. Implementation arrangements were
  specified in detail (PAD, pp. 43-45). Key lessons learned from previous Bank projects in the country, and
  from reviews of health care reforms in other transition countries in the region (PAD, pp. 24-25), included:
  the need to enhance efficiency of the supply side by changing clinical protocols, reforming outpatient
  care, changing the skill set of the labor force, and strengthening providers' managerial capabilities; the
  importance of strengthening the government's use of budgetary and regulatory instruments by improving

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



  public budget management and supervisory capabilities; and design and implementation mechanisms to
  meet demand. Unsuccessful experience with previous case-based hospital pilots in Uzbekistan had
  demonstrated that there were not yet sufficient preconditions for case-based financing at rayon-level
  hospitals, requiring more preparation and a longer transition period. However, in other areas where the
  government had already initiated reform, such as the development and implementation of new standards
  for clinical practice and management, progress could be rapid. Earlier project experience had also
  demonstrated the importance of keeping the project's objectives and key monitoring indicators specific
  and limited in number, and limiting the scope of public health activities, in recognition of capacity
  constraints. The Operational Risk Assessment Framework at appraisal (PAD, pp. 54-55) rated the
  project's overall risk level MI (low likelihood of risks materializing, but high impact if they did), based on
  concerns about the government's commitment to the health sector reform agenda, challenges with donor
  coordination, and the risk of implementation delays due to weak procurement and financial management
  capacity. Mitigation measures, which proved generally effective, included continued policy dialogue and
  advocacy for reform, a communication strategy to engage stakeholders with the reform agenda, and
  close monitoring and timely advice on procurement and project monitoring/oversight arrangements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 25), supervision was "intense," with frequent missions and consistent policy
 dialogue. There were two task team leaders (TTLs) over the project's lifetime, and the engagement of Bank
 staff in-country provided continuity and responsiveness. Project monitoring documents were candid and
 consistent. M&E and safeguards were well supervised. The Bank team adapted appropriately to the need
 for AF, and then with further restructuring and reallocation of loan proceeds when implementation delays
 arose in 2015-2016. The ICR (p. 25) noted in particular that both TTLs were fluent in Russian and had
 deep understanding of the Soviet and post-Soviet health systems, helping to build trust with the
 government and facilitating discussions on challenging issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objectives were clearly stated, and the theory of change was well established and plausible.
 Results indicators were relevant and manageable, with data sources and responsibility for data collection
 well specified for each indicator; baselines and targets were to be determined primarily through beneficiary

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



 population and other surveys to be completed within six months of effectiveness. Progress was to be
 tracked using the Central Project Implementation Bureau's (CPIB's) M&E system, which drew on multiple
 information sources and instruments. The CPIB system was also to track data on behavior risk factors
 related to NCDs, the satisfaction of patients and providers with health services, and the quality of health
 services through studies and surveys. The M&E specialist of the CPIB was to be responsible for overall
 data collection, analysis, and reporting, working with Regional Institute of Health Monitoring Departments in
 project oblasts. Semiannual Project Management and Progress Reports prepared by the CPIB in
 consultation with the MOH were to verify the project's compliance with established operational procedures
 and document performance.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E framework was implemented as designed, with some indicators adjusted at the restructurings
  to improve the clarity of wording and adapt baseline values in light of new data. Some the planned
  studies on health services quality were not conducted, and the ICR (p. 23) raised questions about the
  reliability of the data that were collected but did not elaborate on the nature of possible shortcomings. The
  project team (6/3/2021) later explained that overall data collection and reliability of any data was a
  generic issue in Uzbekistan, but that data presented on the project indicators were provided by the MOH
  and deemed acceptable by the project team.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project's M&E data and analysis were used as management tools to assess the status
  of implementation throughout the project's lifetime. This ICR Review concurs with the ICR's
  conclusion (p. 23) that "the project's M&E framework was sufficient to assess achievement of project
  objectives, to inform the direction of the project, and was effective for strategy development and/or future
  projects."



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated Environmental Assessment category "B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
   Assessment, as it was to indirectly support the rehabilitation of health facilities, with potential improvements
   in health care waste management. An Environmental Management Framework was prepared and
   disclosed, as was an Environmental Management Plan prior to beginning construction at each site. The ICR
   did not specify whether there was compliance with environmental safeguards. The project team later
   confirmed (6/3/2021) that there was full compliance with safeguard policies.

   OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement, was triggered during implementation, as the scope of civil works went
   beyond initial floor plans and required the relocation of some small businesses. In order to ensure

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



   compliance, the project prepared a Resettlement Audit and Action Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework,
   and Resettlement Action Plan. An independent audit was conducted in 2016 to assess all private sites
   located within the potential territory of RMUs. The audit showed that no involuntary resettlement took place,
   and that only two private sites carried ongoing potential risk in this area; construction on the territory of
   those two sites was not permitted.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The CPIB was responsible for both financial management arrangements and procurement. An Action Plan
   was agreed to with the CPIB to ensure that adequate financial management systems were in place before
   implementation began. According to the ICR (pp. 23-24), CPIB prepared annual budgets on a timely basis,
   and internal controls were consistently found to be reliable. Financial management reports were submitted
   on time and found to be satisfactory, and independent audits were carried out regularly. Although the ICR
   did not discuss the acceptability of the audits, the project team confirmed (6/3/2021) that audits were clean
   and on time.

   At appraisal, a procurement capacity assessment was carried out and concluded that the CPIB had
   adequate staffing and experience to carry out proposed activities (PAD, p. 26). There were issues with
   procurement that led to implementation delays (see Section 5), but these were outside the control of the
   project, and they impacted projects across the entire country portfolio. The ICR (p. 24) stated that these
   challenges related to discrepancies between the Bank's procurement guidelines and national procurement
   procedures, and government unwillingness to recognize the seniority of the Bank's guidelines. As a result,
   the Bank team spent time encouraging the government to adhere to this principle throughout the life of the
   project, and the CPIB had to balance the incorporation of Bank comments with compliance with local
   requirements. Repeated instances of non-acceptance of Bank comments on bidding documents or bid
   evaluation reports caused protracted procurement processes, delaying contract awards and
   disbursements.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 26-27) provided a series of useful lessons, some of which are adapted here:

Health reform relies heavily on government commitment and political processes. In this case,
government ownership was critical to supporting reforms through legislative processes, but political
reluctance and opposition to more far-reaching hospital rationalization constrained the scope and
approach of project design.

Close coordination with other technical agencies can produce important benefits and
synergies. In this case, work with the World Health Organization and U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention was central to the development of clinical protocols and national health
accounts reports.

Continuous and long-term engagement of the Bank in a specific sector pays off, though in this
case, it is a work in progress. Engagement through the previous Health I and Health II projects,
which supported comprehensive reform of primary care and piloted case-based payments for
hospitals, both laid the ground work for the investments supported by this project and sustained an
ongoing dialogue about pathways for engaging in more difficult financing and structural reforms in
hospital care.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-written, concise (at 22 pages of main text), and carefully adherent to guidelines. It effectively
reconstructed the project's theory of change discussions and meticulously described the revisions in
the project's objectives, financing, activities, and indicators over its lifetime. The ICR was results-oriented,
explaining how the implemented activities contributed to achieved outcomes. It was candid in its assessment of
the government's reluctance to pursue more ambitious hospital reform and the project's challenges with
procurement. However, there were some minor shortcomings and inconsistencies in M&E. The risk to
development outcome and M&E discussions were thin, and there was no statement about the quality of
financial audits or compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  HEALTH SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (P113349)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                             Page 15 of 15
