     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022586

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P131408                                    BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Belize                                     Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18449                                   31-Mar-2020                                           5,160,605.70

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Mar-2015                                30-Sep-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            5,530,000.00                                     5,530,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             5,160,605.70                                     5,160,605.70

 Actual                                         5,160,605.70                                     5,160,605.70




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was to implement priority ecosystem-based marine conservation and climate
   adaptation measures to strengthen the climate resilience of the Belize Barrier Reef System (Grant
   Agreement, Schedule 1, page 6), which was stated identically in PAD (page vii).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



   Based on the PDO formulation, this assessment regards the PDO to be “to strengthen the climate resilience
   of the Belize Barrier Reef System,” an objective which was to be achieved through implementing priority
   ecosystem-based marine conservation and climate adaptation measures.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-May-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1. Improving the Protection Regime of Marine and Coastal Ecosystems (Estimated:
   US$2.0 million; Actual: US$2.54 million, 127 percent of the original estimate) intended to strengthen: (a)
   regulatory and institutional measures to expand and improve the management of Marine Protected Areas
   (MPAs) and (b) physical measures to restore the reef. This component comprised four sub-components: (i)
   supporting refinement and demarcation of the boundary and no-take zones for the Turneffe Atoll Marine
   Reserve (a new marine reserve declared in 2012 during project preparation), as well as realigning or
   expanding the boundaries and no-take zones for the South Water Caye Marine Reserve and the Corozal
   Bay Wildlife Sanctuary, through participatory processes involving the surrounding communities, in order to
   achieve about 20.2% of area under protection and creating replenishment zones in the selected MPAs; (ii)
   promoting effective management of the selected MPAs, including their replenishment fishing zones; (iii) re-
   populating coral reefs within replenishment fishing zones; and (iv) strengthening the legal framework for the
   management of Belize’s MPA network and coastal zone.

   Component 2. Promotion of Viable Alternative Livelihoods (Estimated: US$2.45 million; Actual:
   US$1.67 million, 68 percent of the original estimate) intended to reduce the local anthropogenic stressors
   on the marine resource base by providing grant financing to promote economically viable and sustainable
   alternative livelihoods for communities adversely impacted by climate change and by the expansion and
   consolidation of MPAs and replenishment zones under the project. This component comprised three sub-
   components: (i) supporting community mobilization for the development of alternative livelihoods; (ii)
   carrying out alternative livelihoods sub-projects; and (iii) capacity building to transition to economically
   viable and sustainable alternative livelihoods through business and occupational skills training.

   Component 3. Raising Awareness and Building Local Capacity (Estimated: US$0.56 million; Actual:
   US$0.61 million, 109 percent of the original estimate) intended to build support for the National Protected
   Areas Policy and System Plan, to build local capacity to develop and explore climate resilience strategies,
   and to promote behavior change designed to minimize climate risks in MPAs and replenishment zones. This
   component’s activities included: conducting a climate change knowledge, attitude, and behavioral



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



  practice survey, disseminating the project information, establishing a coordinated behavior change
  communication strategy, and promoting inter-community learning and dialogue.

  Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Assessment (Estimated: US$0.52 million; Actual:
  US$0.34 million, 65 percent of the original estimate) intended to support project management and
  implementation, including technical, administrative, and fiduciary support and compliance with
  environmental and social safeguards; and monitoring and evaluation, data collection, and stakeholder
  involvement and coordination.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated to be US$7.31 million (PAD, page vii). At
  project closing, the total actual cost was US$5.16 million (ICR, page 2). The difference between estimated
  and actual costs was due to the Government's in-kind contribution that was included in the appraisal
  estimate.

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was expected to be funded by US$5.53 million grant by the Adaptation
  Fund and US$1.78 million in-kind contribution by the Government (PAD, para 29). At project closing, the
  project executed US$5.16 million grant (93% of the original amount) (ICR, page 2). The grant account with
  the remaining amount of US$369,394.30 was cancelled and closed after the project closing (Letter on
  Cancellation and Closing of Grant Account, dated March 4, 2021).

  Dates: The project was approved on March 3, 2015, and became effective on July 15 in the same year. The
  Mid-Term Review (MTR) was completed on April 3, 2018. The project was closed on September 30, 2020,
  six months after the original closing date of March 31, 2020. The account of the Adaptation Fund Grant was
  cancelled and closed on January 30, 2021.

  Restructuring: There were two restructurings in May 2019 and January 2020. In the first
  restructuring, the results framework and components were revised, as well as costs were
  reallocated between disbursement categories. In the second restructuring, the project duration was
  extended for six months to complete implementation of project activities.

  The pre-restructuring period covered from the project approval in March 2015 to the first restructuring in
  May 2019. The post-restructuring period covered from June 2019 until the project closing in September
  2020. The share of actual credit disbursements made by each period was as follows: 69% (US$3.55 million)
  and 31% (US$1.61 million).

  Split Evaluation: The project’s scope was downscaled, and three of the four outcome targets were revised
  downwards in the restructuring in May 2019, in consideration of the long-term nature of the intended
  outcomes (i.e. strengthening climate resilience of an ecosystem, changing behaviors of communities) to
  become observable. As the scope of the project shrank and project commitments remained approximately
  at the same level, IEG concurred with the ICR team that a split rating of the outcome was deemed
  necessary.




                                                                                                 Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. As a small island development state with extensive and low-lying coastal
areas, Belize is vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. The value of ecosystem services
generated by the coral reefs and mangroves was estimated to contribute between 15% and 22% of GDP in
Belize (in the range of US$395–559 million per year) (WRI, 2008). Of the ecosystem services, tourism
accounted for over 15% of GDP by providing a large amount of foreign exchange earnings and employment
(PAD, para 6). Given Belize’s location and vulnerability to climate change, one effective way of adapting to
climate change was through the promotion of ecosystem-based adaptation measures that strengthen the
resilience of the reef and associated habitats. The Belize Barrier Reef was classified as one of the world’s
marine hotspots with an abundance of globally and locally significant biodiversity. Climate change induced
destabilization of the barrier reef ecosystem, affecting livelihoods of coastal communities. Increased sea-
surface temperatures and intensified coral bleaching caused declines in fisheries stocks, endangering
livelihoods of people who were dependent on catch fishing. The Belize Barrier Reef not only provided
resources for fishing and tourism, but also sheltered the country’s extensive coast from high velocity winds
that caused erosion and coastal damage. In the Belize Barrier Reef, the Turneffe Atoll Marine Reserve, the
South Water Caye Marine Reserve, and the Corozal Bay Wildlife Sanctuary were targeted by the project
due to their criticality in terms of the integrity and connectivity of marine ecosystem and climate impacts
(PAD, para 21).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project was expected to contribute to Results
Area 3: Investment to strengthen climate resilience in the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS)
FY2012-2015 (CPS, para 76). At project closing, the project was aligned with Focus Area 1. Fostering
Climate Resilience and Environmental Sustainability and Objective 1b. Enhancing sustainable natural
resource management in target areas in the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2018-2022
(CPF, page 30). The CPF was informed by the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) 2016, which
empathized the importance of the Belize Barrier Reef as a basis of economic activities and a shelter from
coastal erosions (SCD, para 28).

Relevance to Government Strategies. Throughout the project duration, the project objective was aligned
with the National Development Framework 2010-2030 (called Horizon 2030). Horizon 2030 (page 34)
stated that incorporating environmental sustainability into development planning and strengthening
protected areas management as strategies for promoting sustainable social and economic development. In
addition, the coastal and marine resources sector was identified as one of the priority sectors to build
climate resilience in the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) submitted to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015 (NDC, page 12). At appraisal, the project
was aligned with the 2005 National Protected Areas System Plan (NPASP), which provided
recommendations and identified targets to enhance management of protected areas in accordance with the
country’s commitments the Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD). At project closing, the project objective
was also in line with the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 2016-2020 submitted to the CBD,
which promoted comprehensive use and management of Belize’s biological resources.

Clarity and Ambition of the Objective. The formulation of the objective captured only PDO Outcome 1 on the
improvements in the protection regime of marine and coastal ecosystems and did not adequately capture
PDO Outcomes 2 and 3 on the strengthened capacity and resilience as well as the improved knowledge
and practices of communities who depend on the reef (ICR, para 65). Logical paths to derive intended

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



               outcomes from planned outputs and activities were not explicitly presented in the PAD. The vagueness in
               the objective and the results chain negatively affected the project design to set the project scope at an
               appropriate level.

               The objective was highly relevant to the strategies and plans of the Bank and the Government.
               Considerations on the institutional capacity and realism were sufficient for the government and agencies,
               but could have been more thorough for the communities. Moreover, the objective could have been more
               precisely worded to include its targeted outcomes through community-based activities. Overall, the
               relevance of objective is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the climate resilience of the Belize Barrier Reef System

                             Rationale
                             Under this objective, this ICRR separately presents and assesses the three PDO outcomes, that are, coral
                             reef protection regime improved, livelihoods of affected users of the reef diversified, and the value of marine
                             conservation and impacts of climate change are understood by local people.

                             Original PDO Outcome 1: Coral reef protection regime improved

                             Theory of Change:

                             The PDO Outcome 1’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as creating spatial maps and
                             revising zoning of the selected Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) through field verification and consultation,
                             incorporating the maps in the management plans of the selected MPAs, and re-demarcating the MPAs would
                             result in outputs such as expansion and consolidation of the MPAs. The project activities such as
                             strengthening surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement, and supporting biological and water quality
                             monitoring would result in outputs such as promotion of effective management of selected MPAs. The project
                             activities such as establishing coral nurseries and out-planting corals in replenishment zones would result in
                             outputs such as repopulation of coral reefs. The project activities such as reforming the legal and institutional
                             framework for protected areas, reviewing the mangrove regulations, reforming the Coastal Zone Management
                             Act, and implementing an Integrated Coastal Zone Management plan would result in outputs such as
                             strengthened legal framework for the management of MPAs and coastal zones. A critical assumption here
                             was that enabling legislative framework would improve effectiveness of MPA management. Those outputs on
                             expanding and realigning the selected MPAs and creating replenishment zones within the MPAs, enhancing
                             management of the MPAs, strengthening the legal framework for management of the MPAs and the

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



coastal zone, and repopulating coral reefs within replenishment zones would result in the intermediate
outcome on coral reef protection regime improved. Critical assumptions here were: (i) establishing
replenishment zones and restoring coral reefs would produce intended adaptation benefits; and (ii) improved
effectiveness of the management of the MPAs would reduce stressors to the ecosystems.

Outputs:

      The actual achieved for the indicators on the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) scores
       for the three MPAs could not be compared with the original target, as the achieved values were
       measured in a scale ranging from 0 to 1, while the original baselines and targets were in a scale
       ranging from 1 to 4. Therefore, the actual achieved could not be compared with the original target of
       3.50. These indicators were replaced with revised indicators at the restructuring in 2019, please refer
       to descriptions under the revised PDO Outcome 1 below.
      12 coral sites with total area of 1,400 square meters were restored in the South Water Caye Marine
       Reserve and the Turneffe Atoll Marine Reserve with 28,927 out-planted corals, surpassing the target
       of 6 sites (200% of the original target). However, these sites have not yet reached their full potential of
       300 square meters per site as set in the original targets, as the coral replenishment would take at least
       5 years while the restoration was initiated in 2017 (ICR, page 36).
      Baselines for the monitoring of adherence to Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan guidelines
       were established in 3 regions (northern, central, and southern Belize), meeting the target of 3 (100%
       of the revised target). The project completed geographic information system mapping inventory of
       three coastal planning regions.

In addition to the outputs in the RF, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs. None of them had
formal targets.

      MPA boundaries and zoning maps were redrawn based on remote sensing data and verified through
       observations and consultations in the fields (ICR, page 40). The project took a participatory process
       with stakeholders, in particular fisher households in the 12 coastal communities that were to be
       affected by the MPA expansion/realignment, to share the new zoning schemes and to resolve existing
       and potential conflicts with respect to the proposed management schemes, thereby enhancing the
       effectiveness and sustainability of proposed actions (ICR, para 28).
      Of legislation to improve the legal framework for the management of MPAs and coastal zones, the
       Forest (Protection of Mangroves) Regulations 2018 were updated and entered into force. On the other
       hand, legislation to update the MPA boundaries and zoning and the Coastal Zone Management Act
       1998 was not completed, though the underlying conditions and the technical basis for adoption of
       legislation were improved.

Outcomes:

The achievements of outcomes are measured by three PDO outcome indicators below.

      Marine areas of 405,512 hectare (ha) were under biodiversity protection, progressing from the
       baseline of 248,810 ha and achieving the target of 386,612 ha (105% of the original target). The
       MPAs expanded to 21.2% of territorial waters (ICR, para 27), surpassing the indicative target of 20.2%
       as defined in the National Protected Areas System Plan (NPASP) in a participatory manner (PAD,
       para 21). However, by appraisal, Belize’s MPA system had already been expanded to about 20% of

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



       the country’s territorial sea in terms of designation (PAD, para 18 in Annex 2). This indicator might not
       be fully adequate to measure the project’s contribution to PDO Outcome 1, as described in Section
       9.a.
      Replenishment zones of 58,699 ha were under biodiversity protection, progressing from the baseline
       of 38,278 ha and almost achieving the target of 59,331 ha (98% of the original target). The project
       increased marine replenishment zones from approximately 2% to 3% of territorial waters, almost
       achieving the indicative target of 3.1% as defined in the NPASP in a participatory manner (PAD, para
       21).
      Coastline in kilometers (km) brought under biodiversity protection was not measurable, thus not
       achieved the target of 386 km (0% of the original target). At appraisal, this indicator was intended to
       be measured by no net loss of mangrove coverage (PAD, page 16). Such data for the entire coastline
       covering 9 planning regions was not available to set a reliable baseline and monitor a progress under
       the project (ICR, page 32). This indicator was replaced with a revised indicator at the restructuring in
       2019. Please also refer to descriptions under the revised PDO Outcome 1.

Expansion of marine areas under biodiversity protection was achieved, though there was a lack of a relevant
indicator to adequately measure the expansion of marine areas under protection. Expansion of replenishment
zones was almost fully achieved. Coastline brought under biodiversity protection was not measurable due to
lack of data. Overall, the original PDO Outcome 1 was substantially achieved, as the first of the three
outcome indicators presented above was achieved, but with an indicator that is not fully relevant, the second
was very nearly achieved and the third was not measured and was removed at restructuring.

Original PDO Outcome 2: Livelihoods of affected users of the reef diversified

Theory of Change:

The PDO Outcome 2’s theory of change envisioned the project inputs/activities such as providing training on
business and occupational skills to communities, conducting community needs assessments and participatory
workshops for planning alternative livelihoods sub-projects would results in the outputs such as the
developments of the sub-projects. Further building upon the outputs, the project activities on supporting
implementation of alternative livelihoods sub-projects with relevant training would result in intermediate
outcomes such as livelihoods of the reef users affected by the expanded MPAs diversified. A critical
assumption here was that the project activities were adequate to ensure the target population’s willingness
and capacities to adapt to alternative livelihoods.

Providing training on business and occupational skills to communities would build their capacity for transition
to economically viable and sustainable alternative livelihoods. Undertaking community needs assessments
and participatory workshops for planning alternative livelihoods sub-projects would support community
mobilization for development of the sub-projects. Implementing alternative livelihoods sub-projects and
providing relevant training would enhance income diversification of the reef users affected by the
expanded MPAs. A critical assumption here was that the project activities were adequate to ensure the
target population’s willingness and capacities to adapt to alternative livelihoods.

Outputs:

      10 alternative livelihoods sub-projects were developed and completed, not meeting the target of 20
       sub-projects (50% of the original target).


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)




      Based on training needs assessment, 759 persons participated in training, not meeting the target of
       2,000 participants (38% of the original target). 58% of the trainees were women, meeting the target of
       30% (193% of the original target). The training in marketable individual skills sets were in line with
       customized training curriculum developed by the project, in subjects such as entrepreneurship,
       communications, and information technology; arranged learning exchanges; and facilitated community
       service, internships, external examinations, and trade licenses for participants.
      1,535 users of the reef benefited directly through participation in the occupational and skills training
       and the implementation of the 10 sub-projects, not achieving the target of 2,500 (61% of the revised
       target). Of which, women were 49.5%, achieving the target of 30% (110% of the original target). This
       indicator was designed as a PDO outcome indicator by the project; however, the number of direct
       beneficiaries is not sufficient to measure diversification of livelihoods of affected reef users, as
       described in Section 9.a.

In addition to the outputs in the RF, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs. None of them had
formal targets.

      104 community mobilization meetings in the 12 targeted communities were held to develop sub-
       projects, recording 1,009 participants (of which 31% were women) (ICR, para 33).

Outcomes:

No outcome-level indicator was designed by the project, as described above and in Section 9.a. The ICR
team provided additional evidence to make up for the missing indicator and to enable triangulation of data.

      Total additional income of US$41,195.33 was generated by four out of ten sub-projects during project
       implementation (ICR, Table 3 in Annex 6). Not all sub-projects aimed to quantify the livelihoods
       benefits derived from the sub-projects, as some sub-projects intended to provide training for
       diversified livelihoods. Of the additional incomes, more than 93% came from one sub-project on
       enhancing organic vegetable production in Chunox Village, which supported 12 fishers and their
       families in Chunox Village to generate substantial additional income of BZ$293 (approx. US$147
       equivalent) per month between March and July 2020 (ICR, footnote 7 in page 15).

Outcome-level achievements were observed in terms of the additional incomes generated by the sub-
projects; however, the achievements did not provide an overview on outcome-level achievements by the
whole sub-project portfolio. Overall, the original PDO Outcome 2 was modestly achieved.

Original PDO Outcome 3: The value of marine conservation and impacts of climate change are understood by
local people

Theory of Change:

The PDO Outcome 3’s theory of change envisioned that the project outputs such as a knowledge and
awareness raising programs, dissemination of the project information, and a coordinated behavior change
communication strategy would result in the intermediate outcomes such as raised awareness and
built local capacity for climate adaptation measures. A critical assumption here was that the project
activities would effectively induce behavior changes of the target population in a timely manner.



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



Outputs:

      18 behavior change communication campaigns were conducted for the target communities,
       surpassing the target of 12 campaigns (150% of the original target). The campaigns reached 2,371
       fishers and community members.

In addition to the outputs in the RF, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs. None of them had
formal targets.

      For youth: training courses, field trips, community events, and internships were held to raise
       awareness and increase capacity on climate change mitigation and adoption (ICR, para 40).
      For teachers: training on delivering climate change instructions to students and other teachers were
       conducted; and training manuals were developed and distributed (ICR, para 40).
      A climate change unit was developed and introduced into the secondary school curriculum by the
       Ministry of Education, which also expressed interest in implementing the same approach at the
       primary level. (ICR, para 40). This new curriculum comprised classroom interactions, field trips, and
       detailed workbooks, and was complemented by comprehensive teacher-training modules (RD
       comments).

In addition to the outputs in the RF, the project team provided information on June 28, 2021 (RD comments)
reporting on the following achieved outputs. None of them had formal targets.

      Boat-to-boat sharing events were organized for 230 fishers that built an important community across
       the fisheries supply chain to share information and new technologies.
      10 community events were organized, reaching 2,380 community members and 610 fishers from over
       18 communities, in order to launch a discussion around climate change.
      The topic of climate change was included in the Punta Fuego drama and talk show (over 20
       episodes), which was expected to have an influence on popular culture.
      The annual Women in Fisheries Forum was initiated as a safe space for women in the fishing industry
       and the fisheries value chain were enabled to come together to talk about their challenges and
       discuss possible solutions.

Outcomes:

The achievements of outcomes were measured by one PDO outcome indicator. No indicator for the climate
change education in the secondary schools was designed as the outcome was unintended (See Section
10.c.)

      According to the knowledge, attitude, and behavioral practice survey carried out in 2020, the change
       of attitude and/or behavior was observed in 38.3% of targeted beneficiaries, progressing from the
       baseline of 32% but not meeting the target of 75% (51% of the original target). The level of climate
       change knowledge and practice among the target population improved by 6.3 percentage points
       (absolute) or 20 percent (relative) (ICR, para 40). The low achievement of the PDO outcome indicator
       was due to the late commencement of the behavior change and communications strategy, which
       commenced in late 2018 and limited the time to implement the activities aimed at achieving the PDO
       outcome indicator (ICR, para 41). This indicator was replaced with a downscaled indicator at the
       restructuring in 2019, as described in the revised PDO Outcome 3.

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)




      Climate change education at the secondary level was initiated nation-wide, in collaboration with the
       Ministry of Education, according to Belizean Studies Curriculum: Second form Belizean Studies
       Learning Outcomes (2019) (ICR, page 47). Studies showed that climate change education influences
       individual behavior, and, if applied at scale, were able to generate substantial positive impact (ICR,
       footnote 10 in page 17). The activity on climate change education was not originally planned, thus not
       measured by any indicator. The quality and effectiveness of the climate change unit to induce
       behavior change among the affected reef users or the youth were not fully assessed by the project. To
       what extent the climate change education would contribute to behavior change in the long-term was
       still to be observed. Nevertheless, as the Barrier Reef ecosystem extended beyond the targeted
       communities, scaling up the climate change education to the national level by engaging the Ministry of
       Education would cement gains from ecosystem-based adaptation measures.

The change of attitude and/or behavior caused by the project was observed in less than 40% of the targeted
beneficiaries, due to the late commencement of the behavior change and communications strategy. An
outcome-level achievement was observed in terms of climate change education initiated in secondary schools
nation-wide, which was expected to enhance young people’s understanding on climate change. The
evidence on project-supported events and initiatives on awareness raising provided in additional
team comments strengthened the evidence on a wide range of attempts to raise awareness of populations by
adopting multiple approaches. This additional evidence was not originally intended and captured by the RF,
but implied there was a possibility of having a lasting impact on behaviors. Thus, the original PDO Outcome 3
was substantially achieved.

The achievements for the original PDO Outcome 1 was substantial. The legal framework for coral reef
protection was improved through the updated regulation on protection of mangroves and the enhanced no-
take zones. However, to what extent the legislations improved the protection of coral reef on the ground and
to what extent the effectiveness of MPA management was improved were not clearly verified by outcome-
level evidence. The achievements for the original PDO Outcome 2 was modest. The livelihood of the people
especially the fisherfolks affected by the MPA expansion was diversified under some sub-projects that
generated alternative incomes through vegetable production. Nevertheless, the livelihoods diversification was
verified only in a part of target groups and the sustainability of the alternative livelihoods was uncertain. The
achievements for the original PDO Outcome 3 was substantial. The understanding on the value of marine
conservation and impacts of climate change among the local people who were vulnerable to climate change
remained at a low level according to the survey results. So while the climate resilience was strengthened in
terms of forest protection and awareness raising amongst the population was achieved, there was a limited
evidence that people’s vulnerability to climate change was adequately decreased. However, on balance the
achievement of the original objective is rated substantial but with notable shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the climate resilience of the Belize Barrier Reef System (The Objective formulation was not
revised but some PDO outcome indicators and targets were revised.)


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)




Revised Rationale
Revised PDO 1: Coral reef protection regime improved (The PDO formulation was not revised but the third
PDO outcome indicator and its target were revised.)

Theory of Change:

Revisions in the PDO outcome indicator and its targets were consistent with the theory of change described
under the original PDO Outcome 1.

Outputs:

The targets of the output indicators below were revised.

      In the Turneffe Atoll Marine Reserve, the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) scored
       0.71 (in a scale ranging from 0 to 1), increasing from the baseline of 0.69 but not meeting the target
       of 0.80 (18% of the revised target). In the Corozal Bay Wildlife Sanctuary, the METT scored 0.79,
       increasing from the baseline of 0.65 and almost meeting the target of 0.80 (93% of the revised target).
       In the South Water Caye Marine Reserve, the METT scored 0.56, declining from the baseline of 0.62
       and moving backward from the target of 0.80 (-33% of the revised target). The METT scores in all
       three targeted MPAs did not meet the targets. This project adopted an innovative approach to include
       climate change indicators to the METTs for the first time. Nevertheless, most of the underlying
       variables to calculate the METT scores, including socio-economic, governance, and biophysical
       indicators, were outside of the scope of the project (ICR, page 36).
      Baselines for the monitoring of adherence to Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan guidelines
       were established in 3 regions (northern, central, and southern Belize), meeting the target of 3 (100%
       of the revised target). The project completed geographic information system mapping inventory of
       three coastal planning regions.

Other than the above, the outputs obtained were the same as under the original PDO Outcome 1.

Outcomes:

The PDO outcome indicator on coastline length (km) was revised to measure coastal areas (ha), which
increased its measurability.

      Coastal regions of 19,970 ha in three planning regions were under improved regulation (measured by
       mangrove coverage), achieving the target of 18,900 ha (106% of the revised target). The revised
       indicator captured the coastal territory in three planning regions, for which data could be monitored,
       that was brought under improved mangrove regulation, as measured by mangrove coverage. The
       revised target measured the area (ha) which maintained 95% of mangrove coverage.

Other than the above, the outcomes achieved were the same as under the original PDO Outcome 1.

Expansion of coastal regions under improved regulations was achieved, in addition to the other achieved
outcomes described under the original PDO Outcome 1. Overall, the revised PDO Outcome 1 was
substantially achieved.



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



Revised PDO Outcome 2: Livelihoods of affected users of the reef diversified (The PDO formulation was not
revised but targets were revised.)

Theory of Change:

Revisions in targets were consistent with the theory of change described under the original PDO Outcome 2.

Outputs:

The targets of the output indicators below were revised.

      10 alternative livelihoods sub-projects were developed and completed, meeting the target of 10 sub-
       projects (100% of the revised target). Some sub-project activities on procurement and training were
       delayed or cancelled due to the nationwide lockdown from March to July 2020 in response to the
       COVID-19 pandemic.
      Based on training needs assessment, 759 persons participated in training, meeting the target of 500
       participants (152% of the revised target). Of which, 58% of trainees were women, meeting the target
       of 30% (193% of the original target). The training in marketable individual skills sets were in line with
       customized training curriculum developed by the project, in subjects such as
       entrepreneurship, communications, and information technology; arranged learning exchanges; and
       facilitated community service, internships, external examinations, and trade licenses for participants.
      1,535 users of the reef benefited directly through participation in the occupational and skills training
       and the implementation of the 10 sub-projects, achieving the target of 1,500 (102% of the revised
       target). Of which, women were 49.5%, achieving the target of 30% (110% of the original target). This
       indicator was designed as a PDO outcome indicator by the project; however, the number of direct
       beneficiaries is not sufficient in itself to measure diversification of livelihoods of affected reef users, as
       described in Section 9.a.

Other than the above, the outputs obtained were the same as under the original PDO Outcome 2.

Outcomes:

The outcomes obtained were the same as under the original PDO Outcome 2.

Overall, the revised PDO Outcome 2 was modestly achieved.

Revised PDO Outcome 3: The value of marine conservation and impacts of climate change are understood
by local people (The PDO formulation was not revised but the PDO outcome indicator and its target were
revised.)

Theory of Change:

Revisions in the PDO outcome indicator and its target were consistent with the theory of change described
under the original PDO Outcome 3.

Outputs:



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



                            The outputs obtained were the same as under the original PDO Outcome 3.

                            Outcomes:

                            The PDO outcome indicator to measure changes in “attitude and/or behavior” was revised to measure
                            changes in “knowledge and/or behavior,” which downscaled the scope. The target was also revised
                            downwards from 75% to 50%.

                                  Change of knowledge and/or behavior was observed in 38.3% of targeted beneficiaries, progressing
                                    from the baseline of 32% but not meeting the target of 50% (77% of the revised target).

                            Other than the above, the outcomes obtained were the same as under the original PDO Outcome 3.

                            The change of knowledge and/or behavior was observed in 38.3% of the target beneficiaries, not meeting the
                            revised target of 50%. The low achievement against the PDO outcome indicator was due to: (a) the short
                            period of time from the rollout of a targeted behavior changes and communications strategy in late 2018 to
                            the KAP survey in 2020 (ICR, para 41); (b) the scope of the KAP survey which did not capture changes
                            induced by the national curricular activities on climate change education (Ibid); (c) the weakness of the KAP
                            survey design to serve as a data source for the PDO outcome indicator (See Section 9.a.); and d) as noted by
                            the project team, the final survey being undertaken during the COVID-pandemic when attention to climate
                            change was understandably not top-of-mind. Nonetheless, there was a 20% increase in knowledge on
                            climate change from the beginning of the project among the target population; thus, the achievement of the
                            revised PDO Outcome 3 was substantial.

                            The achievement of the revised PDO Outcome 1 was substantial. Coral reef protection regime was improved
                            to enhance the protection of mangroves and fish, which led to the protection of coastal areas and biodiversity,
                            respectively. The revised indicators were insufficient to provide evidence on to what extent the effectiveness
                            of MPA management was improved. The achievements for the revised PDO Outcome 2 was modest and
                            substantial for Outcome 3. In sum, the climate resilience was strengthened in terms of coastal and
                            biodiversity protection, as well as awareness-raising of the local population. On the other hand, there was
                            limited evidence that people’s vulnerability to climate change was adequately decreased. Though on balance,
                            the achievement of the revised objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under both the original and revised objectives, the PDO outcome 1 on the enhancement of protection
                            regimes was substantially achieved; the PDO outcome 2 on the diversification of livelihoods of affected reef
                            users was modestly achieved; and the PDO outcome 3 on awareness raising and capacity building for
                            climate adaptation was substantially achieved. Insufficient evidence for the achievements of the PDO for

                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



  outcome 2 was observed. Overall, the efficacy is rated substantial for both the original and the revised
  objectives but with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted, which focused on Components 1 and
2 given the difficulty in quantifying the effects of increased awareness. For Component 1, the key benefits were
tourism and the shoreline protection benefits provided by coral reefs and mangroves. For component 2, the key
benefits were the increased income gained by fishers from the recovery of fisheries through more effective
management of existing protected areas and the designation of new replenishment zones, and alternative
livelihoods income. This analysis found net positive benefits from all three streams over a 10 and 20-year project
horizon, applying various discount rates.

At project closing, an incremental economic analysis was conducted on Components 1 and 2, estimating
benefits from three streams: (i) ecosystem services, (ii) carbon storage and sequestration (mangroves), and (iii)
beneficiaries’ future income from alternative livelihoods support. This analysis showed that the net present value
(NPV) of the project is projected to reach between US$0.36 million (lower bound) and US$16 million (upper
bound) in the baseline scenario using very conservative parameters (10 year horizon, carbon prices of US$4.3
per ton carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) and US$18/tCO2e, and 6 and 9 percent discount rate). The
investments evaluated for the economic analysis would generate a benefit-cost ratio between 1.08 and 4.34 and
an internal rate of return (IRR) between 10.76 and 38.03 percent. Calculations for a 20-year project horizon
using the same parameters showed project NPV between US$4 and US$36 million and a benefit-cost ratio
between 1.89 and 8.34. The economic analysis thus showed that project-supported investments would bring
substantial financial and economic benefits to fishers, processors, and other potential beneficiaries in the project
area and to the country at large. The results of the quantitative simulations were robust in terms of sensitivity
analyses.

Aspects of Design and Implementation that Influenced Efficiency: The project experienced initial delays in
the implementation of alternative livelihoods sub-projects. Some of these delays could have been mitigated at
the project design stage, given the extensive body of experience in community-driven livelihoods activities in
Belize and other countries. For example, anticipatory measures, such as a clear delineation of safeguards
requirements and the early provision of handholding support for communities to develop sub-projects, could
have been included in project design.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      81.58
ICR Estimate                                               38.03
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective is substantial. The efficacy is substantial with moderate shortcomings. The
efficiency is substantial. Thus, overall, the achievements of the objective before and after restructuring are both
rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks to the sustainability of the achieved results were presented in the ICR:

Government Ownership Risk: The government showed commitments to maintain the development
outcomes by advancing national laws and policies on the management of marine and coastal resources
under the project, including the Forest (Protection of Mangroves) Regulations, the Coastal Zone
Management Act and Regulations, the national policy to expand the Fisheries Replenishment (No-Take)
Zones, and the National Fisheries Policy, Strategy & Action Plan 2020-2024. The development outcomes
were aligned with the Government priorities at project closing. Nevertheless, there would still be potential
risks related to government ownership, which could substantially affect development outcomes in case of
occurrence.

Institutional Risk: Improvements in the capacities of key stakeholders and coordination among them might
not be sustained without the project support, posing uncertainty on self-sustainability and effectiveness of
alternative livelihoods in the long-term. At appraisal, the project recognized the risk related to low-capacity
and coordination among the implementing entities and the community organizations, thus aimed to mitigate
the risk through providing training, strengthening technical capacity, and adopting a participatory process to
involve different stakeholders (PAD, para 38). At the national level, the project contributed substantially to
institutional strengthening within the Fisheries Department and the Coastal Zone Management Authority and
Institute that should support continued inter-agency coordination on coastal and marine resource
management; however, without the coordinating role of the project, and the additional funding it provided to
supplement ongoing activities, these efforts might not be sustainable. At the community level, the project
gradually shifted its focus to diversifying incomes of communities rather than redirecting them away from

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



fishing, as well as explicitly targeted women and youth in livelihoods and behavior change activities. These
measures were expected to contribute to mitigate the risk; nevertheless, a residual risk still remained at the
project closing, as it was unclear to what degree the sub-project activities would be sustained long-term or
whether there would be meaningful generation of additional income for beneficiaries.

Environmental Risk: Restored corals might be damaged by bleaching, disease, and extreme weather
events induced by climate change, reducing development outcomes achieved through the repopulation
activities. At appraisal, the project intended to mitigate the general risk of coral loss by outplanting a coral
specie which was resistant to bleaching, disease, and temperature change. During implementation, Stony
Coral Tissue Loss Disease was first reported in northern Belize in 2019 and spread to further south in the
Hol Chan and the Caye Caulker Marine Reserves in less than a year (ICR, para 78). While the disease was
not reported in the Turneffe Atoll Marine Reserve and the South Water Caye Marine Reserve at project
closing, a persistent risk on loss of corals remained, requiring mitigation measures including monitoring of
the corals by the Fisheries Department and expanding locations to outplant corals.

.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
    The project’s strategic relevance and approach was aligned with the Government’s priorities. The project
    design considered technical, environmental, fiduciary, and policy aspects to make appropriate
    arrangements for preparation and implementation. Preparation of the project took over 34 months from
    the Concept Review (May 2012) to Board Approval (March 2015), mostly due to the processes and
    availability of grant funds from the Adaptation Fund (ICR, para 72). The implementation arrangements
    designed at appraisal caused delays in decision-making processes, as both the Technical Advisory
    Committee (comprised of government and non-government agencies) and the Project Steering
    Committee (comprised of the CEOs of relevant ministries) needed to physically convene and review
    technical details, such as terms of reference and selection of consultants, to proceed with activities. Risk
    identification and mitigation were mostly adequate, except for an underestimation of the time required to
    implement alternative livelihoods sub-projects under component 2 and navigate legislative processes in
    Belize to achieve the passage of legislation under component 1. Technical inputs from the World Bank on
    development of community-driven livelihoods activities could have been strengthened by drawing lessons
    from the prior operations in Belize and other countries; for example, by suggesting mitigation measures
    such as a clear delineation of safeguards requirements and the early provision of handholding support for
    communities to develop sub-projects (ICR, para 45). There were shortcomings in the design of the
    Results Framework, as some indicators were not adequate to measure expected outcomes, some
    indicators did not show clear verification methods and data sources, and some indicators did not capture
    the achievements made by the project activities. The shortcomings directly affected the project’s inability
    to measure, record, and report on relevant outputs and outcomes, leading to the insufficient evidence on
    the achievements of objective 2. Please see Section 9 for details.




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank provided technical advice, as well as fiduciary and safeguard oversight, through ten
 implementation support missions and communication that were conducted both remotely and physically.
 The Bank facilitated efforts to build financial management and procurement capacity early in project
 implementation through WB training offered to the Project Coordinator and Procurement Officer in the
 Project Implementing Agency Group. The sub-projects faced challenges in complying with environmental
 and social safeguards set by the Government and the Bank during the first half of implementation, partially
 due to frequent turnover of Environmental and Social Specialists in the Bank team. After the Mid-Term
 Review, the Bank’s support to safeguards compliance was strengthened through the participation of
 Environmental and Social Specialists in project missions, the extensive correspondence between the
 Project Implementing Agency Group and the Bank on safeguards documents prepared for the sub-projects,
 and the provision of training to the consulting firm on environmental and social screening for the sub-
 projects. The delay in the commencement of the behavior change campaigns was critical, given that it
 resulted in low achievement on the PDO Outcome 3. After the revisions in the Results Framework in the
 restructuring in 2019, the measurability and achievability of the indicators were improved to a certain
 extent, though some indicators remained irrelevant and some relevant indicators were lacking.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Theory of Change was not thoroughly explained in the PAD and not explicitly reflected in the
 Results Framework at appraisal. The indicators were not fully adequate to encompass outcomes and
 outputs achieved under the project. For PDO outcome 1, the quantity of marine area under protection was
 not sufficient to measure changes in the quality of protection brought by the project. As the PAD (Annex 2,
 page 27) stated, Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) were expanded to about 20% of Belize’s territorial sea
 after the Turneffe Atoll was legally declared a marine reserve in November 2012. Thus, the outcome
 indicator’s target of 386,612 ha (20.2% of territorial waters) was already almost achieved before this
 project. The outcome indicator could be more adequate if it focused on improvements in the quality of
 protection in the MPAs, for example, by measuring a decrease in a number of stressors or
 harmful incidents to the ecosystem. For PDO outcome 2, no indicator was set to appropriately measure
 diversification of livelihoods of affected reef users. The indicator on direct project beneficiaries was output-
 focused and did not measure quality and spread of results (ICR, para 65). Moreover, the coastline under
 biodiversity protection in kilometer was not a measurable indicator due to lack of a measurement
 methodology to cover the 9 regions, as described in Section 4. Regarding the Intermediate Result (IR)

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



 indicator 1, the changes in the METT scores was not solely attributable to the project, as most of the
 underlying variables in the METT score calculation fell outside the project’s scope. The IR indicator also did
 not specify a methodology to establish a missing baseline. For PDO outcome 3, the formulation of the PDO
 outcome indicator and the suggested data sources and methodology did not match, as the design of the
 Knowledge, Attitude, and Practice (KAP) survey overlooked the variance in the attitudes of the target
 population, especially between the fisherfolks and the community households, towards climate change,
 resulting in the unrealistic original baseline and target of the PDO outcome indicator.



b. M&E Implementation
  The baseline data collection was not carried out in a timely manner due to lack of clarity and feasibility of
  data collection methodologies, which resulted in missing baseline values for two PDO outcome indicators
  and an Intermediate Results indicator. It also negatively affected reliability of targets for some indicators,
  which required adjustments to take into account baseline values. The weakness in the design of the
  Results Framework was formally addressed only after the Mid-Term Review in 2018, which was done
  three years after the project approval. After the revisions in the Results Framework in the restructuring in
  2019, some of the were indicators improved, though some indicators remained inadequate. The M&E
  function was led by the Project Implementing Agency Group and supported by the other agencies and
  partners involved in project implementation based on the methodology established in the Project
  Operations Manual.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data was used to track progress toward project objectives and to inform shifts in management
  direction of the project. For example, the initial delays in the preparation of sub-projects were addressed
  by engaging a firm for more thorough support to the communities and reducing the target number of
  sub-projects to increase achievability; the lack of baseline data for coastal zone management was
  addressed by gathering the data to establish the baseline inventory for monitoring adherence of the
  implementation to the Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan; and the restoration network was
  extended to the northern Belize by increasing the target sites for coral out-planting. On the other hand,
  the shortcomings in the PDO outcome indicators described in Section 9.a. were not adequately
  addressed, which limited the usability of M&E data to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes.

  As described above, the shortcomings in the M&E design, including the missing explicit Theory of
  Change, the unclear data collection methodology and baseline values, and the weak relevance of PDO
  outcome indicators, affected the M&E implementation and utilization, and as such also the project’s
  ability to measure, record and report on relevant results. A number of adaptive approaches were
  embraced by project management as a consequence of M&E results, though the revision of the Results
  Framework was not conducted until the restructuring in 2019. Overall, the M&E quality is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards: The project was classified as environmental category B and triggered
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest
   Management (OP 4.09), and Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) throughout the project
   duration. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was created by the Government, consulted
   with the project stakeholders, and disclosed, in order to serve as a guide during implementation, since the
   exact locations and nature of small-scale investments to be financed under the project were not yet
   determined during preparation.

   Social safeguards: Social Safeguard policies triggered by the project included Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP
   4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). During the project preparation, the Government created,
   consulted with the project stakeholders, and disclosed a Culturally Appropriate Consultation and
   Participation Plan (Indigenous Peoples Plan) in compliance with OP 4.10, as well as a Resettlement Policy
   Framework and a Process Framework in compliance with OP 4.12 (ICR, para 69). To mitigate a range of
   social risks, a project-wide Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with a GRM Manual as described in the
   Process Framework was established and formalized during implementation. The ICR (para 66) reported
   that the Project Implementation Agency Group responded to queries and grievances appropriately and
   recorded a grievance log.

   To mitigate environmental and social risks of the sub-projects, the project developed instruments such as:
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessments, Environmental and Social Management Plans, best
   practice guidelines, and documentation of the participatory processes undertaken to design and implement
   sub-projects under Components 1 and 2. The Bank team, including Environmental and Social Specialists,
   supported safeguards implementation through the supervision mission in Belize in 2017, which provided
   training on environmental and social safeguards to project staff, discuss the implementation of the project’s
   social safeguards instruments, and carry out discussions with user groups belonging to the Marine
   Protected Areas under the project (ICR, para 69). Mission findings were recorded in Aide Memoires.

   Legal safeguards: The legal safeguard of Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) was also triggered.
   Though there was no description of implementation of the safeguard in the ICR, the PAD (page 49)
   confirmed that “[i]n line with OP/BP 7.60, the World Bank has ensured compliance with the requirements of
   the policy,” as the project was determined as not harmful to the territorial interests of Guatemala, in
   consideration of the scope of project activities covering capacity building, small-scale community driven
   sustainable forest management practices, and improvements to the management of Protected Areas.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The Protected Areas Conservation Trust (PACT) was the sole fiduciary agent
   responsible for the project’s financial management. In the first two years of project implementation,
   there were shortcomings related to proper establishment of the project’s chart of accounts, adequate
   reviews and approvals of transactions posted to project accounts, timely reconciliation and addressing
   discrepancies in the expenditure records of the PACT and the Bank. Those issues resulted in late
   submissions of Interim Financial Reports to comply with the Bank’s requirements. After a financial

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



   management review in 2017, the PACT followed an action plan and its recommendations to address
   fiduciary challenges. As a result, the PACT received an unqualified (clean) opinion from auditors for the
   project’s financial statements for the fiscal years ending March 31, 2017, 2018, and 2019.

   Procurement: Based on the Bank’s guidelines as described in the PAD (para 46), the project’s
   procurement was mainly conducted by a Procurement Officer in the PACT with support from the Project
   Implementation Agency Group (PIAG). The Bank supported the building of procurement capacity of the
   project staff through two workshops on fiduciary, safeguards, and procurement frameworks held in 2016.
   The Bank also conducted annual post-review missions to verify all procurement under the project.
   Procurement challenges were mainly caused by the need to purchase a large number of small items and
   services for the sub-projects in adherence to the Bank’s requirements, as well as the temporary freeze on
   new procurement contracts during the COVID-19 lockdown from April to June 2020. Despite these
   challenges, most of the procurement for the sub-projects were completed by the project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Though not originally planned, the project achieved strong collaboration with the Ministry of Education in
   the implementation of teacher training and the introduction of climate change into the national secondary
   school curriculum. The nation-wide initiation of the climate change education in the secondary schools was
   expected to show positive impacts of improved awareness on climate adaptation and behavior change
   among youth in the long-term.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  There was limited progress and
                                                                                  evidence against achievement of
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  the second aspect of the
                                                                                  objective.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



The following lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects on marine
conservation and climate resilience, and are presented here with some editing.

1. Embedding project activities on adaptation measures into ministries’ work plans has the
potential to mainstream climate resilience in government policy and activities. The project
aimed to incorporate adaptation actions into activities that were already underway or planned by
different government ministries and departments. This approach strengthened government
ownership; enhanced inter-agency coordination by supporting discrete activities undertaken by
different agencies; and helped to ensure that changes in policy and regulations were achieved
during the project lifetime. The project also adopted this approach with respect to the management
of protected areas, for the first time developing and incorporating climate change indicators into the
METT assessment process.

2. Nature-based solutions designed in a participatory manner and implemented in a multi-
pronged approach can enhance climate resilience of an ecosystem and achieve social and
environmental benefits. The nature-based adaptation measures supported by the project,
including the expansion of replenishment zones, protection of mangroves, and coral restoration,
were expected to enhance coastal protection, carbon sequestration, a sanctuary for marine flora and
fauna, sustainable fisheries management, and tourism, which would generate environmental and
economic benefits. The project employed an equitable and participatory approach by consulting
with communities and implementing partners throughout the project duration. While such approach
required substantial time and resources, it strengthened community involvement in natural resources
management. Moreover, the project employed a multi-pronged strategy that combined actions on
legislation, coral restoration, and community livelihoods, while implementing these actions in a
sequence to achieve intended results, for example, providing livelihoods support prior to regulatory
measures taking effect). Those successful practices suggested a potential for scaling up the
activities to cover the whole coastline of the Belize Barrier Reef in the future.

3. Community-driven livelihoods activities may require considerable effort and capacity
during project design and early implementation to initiate them in an effective and
timely manner. The project’s highly participatory approach to engage affected communities in
identifying and developing sub-projects to ensure transparency, inclusiveness, and prioritization of
local needs was aligned with the project objective. However, the approach required significant
facilitation support and capacity building that was not sufficiently provisioned during project design
and early implementation. There were initial delays in preparation and implementation of alternative
livelihoods sub-projects. After the MTR, the project accelerated the community-driven livelihoods
activities by focusing on a smaller number of sub-projects with higher contribution to the project and
expanding implementation support through a consulting firm with solid local experience in livelihoods
activities. Assigning time and resources in the early stages of project design and implementation
have a potential to ensure an adequate time for generating tangible results.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BZ Marine Conserv & Climate Adaptation (P131408)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The report is results-oriented and focuses on the outcome-
level achievements which link to potential impacts of the project’s intervention. The ICR’s lessons are useful
and largely based on evidence outlined in the ICR. There is a reference to the project’s theory of change that
helps the reader to understand how the ratings have been reached, though the description could have been
more detailed to clarify logical paths to link each output, outcome, and intended impact. Where evidence of
achievements of outcomes were not adequately measurable by the given indicators, the ICR is candid to
highlight the issue and attempts to triangulate data to reach conclusions, though some gaps in evidence
remain. Some of the evidence gaps were filled by additional evidence provided by the project team in their
draft comments, especially on the achievement of the PDO 3. Despite the fact that the project was classified
environmental category B and triggered eight safeguards policies, evidence described in the ICR were
insufficient to fully verify what mitigation activities were implemented for each triggered safeguard. Overall, the
quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 22
