     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022255

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P129828                                   ET GEQIP II

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53150,TF-16684,TF-18053,TF-          07-Jul-2018                                        517,669,363.36
 A4619,TF-A4701,TF-A6267

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Nov-2013                              31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           130,000,000.00                               399,756,425.51

 Revised Commitment                            529,725,775.38                               392,014,574.12

 Actual                                        517,218,270.59                               392,014,574.12




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Antonieta Romero-           Judyth L. Twigg             Joy Maria Behrens             IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Follette




 P161060_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P161060                                   GEQIP2 GPE2 grant ( P161060 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)




 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jul-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                                0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives stated in the grant agreement were "improving learning conditions in primary and secondary
   schools and strengthening of institutions at different levels of educational administration."

   A June 2017 restructuring revised some outcome targets upward. A split rating is not required.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Jul-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project originally included six components. In the first restructuring on July 11, 2017, the objectives
   were not changed, but activities were moved or new ones introduced in components 1 through 5 and some
   targets increased. Consequently, the project presents two periods of implementation as follows.

   Period 1: November 12, 2013 to July 10, 2017

   Component 1: Curriculum, textbooks, assessment, examinations, and inspection (US$114.4 million).
   This component built on the quality interventions of its predecessor project, General Education Quality
   Improvement Project (GEQIP) I: (i) improvement in the quality and relevance of the general education
   curriculum; (ii) increase in the supply of textbooks and other teaching and learning materials; (iii)

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ET GEQIP II (P129828)



strengthened national assessment and examinations system, aligned with the national curriculum; and (iv)
support for the newly developed schools inspectorate to ensure the implementation of the curriculum, use of
educational materials, continuous assessment, and all other contributions to quality improvement within the
classroom. It had three sub-components:

      Sub-component 1.1: Curriculum implementation improvements.
      Sub-component 1.2: Learning and teaching materials to Grades 0-12.
      Sub-component 1.3: Support for institutional development to improve student assessments
       and strengthen schools inspectorate.

Component 2: Teacher and education leaders’ development program (US$70 million). This
component had two subcomponents:

      Sub-component 2.1: Enhance the training of pre-service teachers in teacher education institutions
       (TEIs) through (i) improved selection of entrants to teacher training; (ii) provision of teaching and
       learning materials in the TEIs; (iii) enhanced practicum for teacher candidates; (iv) in-service
       pedagogical training for teacher educators; (v) enhanced English language support in the TEIs; and
       (vi) provision of a training program for alternative basic education center (ABE) facilitators.
      Sub-component 2.2: Improve the quality of in-service teacher training through: (i) enhancing the
       provision of continuous professional development at schools; (ii) providing English language training
       for teachers of English and developing a cadre of school-based English mentors to support all
       teachers using English as a medium of instruction; (iii) developing a teacher career structure, as well
       as a licensing and re-licensing system that recognizes professional development and behavior; and
       (iv) upgrading primary teachers from a certificate qualification to a diploma qualification.

Component 3: School improvement plans (SIPs) (US$255 million). This component sought to support
the strengthening of school planning, and to partly fund the SIPs through school grants. It comprised a
combination of activities started and successfully implemented under GEQIP I and new activities initiated
under this project. The two subcomponent activities included:

      Sub-component 3.1: Specific activities for school improvement, including: (i) providing training on
       linking SIPs with improved student learning; (ii) developing a simplified SIP framework for rural,
       isolated schools, smaller schools, and ABEs; (iii) creating information campaigns for parents and
       communities to strengthen community support to improved learning through the SIPs; and (iv)
       encouraging activities focused specifically on reading.
      Sub-component 3.2: School Grants (SG) interventions. The interventions covered: (i) revision of
       SG guidelines to encourage use of funds for appropriate learning and teaching materials; (ii)
       additional per capita incentives for the most disadvantaged regions and disadvantaged students; (iii)
       introduction of performance-based incentives for encouraging improved learning outcomes through
       SGs in the second year of project implementation; (iv) strengthening the social accountability
       mechanisms through parents, students and teachers associations (PSTAs) with intensive
       community involvement in planning and monitoring SGs; and (v) strengthening the grievance
       redress and complaint management mechanisms at various levels of educational management to
       ensure efficient and equitable management of the grants.

Component 4: Systems management and capacity building program, including Education
Management Information System (EMIS) (US$21.7 million). This component was designed to: (i)


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ET GEQIP II (P129828)



improve the effectiveness and efficiency of education planning, policy-making, management, evaluation,
and resource allocation and utilization through human capacity development and by strengthening linkages
at the federal, regional, and woreda levels; (ii) strengthen participatory and evidence-based school
planning, management, and monitoring; and (iii) strengthen the EMIS by improving collection, accuracy of
input data, and use of system data for evidence-based planning, policy making, management, and
evaluation (with special attention to the four emerging regions).

Component 5: Improving the quality of learning and teaching through the use of ICT (US$34.67
million). This component focused on the use of information and communications technologies (ICT) by: (i)
developing a national policy and institutions for ICT in general education; (ii) developing a national ICT
infrastructure improvement plan for general education through strengthening the specification, procurement,
distribution, and management of ICT in secondary education and developing capacity for producing digital
learning content; (iii) developing an integrated monitoring, evaluation, and learning system for ICT; (iv)
providing teacher professional development in the use of ICT; and (v) piloting the use of e-Braille display
readers in select schools.

Component 6: Program coordination, monitoring and evaluation, and communication (US$24.5
million). This component aimed at: (i) providing technical advisory support to strengthen the institutional
capacity of education institutions at the federal level and to improve coordination between federal, regional,
and woreda levels; (ii) monitoring various activities supported through project interventions and evaluating
the impact of these interventions; and (iii) using communications to increase awareness and ownership
of the project's components and ensure effective participation of all stakeholders.



Period 2: July 11, 2017 to December 31, 2019

Component 1: Curriculum implementation and teaching learning materials (US$91 million; actual
$103.7 million). The revised component kept original activities as subcomponent 1 and added an activity
that became subcomponent 2 as follows:

      Sub-component 1.1: Curriculum, textbooks, assessment, examinations, and inspections. Enhance
       the quality of the primary and secondary curriculum by strengthening the institutional capacity of
       regional educational bureaus through: (i) assessment of the impact of the National Curriculum
       Framework 2010 (NCF 2010); (ii) translation, printing, and distribution of curriculum materials to the
       regions; (iii) focused curriculum studies and study visits; and (iv) realignment of the general
       education curriculum with the technical and vocational education and training and higher education
       curricula.
      Sub-component 1.2: Teaching and learning materials. Finance the reprinting of grade 1-12
       textbooks; grade 1-8 mother tongue textbooks and teachers’ guides in arts, visual arts, music, and
       physical education; and books in Braille for visually impaired students through the provision of e-
       Braille readers, originally under Component 5.

Component 2: Teacher and education leaders’ development program (US$76.3 million; actual
US$105.3 million). This component was revised to include a professional development program for
education leaders.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ET GEQIP II (P129828)



      Sub-component 2.1: Leadership development program, aimed at improving the qualification of
       school managers by providing a one-year leadership program for school principals and supervisors.
      Subcomponent 2.2. Teacher development program, aimed at improving pre-service and in-service
       primary and secondary teacher training. Pre-service teacher development encompassed: (i)
       improving the selection of teacher training entrants and strengthening teacher education programs,
       including the pre-service student teaching experience (practicum); (ii) strengthening English
       Language Improvement Centers; (iii) providing professional development for teacher educators; and
       (iv) establishing one Ethiopian university faculty of education and its cluster of Colleges of
       Teacher Education (CTEs) as a national Center of Excellence in Teacher Education. In-service
       teacher training covered: (i) primary and secondary teacher upgrading (summer upgrading programs
       provided by CTEs for primary teachers and universities for secondary teachers); (ii) improving the
       delivery of the English Language Quality Improvement Program; and (iii) updating short-term training
       integrating mathematics and science programs with school level continuous professional
       development.

Component 3: School improvement program (US$273 million; actual US$257.9 million). Specific
activities under subcomponent 3.2. were added:

      Subcomponent 3.1: “School improvement program” remained the same, but support for school
       report cards was discontinued.
      Subcomponent 3.2: “School grants” were revised to include SGs to specifically support education
       of pre-primary students and children with disabilities (additional funds of US$18 million were
       reallocated to Component 3 to cover these additional grants).

Component 4: Systems management and capacity building program, including EMIS (US$21.7
million; actual US$21.5 million). This component was divided into two subcomponents:

      Sub-component 4.1: Strengthening management systems. Under this subcomponent, the activities
       of Component 4 mentioned above were kept, adding licensing and relicensing of teachers and
       school leaders (formerly Subcomponent 2.3).
      Sub-component 4.2: Quality assurance system, National Learning Assessment, teacher licensing,
       and school inspection. The added activities encompassed. (i) student learning assessments; (ii)
       teacher assessment through licensing and re-licensing; and (iii) school assessments through school
       inspections.
      Sub-component 4.3: Capacity building to school principals and woreda, regional, and federal-level
       education managers (short-term training) through: (i) school leaders updating; (ii) woreda, regional,
       and federal capacity building; and (iii) special support for emerging regions.

Component 5: Improving the quality of learning and teaching through the use of ICT (US$34.67
million; actual US$21.2 million). This component was revised to build ICT infrastructure and skills within
the education sector through: (i) policy development and capacity building for the Centre for Educational
ICT (CEICT); (ii) provision of e-cloud infrastructure; and (iii) e-learning system development, under the
following three subcomponents:

      Sub-component 5.1: National ICT in education policy development and capacity building for the
       CEICT. This covered: (i) the development of autonomous ICT in the education agency; (ii) a capacity
       building program for CEICT; and (iii) a change management program.

                                                                                                Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)



         Sub-component 5.2: Provision of e-cloud infrastructure, which aimed to provide an e-cloud
          infrastructure (re-tendered) to provide ICT-enabled quality learning at 300 secondary schools and
          ten teacher training institutions.
         Sub-component 5.3: E-learning system development (learning management system, LMS). This
          aimed to develop LMS systems to enable curated content and software to be used by teachers and
          students for teaching and learning.

   Component 6: Program planning, coordination, monitoring and evaluation and communications
   (US$16.5 million; actual US$21.5 million). The above-mentioned activities remained the same, as the
   component was not revised.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost and financing. Total project costs were estimated at approval at US$550 million, but
   financing of only US$472.3 million was mobilized from IDA and development partners: US$130 million in
   IDA funds, and the remainder in grants from multi-donor trust funds. To cover the balance, at the 2017 Mid-
   Term Review (MTR) the Global Partnership for Education contributed additional financing of US$69.5
   million. The total actual funding was US$529.7 million, of which the IDA loan was US$125.6 million.

   Borrower contribution: The project had no contributions from the Recipient.

   Dates:

   The project was approved on November 12, 2014 and became effective on February 18, 2014. It had five
   restructurings, with its original closing date of July 7, 2018 extended to an actual closing date of December
   31, 2019. The last three restructurings requested closing date extensions, mainly to complete the
   procurement and delivery of textbooks and installation of ICT infrastructure.

   The restructurings (ICR, pp. 3 and 13) were as follows:

         July 11, 2017: A level 2 restructuring authorized additional financing of US69.5 million from the
            Global Partnership for Education to cover the financing gap found at the MTR of US$85 million (due
            to a drop in United States Agency for International Development commitment and exchange rate
            fluctuations) and to adjust project components and its results framework. Targets were upscaled for
            four out of six PDO-level indicators.
           January 19, 2018: A second level 2 restructuring formalized the allocation of Multi-Donor Trust Fund
            financing as part of the project's pooled funding.
           June 22, 2018: A third level 2 restructuring authorized an extension of the closing date.
           December 28, 2018: A fourth level 2 restructuring formalized changes in some intermediate indicator
            targets, extended the closing date, and revised the implementation schedule.
           June 27, 2019: This fifth level 2 restructuring also authorized revisions in the results framework and
            in the implementation schedule, as well as the extension of the closing date to December 31, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)




Rationale
GEQIP II was the second phase of an Adaptable Program Loan (GEQIP I, 2009-2013) to improve teaching
and student learning conditions (Grades 1-12). Built on GEQIP I’s experience, at appraisal the project was
relevant to address education sector needs identified in the government’s Growth and Transformation Plan
(GTP; 2010-2015) and the Bank strategy for Ethiopia, and continued to be relevant during implementation.
Between 2003 and 2012, Ethiopia was making significant progress towards the government's quest of
becoming a middle-income country – growing at least at 11.2 percent per year, increasing public spending
on education by 70 percent in real terms, and increasing K-12 grade school enrollment from 10 to 19 million
students. GEQIP I had achieved considerable but uneven progress, which meant that at GEQIP II’s
approval, Ethiopia’s education still lagged behind in terms of access (enrollment was still low), equity
(regional and gender disparities remained), and quality of the learning environment (deficit of qualified
teachers, weak leadership, and financing gaps). Considered the flagship investment program in Education,
GEQIP II was relevant to support the GTP’s priority to enhance education conditions and improve delivery
of education services for all. It was also relevant to the Education Sector Development Plans for 2010/11-
2014/15 (ESDP IV) and 2015/16-2019/20 ESDP V, both seeking to spread quality education nationwide
and to ensure equitable access for children and, more specifically, greater girls’ permanence in school. In
the latter dimension, at closure the GEQIP II’s scope proved to be a mismatch in its ambition to reduce the
overall dropout rate, affected by Ethiopia’s unrest.

GEQIP II's objectives were equally relevant to the World Bank Group priorities reflected in the FY13-FY16
Country Partnership Strategy for Ethiopia (CPS1, pp. 15-16). The strategy deemed that, “since 2011,
Ethiopia was on track in achieving gender parity in primary education (MDG Goal 3) and its primary Gender
Parity Index had increased from 0.87 in 2006/07 to 0.94 in 2010/11” (CPS, p. 42). It also pointed to women-
focused project activities or individual projects as the means to mainstreaming gender equality.
Congruously, GEQIP II elevated gender equality issues to cross-cutting activities but, given that the Bank
did not mandate it, gender-disaggregated outcome indicators were not included in the results matrix. The
project was expected to prompt equity of education through textbook distribution to schools, including books
in seven mother tongues for children of ethnic minorities and Braille books for the sight-impaired (ICR, p.
72). The Bank was also to provide support to fostering gender equity and learning outcomes through other
specific projects, such as the Program for Results Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services
Project (approved on September 15, 2015).

The next Bank strategy, FY17-FY22 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), shifted focus towards improved
learning outcomes and gender parity for at least grades 4 and 8. The reorientation of priorities did not
change the relevance of the GEQIP II objectives to the extent that the Bank’s programmatic education
sector analytical work, "Ethiopia Education Sector Studies" (P152796), had stated that there is a general
positive link between teacher qualification and student learning outcomes (ICR, p. 17). In this respect, the
project was aligned with the FY18-FY22 CPF goals inasmuch as it enhanced/set in place instrumental
education conditions at schools that supported Focus Area 2, “Building Resilience and Inclusiveness,” and
Objective 2.4, “improved basic education learning outcomes.” However, the adoption of the new emphasis
on student learning outcomes, coupled with the relatively short duration of the project, slightly constrained
the relevance of the project, as by design, it was not set to measure its contribution to student learning
outcomes or gender equity.

The PDO was also relevant to the Bank’s Global Partnership for Education (2017-2021, GPE), which
sought quality education for all by 2030, and supported education sector plans and raising teacher
qualifications through training. Project activities were relevant taking into account efforts to improve school

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ET GEQIP II (P129828)



               planning, foster teachers’ licensing and diploma programs, and strengthen educational institutions’
               administration. After 2017, during the crisis and conflict period, the project proved to play a relevant role in
               promoting interpersonal cooperation and understanding, and reinforcing social cohesion in the country
               (ICR, p. 14).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve learning conditions in primary schools

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change referred to lessons and experience of the GEQIP I to justify the link between
                             GEQIP II’s textbook provision component and students' cognitive ability. Despite a lack of hard causality and
                             the debate on contribution of teacher capacity building to enhance students’ learning outcomes, the GEQIP II
                             continued to support the link and thus training for teachers as done in GEQIP I. It presupposed that, by
                             increasing the availability of qualified teachers and utilization of teaching and learning materials, the GEQIP II
                             would reasonably expect to contribute to improved teaching and learning conditions in Ethiopia, as noted
                             above. Teacher selection for training was done regionally by the Regional Education Bureaus.

                             With the provision of textbooks under GEQIP II, the theory of change focused on addressing textbook
                             shortages driven from enrollment growth and book replacement. The project also aimed at providing core
                             textbooks at relatively lower unit costs compared to the project's initial estimates as well as to those of other
                             Sub-Saharan African countries. In addition, the theory of change assumed that the preparation and
                             implementation of SIPs under the support of SGs would strengthen the schools’ planning capacity and
                             thereby generate improvements in teaching and learning conditions (ICR, p. 15).

                             The mid-term review found that the project had achieved impressive progress, which led to raising targets of
                             several of the outcome indicators and incorporating some new ones in the first restructuring on July 11, 2017.
                             As indicated in Section 2a, a split rating is not performed here, and in accordance with harmonized
                             IEG/OPCS guidelines, this review assesses outcomes and outputs according to the revised,
                             increased outcome targets. However, some original targets are noted here, particularly those for teachers
                             trained, where the indicator changed from percentage to numbers. For this indicator, the ICR is unclear about
                             whether important information on coverage was lost with the shift away from percentages. In cases of lack of
                             disaggregated data between primary and secondary schools, this review follows the ICR's approach of
                             bringing together Objective 1 (improve learning conditions in primary schools) and Objective 2 (improve
                             learning conditions in secondary schools) (ICR, p. 15).



                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET GEQIP II (P129828)




The GEQIP II project achieved the following outputs by December 31, 2019.

1.1: Curriculum, textbooks, assessment, examinations, and inspection

      125,886 textbooks and supplementary materials distributed to pre-primary - grade 12 (cumulative),
       surpassing the revised target of 120,000 (original target was 130,000).
      156 million primary level textbooks and teachers’ guides procured and reprinted. This was on the
       basis of enrollment growth and an allowance to replace books damaged or lost.
      The indicator related to distribution of mother-tongue textbooks was considered essentially achieved.
       Additional textbooks were distributed over the last six months of implementation, bringing the actual
       ratio of primary students to newly procured mother-tongue textbooks closer to the target of 1:1 than
       than was reported in the 2018 textbook survey. (ICR p. 16, 34).

1.2: Teacher and education leaders development program

      Leadership Program: 1,456 participants obtained post-graduate diplomas in school leadership
       (annual), surpassing the revised target of 800.
      Upgrading of teacher qualifications: 30,949 primary teachers upgraded their credentials from
       certificate to diploma (annual), surpassing the revised target of 22,000.
      Data includes both primary and secondary teachers for the following: 13,833 diploma graduates from
       Colleges of Teacher Education (annual), surpassing the revised target of 10,000 graduates with
       diploma. 18,347 teachers upgraded their qualification from diploma to post-graduate diploma,
       exceeding the revised target of 13,000 graduates. 71,052 teachers received English language
       teaching improvement project training (cumulative), exceeding the revised target of 10,000. 26,761
       G7-8 teachers received math and science updating training (cumulative), surpassing the revised
       target of 20,000. As part of teacher training, the project supported in-service Continuous Professional
       Development (CPD) programs for teachers, general and subject-specific, which was instrumental for
       improving teaching and learning in schools.

      The 2014-15 school inspection collected information on teachers’ application of knowledge and skills.
       Inspectors observed classroom availability of well-planned teaching lessons, subject knowledge,
       teaching methods, and assessment. The project employed 134,749 new teachers over the course of
       implementation. The theory of change did not include this outcome indicator.

1.3: Primary schools improvement

School improvement planning: The project surpassed its target of having schools allocating at least 50
percent of their grants for the SIP teaching and learning domains, or 50 percent of PSTA members who agree
or strongly agree that there was improvement. Over time, the use of the grants decreased, with issues related
to lack of receipt of grant funds and “variations in priorities across schools” compared with program guidelines
(ICR, p. 18).The 2019/20 EMIS data indicates 4,383 schools operating in tents or under trees, but the extent
of variation is not known..




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET GEQIP II (P129828)



According to SG Evaluation results, from the survey conducted by a competitively selected firm that covered
the 2016/2017 period following the 2016 revised SG guidelines:

      92.5 percent of schools planned the SG budget jointly with the SIP committee and wider school
         community members and stakeholders.
      90.4 percent of schools had SIP committees preparing annual reports on results of the implementation
         of SIPs.
        81.1 percent of schools had an SIP plan aligned with SG allocations.
        78.8 percent of schools had their SIP committee’s report discussed publicly at the school with the
         school community and other stakeholders.
        38.5 percent of schools posted their SG allocations at a public notice board.
        About 11.7% of primary schools flagged the school environment to be their priority for SG utilization.
         Other important areas included spending in community mobilization, or support of access for
         marginalized groups (i.e., girls, children with disabilities, internally displaced children).
        94.3 percent of PSTA members agreed or strongly agreed on SIP practices that increased
         participation of the school community in the decision-making process about school matters.

School Grants as assessed by PSTA members who agreed or strongly agreed on SG contribution to school
improvements:

      96.2 percent assessed that the SG program helped with key necessities in their school such as chalk
         and paper.
        92.4 percent assessed that the SG program empowered schools to make informed financial decisions
         based on actual needs in schools.
        92.3 percent assessed that SG resources were allocated transparently with participation of
         internal and external stakeholders.
        88.4 percent assessed that the SG program helped enrich a library in their school.
        80.8 percent assessed that the SG program helped build separate latrines for boys and girls in the
         school.

Upgrading of schools:

      21,363 schools were reinspected (academic year 2017-2018), showing that 57.5 percent and 8.5
       percent of Level 1 and 2 schools, respectively, were upgraded to the next level as per the inspection
       performance ladder, against targets of 10 percent and 5 percent, respectively.
      The percent of upgraded Level 1 schools surpassed the original target of 25 percent.

GEQIP II contributed to rolling out the school inspection system. Experience was gained in the process of
turning around low-performing schools and upgrading schools, providing a basis for future upgrade of the
majority of primary and secondary schools in the country to meet national standards.



Outcomes




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET GEQIP II (P129828)



According to procurement data, the actual ratio of primary pupils-textbooks delivered rose to close to 1:1 by
the end of the project period. According to evidence from a 2018 textbook survey, textbook availability and
the utilization ratio of primary pupils to newly procured mother tongue textbooks was 1:0.74, an improvement
from the 2013 baseline of 1:0.65, but not achieving the target of 1:1. The 2018 survey found that the rates of
children, at both primary and secondary levels, bringing the books to school were much lower than targeted.
Evidence from the 2019 GEQIP exit evaluation showed that about just over half of students brought their
textbooks to school, namely 51.77 percent for math, 60.95 percent for science, and 56.65 percent for social
science. The 2017 targets of 90 percent for math and 70 percent for science and social science were not
achieved (ICR, p. 15).

Between 2012/13 and 2018/19, the proportion of teachers with appropriate qualifications (diploma or degree)
in Grades 1-4 increased from 43.8 to 88.8 percent. Data from the Education Statistics Annual Abstract
(2018/19) supported the magnitude of this achievement, considering the significant increase of the primary
teaching force by 36.6 percent, from 367,989 teachers in 2013/14 to 502,738 in 2017/18 (ICR, p. 18).

The teaching effectiveness indices used as metrics covered average scores of school inspection standards
on teachers' knowledge, lesson planning, teaching practices, and assessment practices. The targets were
45.4 percent (Level 1) and 59.3 percent (Level 2). Al closing, the indices were 46.4 percent for Level 1
schools and 59.5 percent for Level 2 schools, based on the 2016/17 and 2017/18 reinspection report. It
should be noted that these data are offered in percentages in the ICR, even though percentage
measurements were dropped from the results framework (ICR, pp. 17-18). Evidence on outcomes on learning
conditions from teacher training includes: (i) the application in the classroom of teachers’ new knowledge and
skills, as measured by inspection surveys, and (ii) compatibilities in measuring the average scores in the
teacher effectiveness indices used and instruments used. The ICR (p. 68) mentioned that inspection
standard 8 refers to “Teachers use modern teaching methods to increase student participation.” GEQIP II
lacks specific data on teachers’ training applied in the classroom and on where these trained/qualified
teachers were deployed. However, the sample-based inspections cover the whole teaching force, showing
significant improvements nation-wide. Thus, it can be speculated that GEQIP II-trained teachers might have
potentially had a contribution, of unknown dimension, to the objective of improving learning conditions.
Although undermeasured, it is likely that the project achieved the revised target of having about half of the
teachers adopt active teaching methods.

Evidence from the 2018 SIP and SG evaluation showed that 74 percent of schools were using their school
grants allocation for guiding SIP teaching and learning. This achievement surpassed the original target of 50
percent, but not the revised target of 100 percent (ICR, p. 70).

To reduce first-grade dropout rates, the project undertook community and parents’ sensitization activities, as
well as school Asmelash committees (comprised of parents, teachers, and community members) to work with
out-of-school children and their parents. Sensitization activities focused on ensuring that those who dropped
out of school re-entered and continued their education. These activities were largely successful in reducing
Grade 1 dropout until the mid-term review; from a baseline level of 25 percent, the Grade 1 dropout rate at
the national level fell to 18.1 percent in 2016/2017. However, at closure, the targeted reduction in the grade 1
dropout rate was not achieved, as violence prompted school closures, population displacement, and child
absences. The rate had reverted to the baseline of 25 percent by 2018/2019 (ICR, p. 21).

The overall number of direct project beneficiaries was 24,976,545 (i.e., exceeding by 5.6 percent the revised
target of 23,650,000), and of these, 47 percent were female, slightly below the targeted 48.7 percent.


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET GEQIP II (P129828)



The number and percentage of qualified teachers improved impressively; data shows improved teaching
effectiveness in new knowledge application, and textbook provision and use arguably improved to targeted
levels. Although below-target utilization is reported, surveys suggest that outcomes are likely to be higher and
that GEQIP is potentially meeting the utilization targets. Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve learning conditions in secondary schools

Rationale
The same considerations that the project’s theory of change presupposed for primary schools applied
for improving conditions in the secondary schools, namely through increased numbers of textbooks, guides,
and other teaching materials, and upgrades in teachers’ qualifications. With respect to the 2017 revised
targets, the GEQIP II project achieved the following outputs and intermediate results by December 31,
2019.

2.1: Curriculum, textbooks, assessment, examinations, and inspection

      As stated above under objective 1, achievements for secondary education are included in the 125,886
       textbooks and supplementary materials distributed to O class - Grade 12 (cumulative), surpassing the
       revised target.
      21 million textbooks and teachers’ guides for the secondary level were procured and reprinted under
       the project (ICR, p. 15). No baseline or target were provided.
      SG payments made to all government secondary schools were used for additional teaching and
       learning materials, charts, graphs, maps, laboratory equipment, and minor upgrades of school
       facilities, and to support continuous professional development of teachers.

2.2: Teacher development program

Upgrade of secondary teachers' qualifications

      3,338 graduates obtained post-graduate diploma in teaching (secondary, annual) from universities,
       surpassing the revised target of 1,500 teacher trainees.
      As detailed below under Objective 3, an undetermined number of secondary teachers took the written
       licensing exam. There is no specific data on how many secondary teachers obtained licenses.

2.3: Secondary school improvement

The SG evaluation and PSTA assessments did not provide evidence specific to secondary schools. As noted
under Objective 1, because the data lump together all grades (K to 12), it can only be speculated that the
project might have achieved an unknown number of secondary schools allocating at least 50 percent of their


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET GEQIP II (P129828)



grants for their SIPs to teaching and learning, and PSTA members that agree or strongly agree with seeing
improvement in different areas pertaining to secondary schools.



Outcomes

The ICR does not provide evidence specifically on secondary student-textbook ratios; however, as noted
above, textbook utilization rate of primary and secondary students are likely to be above the reported data.

A total of 33,659 secondary teacher trainees were graduated from diploma and post-graduate diploma
teaching programs. Between 2012/2013 and 2018/19, the share of appropriately qualified teachers (diploma
or degree) for grades 5-8 remained at the baseline ratio (about 91 percent). The share of teachers teaching
grades 9-12 who met their level’s standard qualification increased from 91.5 percent to 94.5 percent under
the project. Overall, a 63.9 percent increase in the number of secondary school teachers was achieved
between 2013/14 and 2018/19, rising from 70,987 to 116,345 teachers. However, as noted above, there is
inconclusive evidence on the application of improved training and qualifications in the classroom.

Although the project institutionalized the practice of having SIPs guiding the use of SGs (ICR, p. 18),
no specific outcomes for secondary schools were reported by the SG evaluation or PSTA self-assessment
study. However, the results of the SG evaluation and PSTA assessments are representative for both primary
and secondary schools.

Despite inconclusiveness of some evidence, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen institutions at different levels of educational administration

Rationale
With respect to the 2017 revised targets, the GEQIP II project achieved the following outputs and
intermediate results by December 31, 2019.

Quality assurance and accountability systems

3.1 National Learning/Education Assessment (NLA)

      Calibrated test items and administration of grades 4, 8, 10, 12 NLA tests were developed.
      5,160 NLA test items and 15,220 test items for grade 10 national examination were developed.


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ET GEQIP II (P129828)




     The National Education Assessment and Examination Agency delivered training to regional
      assessment and examination experts on conceptual overview of assessment, test development, test
      analysis, and data capturing; and training to grade 8 test developers and exam-administration focal
      persons on how to write, review, and edit examination items based on the national curriculum
      framework.
     A tool for Measuring Early Learning Quality and Outcomes (MELQO) was completed and piloted in six
      local languages.
     800 (grade 4 & 8) and 3,360 (grade 10 & 12) items with acceptable psychometric characteristics were
      developed and banked, surpassing the original target of 800 (grade 4 & 8) and 1000 (grade 10 & 12)
      NLA items banked.

3.2 Teacher and school leader licensing program

     More than 404,160 teachers (307,764 primary and 96,396 secondary teachers) took the written
        licensing exam, doubling the revised target of 200,000 teachers.
             o Of all teachers and school leaders who took the exam, 35 percent were female.
       14,257 school leaders (11,776 primary and 2,481 secondary) took the written licensing exam.
       24 percent of licensed teachers and school leaders participated in portfolio assessment, which is the
        second stage of the licensing process.
       Overall, 31,000 teachers received licensing certificates, while the remaining were under assessment
        as of project closing.
       5,129 (11 percent female) woreda education officials and experts drawn from 1,018 woredas received
        ten-day short-term trainings on educational planning; monitoring and evaluation; data collection,
        analysis, and utilization; educational leadership; educational supervision; women's participation in
        education; community participation; and resource mobilization.

3.3 School inspection and upgrading of schools

     95 schools were inspected, meeting the target of 95.
     21,365 schools were re-inspected, of which 6,159 were Level 1 moving to Level 2 (57.5 percent) and
      15,206 (8.5 percent) Level 2 moving to Level 3 in 2016/17 and 2017/18, surpassing the revised target
      of 16,033 schools. These schools were upgraded to the next level as per the inspection performance
      ladder, against targets of 10 percent and 5 percent, respectively. The percent of Level 1 schools that
      were upgraded exceeded the original target of 25 percent.
     Procurement and delivery of E-cloud infrastructure took place as planned, enabling 300 schools and
      universities to have a new computer laboratory installed and operational for access to private cloud
      infrastructure in the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology national data center.
     Since the inspections and re-inspections at the time of closure of GEQIP-II covered different schools,
      and because unique school IDs were not introduced until 2019, no meaningful comparison was
      possible of the data gathered at the time of the first inspection with the reinspection results, even
      without taking into consideration the large number of new schools and teachers in the system.

Systems Management and Capacity Building Program

3.4: Program planning, coordination, monitoring and evaluation and communications



                                                                                               Page 14 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ET GEQIP II (P129828)




                                  A consolidated semi-annual report (March) and an annual report (September) of GEQIP II were
                                   submitted, meeting the target.
                                  Final individual school performance reports were produced from the proposed specialized evaluations:
                                   4 [2 SG evaluations (2016 and 2018); textbook survey (2018); and comprehensive beneficiaries exit
                                   evaluation (2019)] undertaken; target achieved.
                                  The Planning and Resource Mobilization Directorate did not produce consolidated annual GEQIP
                                   work plans by mid-May each year. The target was not achieved.
                                  The target for dissemination of an Education Statistics Annual Abstract by early October
                                   following each school year was achieved.



                            Outcomes

                            Evidence for partial strengthening of the administration capacity of the Ministry of Education and other
                            educational institutions is provided through the reinforced national learning/education assessment system, the
                            established teacher licensing and inspection systems, the regular preparation and dissemination of education
                            statistics, and the school inspection and school upgradings. It is within expectation that the strengthened
                            evaluation process – along with the additional quality assurance described under Objective 1 -- led to
                            informed improvements in teacher training in CTEs and universities, producing better trained teachers. It is
                            also realistic to expect that the professional school leadership and management program bolstered the
                            capacity of school principals and supervisors in these domains.

                            However, there were shortcomings in teacher training, financial flows, and financial audits at the woreda level.
                            With respect to improving teaching and learning, the ICR (p. 17) noted that World Bank's programmatic
                            education sector analytical work, "Ethiopia Education Sector Studies" (P152796) "showed that teacher
                            qualification generally has a positive association with learning outcomes" and that the CPD program was
                            instrumental for improving teaching and learning in schools. It was reported that only modest progress was
                            achieved in building ICT infrastructure and skills in the education sector (ICR, pp. 53-54). The project was
                            adversely impacted by violence and social unrest. Based on the mixed results, achievement of Objective 3 is
                            rated substantial but with shortcomings in management, planning, and budget capacity of the Ministry of
                            Education and Regional Education Bureaus.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial. The project overachieved numerous outputs toward improving learning
                            conditions in primary schools and secondary schools. By closure, half of the expected textbook utilization
                            rate, and a smaller reduction in the targeted dropout rate than envisioned, were achieved. In May 2019, the
                            ICR (p. 17) notes that: “Grade 4 National Learning Assessments in four subjects (mathematics, mother-

                                                                                                                             Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET GEQIP II (P129828)



  tongue reading, environmental sciences and English) and Grade 8 NLA in five subjects (mathematics,
  biology, physics, chemistry and English) were conducted. However, the results of the assessment are yet to
  be released to report on recent developments.”



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, the project was justified on the premise that enhancing the cognitive ability of individuals would
prompt increases in future productivity and therefore higher earnings (PAD, p. 21). In the PAD, the ex-ante
economic analyses deemed Components 1, 2 and 3 (i.e., provision of textbooks, improving teaching and
learning conditions, and capacity building of education administrators) as a benefit to education. Studies of
similar interventions to the project financed by other international agencies and partners in other countries
(Chile, Ghana, Kenya, Pakistan, Tanzania, and South Africa) indicated that, in a worst-case scenario, an
average impact of 0.074 standard deviations in cognitive ability of grade 4 children would be required for the
project to break even (PAD, p. 126). A review of international experience indicated that the project's planned
activities could be expected to produce the required learning benefits to justify the project economically, but that
there was a wide range of results -- including some poor performers -- among the comparator countries and
interventions.

The GEQIP II internal rate of return was calculated only at completion by the ICR. Thus, it is not possible to
compare cost-benefit assessments of the project with the appraisal stage. The ICR calculated the internal rate of
return at 13.5 percent, based on a modeled effect size of 0.22 standard deviations using data from the 2015
National Learning Assessment. The ICR also conducted a sensitivity analysis on the sampling distribution.
Under this probability distribution, an internal rate of return of less than 10.7 percent was found to be unlikely,
having a probability of less than 5 percent (ICR, p. 22). Comparatively, optimal levels of a metric of the
opportunity cost of capital invested by education enhancement projects reported by the 2001 Bank Policy
Research Work tended to gravitate between 24 to 27 percent, including Ethiopia and other fragile or conflict-
afflicted countries in the region (Ethiopia Education Sector Development Program (Report No. 1 7739-ET) in
Economic Analysis of World Bank Education Projects and Project Outcomes, Policy Research Working
Paper 2564, 2001).

Cost efficiency of procurement. Overall, procurement faced multiple shortcomings, mainly due to a lack of
proficient procurement staff in the Ministry of Education, Regional Education Bureaus, and other sub-national
implementing agencies. These shortcomings were coupled with a lack of coordination and supervision; lack of
systems and practices of accountability, planning skills, and use of plans to monitor, make decisions, and
supervise procurement; ineffective handling of procurement complaints; and an absence of expertise and
experience in managing ICT procurement (ICR, p. 29). However, with respect specifically to procurement of
textbook reprinting and distribution, GEQIP II showed efficiency through the use of international competitive
bidding, a copyright agreement that allowed the government to reprint at no extra cost, and large print runs. Its
initial estimates on unit costs from textbook reprinting were based on the unit costs provided by GEQIP I. The
ICR reported that GEQIP II costs in 2015/16 were US$0.47 for primary textbooks and US$0.74 for secondary
textbooks, which were lower than those under GEQIP I. Textbook costs were also lower compared to other Sub-

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ET GEQIP II (P129828)



Saharan Africa countries, enabling significant savings of US$25 million (ICR, pp. 22-23), while at the same time
ensuring better quality and durability of materials.

Cost efficiency in teachers' and leaders' capacity building activities. The project considered lessons from the
experience of GEQIP I and from international literature to justify the assumption of benefits from upgrading
teachers’ and education leaders’ knowledge and capabilities. Despite inconclusive evidence on the link between
training and education enhancement, following the arguments of GEQIP I, the PAD deemed training activities to
be cost-effective. The ICR did not comment about these activities, and therefore cost-efficiency of the capacity
building activities for teachers and education leaders cannot be determined.

Cost efficiency of School Grants. School improvement plans for teaching and learning guided the use of school
grants. It is reasonable to assume that the multi-stakeholder school planning process (involving schools’
principals, SIP committees, the wider school community, and other stakeholders) contributed to bringing more
cost-efficiency and transparency to identifying optimal investments than when school decision-makers were
solely responsible for investments and budget allocations. Conversely, it is within expectation that the Ministry of
Education's delays in transferring SGs at regional levels or woreda levels (according to the Beneficiary Survey)
might have had a detrimental effect on implementation efficiency (ICR, p. 18). The ICR did not comment about
the SGs' cost-benefit ratio. Conversely, the ICR noted that delays in grant disbursements produced three
extensions in the closing date and cancellations of some funds. In some schools and Alternative Basic
Education Centers in remote areas, the inefficiencies were significant because of budget shortages and/or a
lack of trained personnel to use funds or report fund utilization as required (ICR, p. 8).

Implementation efficiency. The project disbursed nearly all of its planned financing (98.4 percent of its
proceeds), with three six-month closing date extensions due to delays in completing the procurement and
delivery of textbooks, as well as installation of ICT infrastructure. Factors that positively affected efficiency in
implementation were: smooth donor coordination during preparation and implementation (ICR, p. 25); staff
continuity in the Coordination Office (p. 26); and synergy with other Bank-financed projects (ICR, p. 26). The
increased conflict and violence afflicting Ethiopia after the 2017 AF were problematic from an efficiency
perspective (ICR, pp. 13-14). These factors outside the control of the Bank made it impossible to sustain the
project’s initial expedited performance of the early years that had enabled targets to be surpassed.



Based on inefficiencies in implementation, including in some procurement activities and in the implementation of
School Grants, project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                          Page 17 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ET GEQIP II (P129828)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               13.50
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High as indicated by the project’s alignment with government plans/priorities
and Bank strategy at closing. Efficacy is rated Substantial based on plausible achievement of improved teaching
and learning conditions in primary and secondary schools. The following outputs materialized: (i) increased
availability of teaching and learning materials, (ii) improvements in teachers´ skills and qualifications, (iii)
application of teachers' learning, and (iv) increased grants to schools to support learning conditions.
However, outcomes related to improved learning conditions, measured by a partial increase in textbook
utilization and a reduction in school dropouts, were not achieved, and institutional strengthening outcomes
were mixed. Efficiency is rated Modest due to lack of evidence on the cost-efficiency of various activities, as well
as moderate shortcomings in the project's procurement and implementation. The ratings are indicative of
moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and implementation, leading to an overall outcome rating of
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The financial sustainability of the development outcome is likely to be maintained through strong government
commitment to improving learning outcomes and sectoral management through better systems; continued
donor funding, at least through 2022; and the existing donor coordination processes in place (ICR, p. 30).
Several activities were institutionalized, and donor funding supports the sustainability of these activities'
recurrent costs. However, the persistence of ethnic conflict and violence across the country, as well as the
possibly extended school closures triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic, are likely to compromise school
attendance in Ethiopia. A major risk is that these school closures may lead to permanent dropout of children,
particularly from vulnerable households, mainly those in rural areas and especially of girls. Lost months of
schooling and nutrition deficiencies will also adversely affect human capital development and earning
potential of children in poor families. Going forward, the current GEQIP-E AF program preparation (additional
financing to the successor project, GEQIP-E, US$300 million, 2018-2025) is considering incorporating a
resilience program for the education system to face the pandemic and unrest shocks, aiming to reintegrate
internally displaced children into the school system and maintaining focus on equitable and efficient access
to quality education (ICR, p. 31).




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was based on lessons learned from the GEQIP I, strong economic and financial
  analytical work, international studies, and World Bank best practices (PAD, pp 15-17 and 22). While the
  team recognized that evidence of attribution related to strengthening teacher’s capacity on quality of
  education was up for debate, it was reasonable to base the GEQIP II on continuation of the intervention
  in this domain, as it had been deemed beneficial. The project's activities and indicators were aligned with
  the objectives, and indicators were adequate to assess key outputs that were deemed pre-requisite to
  foster enhanced learning outcomes from 0 to 12 Grades. The set of indicators focused on numbers of
  teachers trained/qualified, but missed metrics to assess whether and to what extent and teachers
  used/applied their new learning/qualifications. Although this outcome may take time, the theory of change
  lacked indicators that would enable determination of a positive effect on learning outcomes. As explained
  above in Section 3, the project design set targets in line with the GOE’s General Education Quality
  Improvement Program, and in agreement with Ethiopia’s Education Sector Development Plan IV (ESDP
  IV). The comprehensive evaluation of GEQIP II at mid-term was a relevant foundation for the 2017
  escalated targets and reformulation of the indicators/targets. The mid-term review's findings underpinned
  modifications of the project scope.

  The appraisal team's consultations with stakeholders from the central and regional governments were
  fitting to ensure understanding of the government’s financial constraints and to build ownership for the
  project. Institutional arrangements continued to be pragmatic and enhanced, whereby the project’s
  financial management (FM) arrangements were anchored to the country’s public FM system at the
  Ministry of Education. In addition, the project adopted a harmonization approach, which enabled an
  effective multi-partner operation in all regions and woredas. The appraisal team assessed the Ministry of
  Education's implementation capacity as a substantial risk, given the procurement delays observed in
  GEQIP I. The mitigation package – capacity building prior to the project and a dedicated project
  coordination office within the MoE -- proved to be ineffective, as the ministry's inability to monitor grants
  and some procurement remained unresolved.

  The risks of potential emergence of violence and unrest, as well as the consequences from the recent
  COVID-19 pandemic, were not overt at that time of appraisal. The project's implementation and
  outcomes were impacted by these external factors, mainly causing dropouts or absences of children, and
  delays in generation of statistics by the EMIS, which ultimately underestimated learning outcomes.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was adequate to track timely progress towards milestones and goals. Except for
 the first bi-annual ISR development objective rating (DO-rating) of June 2014 that was satisfactory, all other
 DO- and implementation progress ratings were moderately satisfactory (ICR, p. 3), a basis to rate
 supervision moderately satisfactory. Although World Bank teams of managers were proactive in providing


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)



 timely fiduciary advice and observations to the government and development partners to keep the project
 on track, delays still happened.

 The Bank showed responsiveness in supporting the five restructurings with extension of deadlines and AF,
 and skillful management of the project with the aim of achieving the PDOs, despite the Ministry of
 Education's minimal involvement in monitoring school grants and delayed delivering of its Annual Work
 Plans and budgets. The project team dealt effectively with the challenges posed by conflict and violence,
 rising ethnic tensions, border disputes, and ongoing internal displacements in the country. At closure, the
 project delivered outputs, such as an increase of the primary teaching force, but did not meet all of its
 targets, particularly for textbook utilization (ICR, p. 17) and school grant utilization (ICR, pp. 15-16), and
 there was an absence of data on the number of teachers deployed and who applied/adopted their new
 knowledge, skills, and active teaching methods in the classroom.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's results framework clearly specified the intended outcomes and their linkages to indicators,
 outputs, and intermediate outcomes. The M&E design made it possible to monitor progress
 towards completion of planned activities and their linkages to achievement of the objectives (ICR, p. 26).
 The project developed M&E systems with indicators and outputs that were plausibly and logically tied
 to achievement of objectives for overall education. However, separate outcome indicators for primary
 education and secondary education were not captured, and so the project was unable to assess the extent
 to which education at each level improved. The project introduced or enhanced textbook procurement and
 delivery, M&E systems, and a teacher quality assurance system that included a teacher licensing and
 inspection system. In addition, the project's design included a SG management system, an M&E and
 Learning System for ICT, school audits, a student performance system, and enhancements to the EMIS.
 Institutionally, the M&E function was undertaken by the Ministry of Education and the Regional Education
 Bureaus (REBs). REBs monitored activities using data collected at the regional, woreda, and school levels,
 while the central ministry was in charge of reviewing, compiling, and feeding such data into the EMIS (ICR,
 p. 27).

 The project's M&E design lacked gender-disaggregated outcome indicators. The lack of female/male
 breakdown inhibited assessments of gender equality improvements, from the student perspective. The
 indicator on the Grade 1 dropout rate was more suited to measure internal efficiency of the education
 sector than to measure the institutional strengthening objective it was supposed to measure (ICR, p. 27).




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, the results framework enabled the Ministry of Education to monitor implementation, the REBs to
  collect data at regional, woreda, and school levels to feed the EMIS, and the World Bank team to review
  implementation progress. M&E activities included: (i) systematic/routine monitoring, (ii) a mid-term review,
  (iii) biannual implementation support reviews, (iv) a series of evaluations on the teacher development
  program, SG utilization, schools’ and PTAs’ self-assessments, and an end-of-project comprehensive
  evaluation, and (v) the ICR (ICR, p. 27). As indicated in Section 2d, the project supported the design,
  development and completion of the EMIS, which also supported tracking procurement.

  The mid-term review, as well as the SG and end-of-project evaluations, enabled close follow-up of
  textbook delivery and utilization by students, teacher training, SG delivery. The newly developed school
  inspection system was also part of the design to increase school accountability, enabled by the individual
  school performance reports (ICR, p. 69). The EMIS allowed project and Ministry of Education managers
  to collect more accurate input data for evidence-based planning, policy-making, and evaluations.

  The mid-term review disclosed moderate weaknesses of M&E design. Underestimation of scope
  prompted the upscaling of target levels, although without revisiting potential risks, such as ethnic conflicts
  and violence. Textbook utilization at schools was added as an indicator, and the target for upgrading low-
  performing schools was reduced. For Objective 3, the indicator for production of report cards in woredas
  in each region was dropped in the first restructuring. Because EMIS data collection lagged by one school
  year, and inspection data was collected in batches, the project had insufficient time to further revise the
  PDO-level indicators and/or targets before its closure.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings from the project's various systems were effectively used to monitor implementation and
  inform decision-making. M&E findings were assembled by the Ministry of Education and shared with the
  project administrator and the Bank team. The national school inspection system informed the ministry's
  strategy for upgrading primary and secondary schools. The project-supported quality assurance systems
  were at the basis of the Ministry of Education's Education Roadmap until 2030 and other policy
  documents (ICR, p. 28).

  The 2017 mid-term review´s finding of targets having been surpassed was used by the government and
  the Bank to modify the results framework and serve as a basis for the first restructuring. Results from
  subsequent monitoring mechanisms were also the basis for justifying four additional restructurings to
  accommodate implementation delays in textbook procurement, in ICT infrastructure, and in EMIS data
  collection.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ET GEQIP II (P129828)



  Environmental and social compliance. The Project was classified as Environmental Assessment category C
  and did not trigger safeguards. Gaps in social policies implementation assessment were addressed with the
  Ministry of Education, and most REBs allocated budget for cascaded trainings. Implementation action plans
  for social aspects were prepared. The project demonstrated coordination among its different directorates.
  Performance was impacted by delays in the institutionalization of the existing grievance redress mechanism
  (including the establishment of up-take location and documentation at regional and woreda levels), and
  weakness in following up and supporting regions due to lack of environmental and social safeguards
  experts.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial compliance was rated moderately satisfactory in ISRs throughout project implementation.
  Fiduciary staff within the Ministry of Education ensured timely submission of good quality quarterly Interim
  Financial reports. In addition, external auditors were in place and completed school grant audits mostly on
  time with unqualified (clean) opinions. Overall, the project accomplished the financial covenants of the
  Financing Agreements (ICR, p. 28). The project adequately executed US$517.2 million disbursement (of
  the revised US$529.72 million planned). Due to a dispute between the Ministry of Education and a supplier
  on a tax issue, the closing of contract procurement and delivery of E-cloud infrastructure (under Objective
  3) was still pending at the time of the ICR preparation. This has delayed the disbursement of the remaining
  20 percent payment to the supplier (ICR, p. 43). The final independent financial audit report took place on
  July 17, 2019.

  The project experienced a problematic initial funds flow, which was solved by introducing additional
  reporting on cash balances and basing processing of advances on these. The project used Integrated
  Budget and Expenditure at federal and regional levels and kept intact internal control procedures
  throughout implementation. Financial management challenges and weaknesses identified related to the
  following: (i) Annual Work Plan preparation delayed until the first quarter; (ii) budget allocations
  consequently delayed; (iii) substantial delays in school grant audits and covering two percent instead of the
  planned ten percent of schools; (iv) Ministry of Finance and Economic Cooperation inaction or delays in
  addressing findings from grant audits of regional schools and subsequently delayed communication to the
  World Bank; (vi) limited engagement of the internal audit in reviewing school grants; and (vi) ineffective and
  inefficient meeting for the project of the Financial Management Taskforce led by the government.

  Procurement, except for the initial assessment rated satisfactory (6/2014), was marked by moderately
  satisfactory ratings throughout the project due to delays. The project showed inability to hire qualified
  procurement and contract administration staff at the central and regional levels due to existing salary
  caps. The project was to comply with the Bank’s requirements under OP/BP10.00 by having a dedicated
  project coordination office within the Ministry of Education in charge of procurement, financial
  management, and M&E functions. This requirement, the early and regular familiarization of the
  implementing agencies with the Bank's procurement guidelines, and the Bank team’s regular procurement
  supervision and support for contract management were insufficient to overcome the procurement risk
  identified at appraisal (ICR, p. 29).




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ET GEQIP II (P129828)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 32-33) offered several lessons, including the following adapted by IEG:

      Textbook competitive pricing and a few up-front procurement actions can generate
       savings and increase efficiency. The combined use of international competitive bidding
       that bundled textbook development, printing, and distribution; the use of quality and price as
       tenders’ evaluation criteria; a copyright agreement allowing the government to reprint at no
       additional cost; and large print runs generated US$25 million in savings.
      In conflict-afflicted contexts such as Ethiopia’s, the use of rapid surveys and digital
       data collection can support timeliness of regular data collection. Data collection from
       remote and poorly connected areas, as well as manual data collection, were challenging
       factors for the project's completion and timely generation of statistics that fed the EMIS.
      In conflict or violence contexts, strong attention to realism in defining indicators and
       setting targets is important especially in projects with decentralized implementation.
       In its final year, this project lacked time to accommodate for implementation delays, hindering
       target achievement. When considering extensions and restructurings, activities including
       building social cohesion, provision of psychological support to conflict-affected children and
       their families, empowerment of girls, and prevention of gender-based violence and early
       marriage are also important dimensions to consider in restructurings.
      Careful attention to having systems to track textbook distribution and ensure that
       textbooks and teaching material reach schools is essential. Similarly, in this project,
       encouraging the government to maintain financing for continuous textbook provision
       independent from development partners was beneficial.




                                                                                                  Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ET GEQIP II (P129828)



This review adds an additional key lesson, related to books procured:

        Buying teaching and learning materials does not produce impact if students leave
         textbooks at home and do not use them. When defining characteristics of books to be
         procured and distributed, factors such as weight and bulkiness of the books, as well as bags
         for carrying them, are important considerations, the more so if a set of students must travel
         long walking distances to and from school. The 2019 project exit evaluation showed low
         textbook utilization in all grades in classrooms due to inconvenient dimensions of carrying the
         books.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided complete information on the original and revised project scope and implementation. It was
internally consistent and followed guidelines. The narrative on the theory of change focused on results, and
analyses were well explained. The project would have benefited from capturing the individual performance of
primary education separate from that of secondary education. The ICR's analysis lacked a discussion of cost-
efficiency of procurement, grants, and capacity building activities. The procurement storyline would have
benefited from more clarity. The assessments of Bank supervision focused on the more effective aspects
but lacked a discussion of the shortcomings at the basis of the moderately satisfactory Implementation
Performance Ratings across the project's lifetime. The lessons section provided relevant and coherent insights
for enhancing education service delivery, and on general knowledge (i.e., evident impact of new processes
extends beyond the life of the project). The ICR presented ratings tables under each objective without
supporting data in the tables, making it difficult to understand what was underpinning those ratings. Several
elements of efficacy were more elegantly presented in the lessons than they were in the actual efficacy
discussion. Overall, however, the ICR provided a well-written implementation narrative, enabling assessment of
the project’s outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
ET GEQIP II (P129828)




                                                                  Page 25 of 25
