     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022580

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P156422                                    Third Village Community Support Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                     Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58250                                  30-Oct-2020                                         14,936,269.16

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2016                                30-Oct-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            15,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             15,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         14,938,243.26                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa                John R. Eriksson             Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to strengthen the local government financing system and
   improve local service delivery in rural communes and to provide an immediate and effective response in the
   event of an Eligible Emergency or Crisis (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, page 4). The formulation of the
   PDO in the PAD (page iii) was identical to the Financing Agreement.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



   IEG concurred with the ICR (para 23) that the latter part of the PDO on the emergency response was not
   relevant in the context of this ICR, as the project’s emergency response contingency component (Component
   4) was not triggered during the life of the project.

   This review will assess the following objectives:

        1. To strengthen the local government financing system
        2. To improve local service delivery in rural communes



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Local Investment Fund (Estimate: US$ 4.50 million; Actual: US$ 3.49 million, 77.5% of the
   estimate) aimed to finance small investments (micro-projects) in selected Rural Communes (CR: Commune
   Rurale) through the Local Investment Fund. The micro-projects were planned to be included in the CR Local
   Development Plans and their corresponding Annual Investment Plans. The CRs were responsible for
   management of the funds, the contracts, monitoring and evaluation, and operation and maintenance. The
   four subcomponents were: (i) complementary investments in Village Community Support Program Phase 2
   (PACV2) micro-projects; (ii) micro-projects in CRs most affected by the Ebola Epidemic; (iii) inter-
   community micro-projects in natural resources management and biodiversity protection; and (iv) micro-
   projects in CRs located in mining areas.

   Component 2: Institution and capacity building for sustainable local governance and community
   participation (Estimate: US$ 9.00 million; Actual: US$ 8.64 million, 96.0% of the estimate) aimed to set up
   sustainable mechanisms for long-term local development financing and quality community participation.
   This component included four subcomponents: (i) institution building for long-term local development
   financing; (ii) pilot scheme for management of technical staff at CR level; (iii) capacity building of central and
   deconcentrated public services of key sectoral ministries to improve support to local communities; and (iv)
   capacity building of CRs to engage citizens in planning, management, and evaluation of services. Under the
   restructuring in 2018, there was a redeployment of capacity building and support to local authorities under
   Component 2 to include technical assistance for local governments and training of new mayors.

   Component 3: Project coordination and management (Estimate: US$ 1.50 million; Actual: US$2.87
   million, 191.3% of the estimate) supported project management by the National Coordination Unit. This
   included (i) operational support in project management, financial management, and procurement; (ii)
   monitoring and evaluation; (iii) a communications strategy and action plan; (iv) annual external audits; and
   (v) project evaluations at midterm and closing. Under the restructuring, the component was expanded to: (i)
   extend nation-wide coverage of the technical assistance program to all local governments (rural and urban)
   within the framework of National Agency for Local Government Financing; (ii) provide timely technical inputs
   on citizen engagement, accountability, and safeguard compliance, to the Bank project titled Support to



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



   Local Governance Project (P167884, US$40 million from IDA, approved in 2019); and (iii) implement a pilot
   Early Warning and Response System in selected seven CRs.

   Component 4: Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) (Estimate: US$ 0 million; Actual: US$ 0 million)
   established a disaster contingency fund that could be triggered in the event of a natural disaster through
   formal declaration of a national emergency, or upon a formal request from the Government. In such case,
   funds from the unallocated expenditure category or from other project component was planned to be re-
   allocated to finance emergency response expenditures to meet emergency needs; however, the IRM was
   not triggered during the life of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$15.00 million (PAD, page i). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$14,938,243 (ICR, page 2).

   Financing: At project closing, the project was fully financed by the International Development Association
   (IDA), as originally planned at appraisal.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 31, 2016, and became effective on September 27, 2016. The
   Mid-Term Review was completed on September 17, 2018. The project was closed on October 30, 2020, as
   originally planned at appraisal.

   Restructuring: The project had one restructuring on December 11, 2018 to change the Results Framework
   and the components and costs, as well as to reallocate funds between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. Guinea’s economic growth had been unevenly distributed and increasingly
reliant on resource extraction, in particular, bauxite. The mining sector failed to create jobs and worsened
income inequalities due to elite rent capture and corruption. Historically, Guinea had been a centralized
state with all major economic decisions being made at the central level. Guinea initiated a decentralization
process in the 1980s by setting up decentralized local authorities vested with legal and financial autonomy.
The country’s vision for decentralization was accompanied with legal and regulatory frameworks and
institutional instruments to implement the decentralization process, including: (i) the 2006 Local
Government Code which set the legal and administrative framework and transferred management
responsibilities of human resources, budgets, and technical sectors to local authorities; (ii) the 2012
National Policy Letter on Decentralization and Local Development which presented a roadmap for
decentralization and local development; and (iii) the 2013-amended Mining Code which established the
National Fund for Local Development.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the project objectives were aligned with the 2012
National Policy Letter on Decentralization and Local Development and the legal framework that defined the
implementation of the decentralization. Moreover, the project was in line with the Government’s Program for

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



State Reform and Administration Modernization, under which the High Commission for State Reform and
Administration Modernization was created to be responsible for facilitation and coordination of public sector
reforms. The project was also an opportunity to contribute to emergency prevention and management,
including the Post-Ebola Priority Action Plan. At project closing, the project’s objectives and its approach to
provide aid channeled through community driven development were in line with the Government’s
declaration on a state of emergency on March 27, 2020 with regards to the COVID 19 pandemics. The
latter part of the PDO, that stated “in the event of an Eligible Emergency or Crisis,” aligned with the
government vision even though Component 4 on the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) was not
triggered during the project implementation. It was not feasible to trigger the IRM to provide direct support
to the COVID-19 pandemic because the state of emergency was declared only 6 months before the project
closure (Response from the TTL/ICR team to the IEG’s questionnaire on the ICR received in June 17, 2021
(Response from the TTL/ICR team)).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project aligned with the Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS FY14-17), in particular, with one of its strategic focuses on improving governance and
service delivery. At project closing, the project was closely in line with the Country Partnership Framework
(CPF FY18-23), as the CPF Objective 2: “Decentralization of service delivery, including health and
education, and better engagement of citizens” incorporated this project into the Results Framework and the
indicators (CPF, page 39).

Previous Sector Experience. The Bank originally started Village Communities Support Programs (PACV) as
a three-phased Adjustable Program Loan with the long-term programmatic objective to: (i) strengthen local
governance in rural Guinea, and (ii) promote social and economic empowerment of the rural population,
with a focus on women, youth and other marginalized groups. PACV1 (P050732, US$22 million from IDA,
1999-2007) piloted the community driven development (CDD) approach to establish decentralized system
for local development in selected 159 rural communes. PACV2 (P065129, US$17 million from IDA, 2007-
2014) expanded the local-level infrastructure investments to scale up the CDD approach to all 304 rural
communes and operationalized mechanisms for fiscal transfers to rural communes. The main lesson from
PACV1 and 2 was that the long-term impact and sustainability was questionable due to the high
dependence on support from international donors (PAD, para 35). Therefore, this project, PACV3
(P156422, US$15 million from IDA, 2016-2020), shifted its focus from building hard infrastructures to
institutionalizing and consolidating the program of reforms by establishing a permanent national funding
mechanism, in order to sustain gains from the provision of technical support to local governments and
communities. Following PACV1 and 2, the Bank discontinued the APL instrument thus PACV3 was
implemented with the Investment Project Financing instrument. The national funding mechanism
established under this project would be further operationalized under its succeeding project, Support to
Local Governance Project (P167884, US$40 million from IDA, approved in 2019), to expand the CDD
approach in terms of geographic coverage to include all 33 urban communes except for the national capitol
Conakry and frequency of fiscal transfers to communes.

The project objective was in line with the country and sector context, the Bank’s assistance strategies, and
the previous sector experience. The project objective was also aligned with the national policy letter on
decentralization and local development, which presented a roadmap for the government’s vision on
decentralization. The portion of the project objective on emergency response was relevant to the
Government’s vision on decentralization to better respond to emergencies, though the relevant component
was not implemented due to the timing of the declaration of the state of emergency. Overall, the relevance
of objective is rated substantial.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the local government financing system

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The challenges of the local government financing systems included low budget transfer from the national
                             budget to local communes and low resource mobilization from local tax revenues. The first objective’s theory
                             of change envisioned that project activities such as supporting policy dialogue, technical studies, and capacity
                             building of government staff and local communes to strengthen local government financing system would
                             result in outputs such as establishments of national funding mechanisms to enhance budget transfers to local
                             communities, as well as operationalization of a national fund for local development financed by national
                             revenues such as mining revenues. The outputs such as the operationalization of the national fund for local
                             development by a national government agency were envisioned to result in short-term outcomes such as
                             increased national funds transfers to local communes and increased local annual revenues. The short-term
                             outcomes would result in the PDO-level outcome on strengthened local government financing system. Critical
                             assumptions included that the government commitment and political will would continue to be strong to
                             support local development through the national financing mechanisms for local development created under
                             the project.

                             Outputs:

                                        The National Fund for Local Development (FNDL: Fond National de Développement Local) was
                                         established and operational, achieving the original target. FNDL was created by Law in 2016 and
                                         started to disburse in 2019.
                                        The National Agency for Local Government Financing (ANAFIC: Agence Nationale de Financement
                                         des Collectivités Locales), a national government agency to manage the FNDL, was providing
                                         technical assistance to Rural Communes (CR: Commune Rurale), achieving the original target. The
                                         ANAFIC was created in 2017 by Presidential Decree to manage the FNDL, and it became operational
                                         in 2019. Many project staff members at the National Coordination Unit (CNC: Cellule Nationale de
                                         Coordination) were transferred to ANAFIC to ensure seamless transition as well as continuation of
                                         project implementation.
                                        The Government annually transferred 15% of mining revenues to local communities in line with Article
                                         165 of the Mining Code, achieving the original target.



                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)




        67% of CRs increased collection of their annual revenues by at least 10% compared to the previous
         year, improving from the baseline of 46% and achieving the original target of 65%. The project worked
         with a development partner called PROJEG to establish agreements regarding tax collection and
         access to services between the 191 local mines and the 41 CRs in the exploitation zone (Response
         from the TTL/ICR team). As captured by figures in the survey conducted by the National Institute of
         Statistics (INS: Institut National de Statistiques) in August 2020, average tax revenues per CR
         increased from Guinean Franc (GNF) 81.3 million in 2017 to GNF 333.3 million in 2019 (ICR, para
         34). The increase in average local tax revenues resulted from the improvements in financial
         management and local tax collection of the CRs.

Outcomes:

The achievements of outcomes are measured by the PDO outcome indicator below.

        At project closing, 95% of the CRs’ Annual Investment Plans were financed by the FNDL, almost the
         double of the original target of 50% (Response from the TTL/ICR team). As of June 2021, the actual
         achieved was further increased to 98.59% (Ibid). This PDO indicator on funds from FNDL executed by
         CRs was defined as the ratio of the amount of funding provided by FNDL over the total funding
         required by CRs to finance their Annual Investment Plans.

Referring to the objective’s theory of change, both challenges of the local government financing systems on
low fiscal transfer to local communes and low local revenues were addressed by the increase in local annual
revenues in the CRs and the increase in the funds transferred from the FNDL to the CRs to almost fully
finance their plans for local development. All the Intermediate Results indicators were achieved. The actual
achieved for the PDO outcome indicator was almost the double of the original target. Overall, the
achievement of Objective 1 is rated high.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve local service delivery in rural communes

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The challenges of local service delivery in rural communes included limited human capital and technical
capacities. These challenges were on top of the limited financial resources that were addressed under
Objective 1. The second objective’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as building
capacities of government staff and rural communes and supporting community identification, implementation,
and complementation of micro-projects for rural communities would result in outputs such as enhancement in
fiduciary and technical skills to improve government support to local communes country-wide, improvement in
citizen engagement for rural services provision, development of local development plans and annual
investment programs, and improvement in quality and sustainability of rural infrastructures. The outputs such

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



as local development plans, annual investment programs, and improved rural infrastructures were envisioned
to result in outcomes such as improved access to rural infrastructure and improvement in its quality. The
outcomes were envisioned to result in the PDO-level outcome on improved local service delivery in rural
communes. Critical assumptions included that the local communities would be engaged in a participatory and
inclusive manner to include the voices of traditionally marginalized groups such as women and youth and to
prevent the capture of local development resources by local elites.

Outputs:

      100% of elected mayors and key staff was trained or retrained in local governance and the use of
         fiduciary tools, meeting the original target.
        100% of targeted rural communes (CR: Commune Rurale) updated their Local Development Plans in
         a participatory manner, meeting the original target.
        None of the selected CRs detached the technical staff from the sub-prefecture to the Mayor, not
         achieving the original target of 21 CRs. Under the pilot scheme implemented in Component 2 in the
         project, technical staff from line Ministries at local level that so far reported to the sub-prefecture were
         detached to the Mayor’s office in selected CRs (ICR, page 12), but the detachment did not happen
         outside the pilot scheme.
        87% of deconcentrated technical staff were trained to support local development, slightly missing the
         original target of 90%.
        A computerized system for M&E at all levels was operational, meeting the original target.
        58% of committee members were women and youth in selected CRs, improving from the baseline of
         26% and achieving the original target of 50%.
        40% of recorded conflict risk issues were resolved by action groups through the pilot Early Warning
         and Response System (EWRS) implemented in the targeted CRs, achieving the original target of
         35%.
        100% of CRs with the incomplete past investments in infrastructure benefitted from complementary
         micro-projects, meeting the original target.
        76.7% of micro-projects or investments established arrangements for community engagement in post-
         project sustainability and/or operations and maintenance, achieving the original target of 75%.
        100% of the infrastructures, which were funded by this project and audited, were certified to be in
         compliance with the appropriate technical and environmental norms, meeting the original target.
        222 micro-projects were financed, surpassing the revised target of 195 micro-projects.
              o 82 complementary investments were made to the micro-projects supported under the
                 preceding project (PACV2), not meeting the revised target of 100 complementary investments.
              o 73 micro-projects were financed in CRs that were most affected by the Ebola Epidemic,
                 achieving the revised target of 40 micro-projects.
              o 37 inter-community micro-projects in natural resources management and bio-diversity
                 protection were financed, achieving the target of 30 micro-projects.
              o 30 micro-projects were financed in CRs that were located in mining areas, achieving the target
                 of 25 micro-projects.
        Number of direct beneficiaries was 3,309,117, increasing from the baseline of 2,326,000, almost
         achieving the original target of 3,326,000. The ratio of female direct beneficiaries at completion was
         45%. While this indicator was designated as a PDO outcome indicator, it provided evidence on
         achievement of results only at the output level.


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



In addition to the outputs in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs. None
of them had formal targets.

      The infrastructures and facilities constructed by the micro-projects were overall of good standing and
       were actually utilized by beneficiary populations, according to the independent ex-post implementation
       report in October 2020 (ICR, para 70). For the report, the consultants conducted a survey of a small
       sample of typical micro-projects across the national territory. This survey revealed that they were
       overall of good standing and were actually utilized by beneficiary populations.

Outcomes:

The achievements of outcomes are measured by the PDO outcome indicators below.

      167 CRs were using the participatory budgeting, monitoring, and evaluation system supported under
       the Bank’s Village Communities Support Programs (PACV), improving from the baseline of 21 CRs
       almost achieving the target of 179 CRs (achieving 93% of the original target). The remaining 12 CRs
       were actually trained in participatory instruments, but had not achieved full command by project
       closing due to the elections on the ground (Response from the TTL/ICR team). The indicator’s original
       target of 179 was set at approximately 60% of all 304 CRs in consideration of achievability (Ibid). The
       target was later expanded to cover all 304 CRs in the succeeding project by the same implementing
       agency.
      85.2% of beneficiaries felt that project investments on rural infrastructures reflected their needs, an
       improvement from the baseline of 26% and meeting the original target of 85%. The data on
       beneficiary perception was collected through the survey conducted by the National Institute of
       Statistics (INS: Institut National de Statistiques) in August 2020.

Referring to the theory of change above, the challenges on limited human capital and technical capacity were
addressed by the provision of the training and the citizen engagement activities and instruments; however,
there was limited evidence to show achievements of outcomes as a relevant indicator was lacking. For
example, the evidence regarding the beneficiary perception on project investments was not fully sufficient to
show to what extent the access to and the quality of local service were improved as envisioned in the theory
of change in the ICR (Figure 2, page 11). It was plausible that the achieved outputs, such as the Local
Development Plans updated in a participatory manner, the training of mayors and staff completed, and the
computerized M&E system operationalized, enhanced the participatory budgeting, monitoring, and evaluation
system and improved planning and investments for rural infrastructures, resulting in the achievement of the
PDO outcome indicator on the beneficiary perception. However, no evidence was provided regarding to what
extent the agricultural, marketing, educational, and health facilities built under the micro-projects were
operationalized and delivered improved local services to the beneficiaries. Having noted the shortcomings,
the CDD nature of the intervention and the difficulty in predicting which services communities would choose
as their priority allows some latitude in aligning outcomes to the intended broad range of services and thus
the rating is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 was highly achieved as the national fund and agency to support local development became
                            operational to institutionalize the reforms on fiscal transfers to rural communes and strengthened the local
                            government financing system. Objective 2 was substantially achieved as although the CRs improved their
                            planning and investing by adopting a participatory approach, there was limited evidence on the improvements
                            in the local service deliveries. Considering the high achievement of Objective 1 and the substantial
                            achievement of Objective 2, on balance, the efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) showed that the net economic benefits
   generated by the project’s inputs and outputs resulted in a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$54,673 and an
   Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 24%, using a 12% discount rate (PAD, para 48). The ICR (para 67)
   stated that the shortcomings in the methodology used in the PAD jeopardized the replicability of the efficiency
   analysis and the feasibility of a systematic comparison of results. At project closing, the CBA showed an NPV of
   US$482,746 and an EIRR of 35.3% (ICR, Annex 4, Table A4.5). The economic analysis used a discount rate of
   6%, which was the opportunity cost of capital for Guinea’s national society (ICR, Annex 4, page 51). The EIRR
   was calculated for a small sample of 16 Income Generating (IG) micro-projects on agricultural production and
   post-harvest which cost US$260,050 in total (ICR, Annex 4, Table A4.2). The costs of IG micro-projects that
   were used to calculate the EIRR constituted 13% of total cost of sub-projects and 3% of total project costs due
   to the restriction on data collection travels under the COVID-19 pandemic (Response from the TTL/ICR team).
   The ex-post EIRR hardly represented the efficiency of the whole project. Due to the differences in
   methodologies and underlying assumptions used at appraisal and at project closing, comparing the ex-ante and
   ex-post EIRRs is not feasible.

   Financial Analysis: At appraisal, no Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) was provided in the PAD. At
   project closing, the CBA showed an NPV of US$121,295 and an FIRR of 22% (ICR, Annex 4, Table A4.2). The
   financial analysis used an annual discount rate of 12%, which was the commercial bank lending rate prevailing
   for agriculture-related and other productive activities in Guinea (ICR, Annex 4, page 51). The economic analysis
   and the financial analysis at project closing used the same sample of 16 IG micro-projects for calculation.

   Cost-Effectiveness Analysis: At project closing, the unit costs per square meters of construction for the typical
   social micro-projects supported under this PACV3 project were compared with the standard costs and the unit
   costs of other projects. For construction of educational facilities, the unit costs of schools and health centers
   constructed by the social micro-projects were equivalent to the standard costs presented by the ministry and
   approximately half of the unit costs incurred by other donor-funded projects (ICR, Annex 4, page 55).



                                                                                                                           Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



Aspects of implementation that affected efficiency: There were some delays in project implementation due
to external factors. The preparation of Annual Investment Plans and execution of micro-projects had to wait for
the official installation of local councils and the appointment of municipal advisors that were delayed due to the
prolonged official validation of the outcomes of the local election held in February 2018. The project activities
were delayed in general by the restrictions imposed by the Government in 2020 with regard to the COVID-19
pandemic. Despite these delays, the project duration remained the same and closed on the originally planned
date without significant cost overruns nor procurement challenges.

The project’s efficiency was not critically affected by the delays in project implementation caused by the external
factors. On the other hand, it was not feasible to systematically compare the EIRRs at appraisal and at project
closing due to the differences in the methodologies that the PAD and the ICR used. Having said that, the social
micro-projects were found to be cost effective at project closing in terms of the unit costs of construction of
educational and health facilities. Therefore, efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is substantial due to its alignment with the Government's vision on decentralization
and the Bank's previous sector experience. Overall efficacy is rated substantial. Objective 1 on strengthening
local government financing system was highly achieved as the PDO outcome indicator was achieved almost the
double of the original target. Objective 2 on local service delivery was substantially achieved. Efficiency is rated
substantial. Thus, overall, the outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



Institutional Risk: There was a potential risk of insufficient operation and maintenance of the infrastructure
constructed by the micro-projects. To mitigate the risk, the project provided support through: (i) the technical
staff at local level assigned by the deconcentrated public institutions to help the Rural Communes (CR:
Commune Rurale), and (ii) the additional staff contracted by the CRs to manage the facilities.

Financial Risk: There was a potential risk of insufficient operating budgets due to the volatility of mining
resources. To mitigate the risk, the CRs ensured to allocate adequate funding for their operating budgets
including the budget for operation and maintenance, while collecting user fees for their services.

Political Risk: There was a potential risk of conflict between the government and the citizens in terms of the
country’s context of fragility. To mitigate the risk, the project adhered to the Risk Mitigation Regime and
supported participatory and inclusive local development processes, which strengthened the relationship
between citizens and local governments, and also materialized local investments through direct financial and
technical support to the rural communes. The project also supported activities designed to engage and
include citizens in decision-making to reinforce the social contract.

Social Risk: There was a potential risk of negative social impacts. To mitigate the risk, the project used the
participatory approach as an instrument of citizen’s engagement for budgeting and planning, as well as the
Grievance Redress Mechanism and the Early Warning and Response System (EWRS). On a pilot basis, the
project established an EWRS to prevent local conflicts from being escalated in terms of its scale and
severity. The system was built from the grassroots upward, all the way to the central level. This pilot EWRS
activity was successful in mitigating the risk and continued under the Support to Local Governance Project
(P167884, US$40 million from IDA, approved in 2019).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s strategic relevance and approach were aligned with the Government’s vision on
  decentralization, resulting in the strong political will to implement the project. The Bank provided technical
  support to ensure a sound project design with focus on both governance at the local level and
  appropriate investments to develop inclusive and sustainable services as requested by the local
  populations. The main risks were identified, and appropriate mitigation measures were proposed.
  Fiduciary aspects were adequately addressed. Regarding the aspects on social development, gender,
  and youth, the Bank reflected the lessons learned from the two previous phases into the project design.
  Regarding the institutional aspects, the Bank established an agreement with the national training center
  and incentivized development of a sustainable administrative capacity building program for local civil
  servants. On the other hand, there were shortcomings in the efficiency analysis at appraisal which
  prevented a replication of the same format for the efficiency analysis at project closing. Overall, the
  quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank closely monitored project progress and provided regular support for project implementation and
 training to reinforce the capacity of the National Coordination Unit. Supervision missions, including field
 visits, were conducted biannually and jointly with the French Development Agency, which financed another
 decentralization project at the time. The last supervision of October 2020 was organized virtually given the
 restrictions imposed on travel to the field due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Supervision reports showed that
 the Bank was candid on shortcomings and corrective actions during project implementation. Setting up an
 Early Warning and Response System at the Mid-Term Review was closely aligned with recommendations
 by the Risk Mitigation Regime. The Bank team also organized South-South exchanges with Cameroon to
 learn about the lessons on institutionalization of community-driven development modality. Transition
 arrangements were adequate, as the Bank strengthened the local capacities in a participatory manner to
 ensure the local stakeholders’ ownership of the project, and further aimed for scaling up the achievements
 through the succeeding project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change was sound in general and reflected in the Results Framework. The objectives were
 clearly specified. The M&E design and arrangements were well embedded institutionally as the project
 intended the integration of the project’s M&E system with the national and sectoral M&E system to
 empower national institutions. On the other hand, Some relevant indicators were missing for measuring the
 outcomes on improvements in local service delivery under Objective 2, as described in Section 4. For
 instance, relevant indicators were missing regarding to what extent the access to and the quality of local
 service were improved. The lack of relevant indicator resulted in weakening the achievement of the PDO
 outcome indicator on improvements in beneficiaries’ perceptions to the project activities on capacity
 building of local government and communities.



b. M&E Implementation
  All the indicators in the Results Framework were measured and reported. During project implementation,
  a computerized M&E database on the project activities was established at the prefectural, regional and
  national levels, with full integration across the different administrative levels and systematic upward
  aggregation of data. The beneficiaries in rural communes received training on participatory M&E and
  involved in defining target indicators and assessing their achievement for local development.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data including the geographical data and maps of micro-projects was summarized and
  published online for transparency and dissemination of project information. The M&E unit acted as the
  repository of environmental and social safeguards documents to ensure the quality management of
  micro-projects at community level. The M&E activities informed the revision of targets of intermediate
  results indicators on numbers of micro-projects. Beyond the project, the M&E unit also supported the
  Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization to monitor progress in its implementation of the
  strategy for gender equality and inclusion of vulnerable groups. On the other hand, the lack of relevant
  indicator resulted in that the M&E data was not adequately used to provide evidence of achievement of
  outcomes for Objective 2.

  The M&E design was sound with the clear objective and the Theory of Change. The M&E
  implementation and utilization were adequate in general; however, the moderate shortcomings caused
  by the lack of relevant PDO outcome indicator negatively affected the achievement of outcomes under
  Objective 2. Overall, M&E quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards: This project was classified as Category B. Three safeguard
   policies related to the implementation of the micro-projects were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP
   4.01); Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12), and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The policy on
   Involuntary Resettlement Policy was triggered because limited cases of land acquisition combined with
   physical and economic displacement were anticipated. The policy on Pest Management was triggered
   because the micro-projects with irrigation works involved the use of fertilizers and pesticides. To deal with
   these policies, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) used in the previous program were updated and disclosed; and a new Pest Management
   Plan (PMP) was prepared and also disclosed.

   During project implementation, the project-supported infrastructure investments that were monitored for
   their conformity with social and environmental norms, in line with the Intermediate Results indicator on
   compliance with technical and environmental audit of micro-projects. The compliance of the micro-projects
   with the environmental and social safeguards was ensured by: (i) screening each new site identified for a
   micro-project at design stage to identify necessary measures for risk mitigation and management; (ii)
   following the IDA environmental and social procedures, as well as relevant national laws, to ensure that
   land acquisition processes were properly documented with signatures attesting to the land ownership
   transfer; (iii) providing training to the stakeholders on the World Bank operational policies and good
   environmental and social risk management practices; (iv) hiring a safeguards specialist to join the National
   Coordination Unit staff to deal with PACV3 environmental and social monitoring in liaison with the Guinea

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



   Bureau for Studies and Environment Evaluations; (v) conducting information and sensitization campaigns
   with beneficiaries regarding the potential negative environmental and social impacts of the project; and (vi)
   using the Grievance Redress Mechanism supported under the project. Throughout the project, the overall
   project environmental and social impacts turned out to be minimal, site specific, manageable and judged to
   be at an acceptable level.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The project followed the financial covenants throughout the project. Annual
   budgets were adopted in a timely manner by the Steering Committee and subsequently approved by the
   IDA. The audits of project accounts were unqualified, confirming that financial statements were prepared in
   accordance with the standards and gave a true picture of the project’s financial situation in accordance
   with generally accepted accounting and financial principles. The Bank missions certified that the
   expenditure statements related to the various withdrawal requests submitted to IDA during implementation
   were appropriate. After the creation of the National Agency for Local Government Financing in 2019, the
   operations management responsibility was gradually transferred to the new agency to facilitate a seamless
   transition following project closure.

   Procurement: Procurement operations were overall handled adequately by following the Bank’s
   procurement guidelines. Annual Procurement Plans were regularly uploaded and approved. The
   Procurement Post Review and the Procurement-Risk Assessment Management System were regularly
   updated prior to project implementation support missions. The comprehensive update of operations was
   made in a timely manner before project closure. To improve transparency and efficiency in procurement,
   each beneficiary rural commune set up a procurement commission, whose members took specialized
   training modules including procedures for contractors’ selection and contracting modalities. The cost of the
   rural communes’ Annual Investment Plans was kept lower than forecasts in general.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Though the COVID-19 pandemic in January 2020 was unexpected, the project contributed to the fight
   against the disease by institutionalizing participatory methods and equipping the rural populations to fight
   adverse events. Also, the experience gained under the project in the areas affected by Ebola was used in
   the COVID-19 context. On a similar note, the rehabilitation of health infrastructure under the project
   allowed for better access to health services, which enabled the National Agency for Local Government
   Financing to distribute medical and hygiene kits to 153 health facilities which had been constructed with
   FNDL funding (Response from the TTL/ICR team).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects on
decentralization, and are presented here with some editing.

1. Strengthened stakeholder ownership and accountability at all levels and capacity building
at the grassroots can be vital for the long-term sustainability of local government actions.
This project showed that it was important to involve the stakeholders at all levels in the participatory
local planning and budgeting process, namely, the central ministry in charge of decentralization, line
ministries, state decentralized services, technical and financial agencies, local authorities, and local
communities. It has a potential to improve the quality of investments, strengthen the stakeholders’
sense of ownership and accountability, and facilitate the resource mobilization to local development
plans, which would result in the long-term sustainability of local government actions. Moreover, the
project’s experience indicated the importance of outsourcing some capacity building activities to
local NGOs. For example, recruiting and training youth from the local communities to provide
technical support on IT tools and software to local governments would support decentralization
process in the long-term.

2. Bottom-up participatory planning and budgeting of government activities can be effective
for conducting strategic policy dialogue for decentralization. The local government plans were
not sufficiently reflected in the government planning and the public investment budgeting at the
national level. To address this, the project supported government reforms by: (i) ensuring the social
inclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups, such as indigenous peoples, returnees, women,
and youth, and (ii) working in urban environments and fragile conflict-affected areas, with an aim for
laying the groundwork for improved local governance. To further enhance the effective management
of community activities in a participatory manner, provision of basic infrastructure and equipment to
local governments and promoting local indigenous solutions in communities would be essential.

3. Improved financial management systems for facilitation of fiscal transfer and management
of tax revenues and fees with support from commercial banking facilities would be key for
effective decentralization. This project institutionalized the financing of local communities’ annual
investment plans, through the permanent financial mechanism. This achievement enabled to
systematically transfer 15% of mining revenues to local governments. Concurrently, the project
supported local communities to collect revenues and fees from local resources by reinforcing local
service delivery, implementing micro-projects that fulfilled their needs, and strengthening their IT




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Third Village Community Support Project (P156422)



capacities with tailored software. In the future, supporting the communities to access commercial
bank financing to improve their financial capacity would further scale up local projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project in line with the guideline and focuses on results. The
Theory of Change is thoroughly explained in Figure 2 (page 11) and the narrative (para 11-15) in the ICR,
which helped readers to understand the logical relationships among development challenges, inputs, outputs,
and outcomes that the project aimed to address. With some exceptions, the narrative and available evidence
support the ratings, in line with the project development objective. Additional supplemental evidence and
explanation were provided by the TTL/ICR team in response to requests from IEG. The ICR’s lessons are clear,
useful and based on evidence outlined in the ICR. On the other hand, there are some shortcomings regarding
the completeness of evidence and analysis in relation to Objective 2. For example, the reasons for the
underachievement of the PDO outcome indicator on the number of CRs using participatory budgeting,
monitoring, and evaluation at project closing is not adequately explained by the ICR. Overall, the quality of ICR
is rated substantial



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
