     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022458

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Togo                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                         Approved Operations
 0                                          0

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P159844                                    Togo Fiscal Reform Credit




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D2670                                 31-Dec-2018                                        52,980,527.53

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2017                               31-Dec-2018
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            51,900,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             51,900,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                         52,980,527.53                                            0.00




P166739_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Togo                                      Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P166739                                   Togo 2nd Fiscal Manage & Infrast Reform ( P166739 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-D2670,IDA-D4040                        31-Dec-2019                                             39714678.79

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  10-Dec-2018                                31-Dec-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                              39,918,050.18                                                0.00

  Actual                                          39,714,678.79                                                0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            Paul Holden                  Sengphet Lattanavong             IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page vi) for the second (FMIR2) of the two-operation Togo Fiscal
Management and Infrastructure Reform Development Policy Financing, the program development objective
(PDO) of the programmatic series was to support the Government of Togo "in mobilizing tax revenues and
enhancing the efficiency of tax collection, public investment spending, and debt management; and to
strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the energy and ICT sectors." This revised the objective
cited in the Program Document (page vii) for the first operation (FMIR1), "to enhance tax revenues and improve
the efficiency of tax collection and public investment spending, and to strengthen the financial viability and service
delivery in key infrastructure sectors." The revised statement added "debt management" to the objective and
identified the "energy and ICT sectors" as the key infrastructure sectors targeted for reform. This ICR Review will
be based on the revised statement of objectives.

For the purpose of this ICR Review, the objectives of the operation are taken to be:

Objective 1: Mobilize tax revenues through enhancing the efficiency of tax collection.
Objective 2: Enhance the efficiency of public investment spending and debt management.
Objective 3: Strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the energy sector.
Objective 4: Strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the ICT sector.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



The program had four pillars (policy areas), aligned and consistent with the two program development
objectives. The program defined four prior actions (PA1 - PA4) for the objective "to mobilize tax revenues and
enhance the efficiency of tax collection, public investment spending, and debt management," four prior actions
(PA5 - PA8) for the objective "to enhance the efficiency of public investment spending, and debt management,"
five prior actions (PA9 - PA13) for the objective " to strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the
energy sector," and four prior actions (PA14 - PA17) for the objective " to strengthen the financial viability and
service delivery in the ICT sector."

Pillar 1 - Fiscal Management: Tax Revenue Efficiency and Mobilization supported: tax policy and
administration measures to increase tax revenues by reducing tax exemptions (PA1), simplifying the tax system
by reducing the number of taxes in line with West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) tax
harmonization initiatives, while ensuring that the reduction had a net zero effect on revenue (PA2), allowing
electronic tax filing and tax payment through mobile phones (PA3), and improving land registry, land titling and
land census services (PA4).

Pillar 2 - Fiscal Management: Public Resource Management supported: (a) policy and institutional measures
to improve public investment management by creating a Public Investment Committee (PA5), instituting a
system for selecting projects for the Public Investment Program (PIP) and providing for the multi-year budgeting
of PIP projects (PA6), and settling financial obligations associated with previous "pre-financed" capital
investment projects (PA7); and (b) a policy measure to improve debt management by adopting a Medium-Term
Debt Management Strategy aimed at debt sustainability (PA8).

Pillar 3 - Financial Viability and Service Delivery in the Energy Sector supported: (a) measures to improve
the financial viability of the Togo Electric Company (CEET) and the Benin Electric Company (CEB) by arranging
for offsets of government payment arrears with the CEET's tax arrears and arranging for a bridge financing for
the CEB (PA9); (b) a policy measure to improve the commercial viability of the energy sector by adopting a tariff
setting system based on costs, as well as a financing mechanism for any subsidy (PA10); (c) administrative
measures to improve the procedures by which the government paid electricity bills and paid statutory subsidies
(PA11); and (d) measures to improve the operational performance of the CEET by using smart meters (PA12)
and its financial performance by amending its performance contract with the government (PA13).

Pillar 4 - Financial Viability and Service Delivery in the ICT Sector supported: (a) policy measures to
strengthen the economic viability of the ICT sector by promoting competition in retail internet broadband (PA14)
and ensuring an open access regime in the international and national bandwidth markets (PA15); and (b) legal
and regulatory measures to govern the issuance of internet service provider (ISP) licenses (PA16) and to open
Togo Telecom (TOGOCOM) to private investment (PA17).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The program was financed with a grants from the International Development
Association of SDR 37 million (US$51.9 million equivalent) for FMIR1 and SDR 28.7 million (US$40 million
equivalent) for FMIR2. The grants, in the total amount of SDR 65.7 million (US$92.7 million equivalent), were
fully disbursed. The higher U.S. dollar value at closing was due to changes in the SDR-US$ exchange rate
over the program period.




                                                                                                        Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



Dates. FMIR1 was approved on December 20,2017 and closed as scheduled on December 31, 2018. FMIR2
was approved on December 10, 2018 and closed as scheduled on December 31, 2019.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Relevance to Country Development Challenges. The FMIR series aimed to address problems in fiscal
 policy and management and in the electricity and ICT sectors in Togo.

      Growing at a slower rate of 4.9 percent in 2016-17 from an average 6.1 percent over 2010-15, the
         economy suffered from "high and distortionary taxes," which the Togo Systematic Country Diagnostic
         of 2016 considered as the fourth most significant constraint. The tax system was overly complicated
         and burdensome and created a major barrier to private investment, business formalization, firm
         growth, and hence poverty reduction. The development of a more efficient and equitable tax system
         was critical to increasing fiscal space and mobilizing the resources necessary to fund priority projects.
        The quality of public investment was poor, notwithstanding that public investment spending had
         increased from 9 percent of GDP in 2013 to 14 percent of GDP in 2016. The country scored 0.3 on a
         scale of 0 to 1 on the efficiency of public investment, according to the Public Investment Management
         Assessment (PIMA) conducted by the Bank and IMF in 2016. The "pre-financing" mechanism, by
         which private contractors, picked on a sole-source basis to undertake public investment projects,
         obtained commercial bank loans guaranteed by the government, raised budget sustainability risks,
         increasing the cost of financing public investment and obscuring the total magnitude of public
         liabilities.
        After debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative reduced the public debt stock to
         32 percent of GDP in 2010, debt grew rapidly anew to 59 percent of GDP in 2015. The debt numbers
         did not account for liabilities linked to "pre-financed" public investment or for unbudgeted contingent
         liabilities associated with state-owned enterprises that required periodic infusions of fiscal
         resources. Debt-servicing costs were not properly reported to the government.
        Both the poor quality of public investment and the rising stock of public debt and contingent liabilities
         reflected "weaknesses in fiscal governance," which the Togo Systematic Country Diagnostic of 2016
         considered as the second most important development constraint.
        The cost of electricity was high and the quality of service was poor. Many enterprises considered the
         high cost of electricity a major constraint to doing business. Power outages were common. About 25
         percent of businesses reported power cuts for more than 20 percent of business hours in 2015 and
         another 57 percent reported cuts for less than 20 percent of business hours. Losses due to outages
         were estimated at six percent of sales.
        Telecommunications and internet services were costly, inefficient, and of poor quality, preventing
         many firms from taking advantage of opportunities offered by mobile technology. The country ranked
         179th out of 180 countries for the cost of mobile telephone service and 172nd for the cost of fixed
         broadband service, according to the International Telecommunications Union in 2016. Mobile
         telephone costs were exceptionally high, at 28 percent of gross national income per
         capita. Affordability of was a major issue. The quality of mobile voice calls was poor, even in the
         capital city, Lomé. Nonetheless, demand was strong with the number of telecommunications
         subscribers quickly rising from 56,000 in 2000 to 2.9 million in 2016.


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



      Both the high cost and the poor quality of electricity and ICT services were consequences of, among
       other things, "barriers to entry, and policies and regulations that distorted private economic
       activity," which the Togo Systematic Country Diagnostic considered as the third most important
       development constraint.


Relevance to Government Priorities. The program objectives were relevant to the development priorities
of Togo in response to these challenges.

      Informed by Togo Vision 2030 - Towards Accelerated Growth, the Economic Community of West
       African States (ECOWAS) Vision 2020, the WAEMU Agenda 2063, and the U.N. Sustainable
       Development Goals, the government's Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Promotion de l'Emploi
       2013-2017 (SCAPE) and its successor National Development Plan for 2018-
       2022 (PND) advanced the goal to "promote Togo’s structural transformation into an emerging market
       economy." The PND focused on: improving the competitiveness and overall productivity of the
       economy and creating sustainable jobs; reducing poverty through the acceleration of economic
       growth, the massive creation of jobs, and a better redistribution of the benefits of growth; and
       improving human development through better access to basic social services. The policy areas were
       aligned with the objectives of the PND.

Relevance to Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were consistent with the Bank Group's
strategy in Togo.

      The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Togo for the Period FY17-FY20 (CPF)
       committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities – Private Sector Performance
       and Job Creation, Inclusive Public Service Delivery, and Environmental Sustainability and
       Resilience. The first policy area of this programmatic series was consistent with the first focus area of
       the CPF, which aimed "to strengthen fiscal policy and debt management." The second policy area of
       the series was consistent with the first focus area of the CPF, specifically with the objectives to
       "strengthen energy, ICT and logistics services" and "improve the business environment and
       employment opportunities."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The Program Document and the Financing Agreement defined eight prior actions for the first pillar and nine
prior actions for the second pillar.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 1 - Fiscal Management: Tax Revenue Efficiency and Mobilization

      PA1 (completion of an audit of tax exemptions and initiation of measures to reduce tax
       exemptions, including on VAT) was informed by significant analytical work including the Background
       Papers on Tax Simplification, Tax Exemptions, and the Property Tax (Government of Togo,
       2016). Tax exemptions were excessive, had limited impact on the conditions for doing business, and
       were often awarded to enterprises on an ad-hoc and discretionary basis. The government would

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



        conduct audits of tax exemptions to identify any irregularities in granting these exemptions. In
        addition, the government would introduce specific measures to reduce regular tax exemptions,
        starting with the 2018 Budget Act. The reduction of tax exemptions would still depend on actual
        enforcement action by the tax authorities, however. Because the prior action would make only a
        moderate contribution to mobilizing tax revenues and the budgetary measures were discretionary, the
        relevance of this prior action is rated moderately satisfactory.
       PA2 (reduction of the number of taxes from 26 to 17) was consistent with WAEMU tax harmonization
        directives. The results chain linking this prior action to the achievement of the PDO was
        convincing. The WAEMU had issued three directives calling for the equalization of tax rates and tax
        bases among member states so as not to distort the functioning of the common market –
        standard VAT rates and exemptions, a standard corporate income tax base, and standard corporate
        income tax rates in the range of 25 to 35 percent. The reduction in the number of Togo's taxes from
        26 to 17 would be consistent with the WAEMU tax harmonization directives. The prior action would
        make a major contribution to the achievement of the objective to mobilize tax revenues – it would not
        reduce taxes but enhance the efficiency of tax collection. The reduction in the number of taxes from
        26 to 17 would simplify Togo's tax system and serve to harmonize it with those of other member
        states of the WAEMU. The simplification of the tax system would yield CFA 2.7 billion in 2019,
        according to the Program Document for FMIR2 (page 16). The relevance of this prior action is rated
        satisfactory.
       PA3 (launch of a new electronic tax filing system for companies and a mobile phone tax payment
        system for micro and small enterprises) was informed by the Background Papers on Tax
        Simplification, Tax Exemptions, and the Property Tax (Government of Togo, 2016) and the Togo
        Systematic Country Diagnostic (World Bank, 2016). Introducing a new system of electronic tax filing
        by large enterprises and establishing a program that allowed tax payments through mobile phones,
        especially for small and medium-sized enterprises, would facilitate tax payments and enlarge the tax
        base. Tax payments through mobile phones would help bring businesses in the informal sector into
        the tax net, with positive tax revenue effects considering that the informal sector comprised a large 80
        percent of the economy. The size of the potential contribution of the informal sector to taxation was
        not quantified; the relevance of this prior action is rated moderately satisfactory.
       PA4 (transfer of the land register to the Revenue Authority (OTR), computerization by the OTR of land
        titles, and launch by the OTR of a land census for the capital city Lomé to identify areas with large
        revenue potential) was informed by the West Africa Tax Policy Study (World Bank, 2018
        preliminary). The results chain linking this prior action to the achievement of the PDO was
        convincing. To enhance property tax revenue mobilization, the government would move the
        cadastre to the OTR, making information on properties more easily available for tax administrative
        purposes. The OTR would also computerize the land registry, launch a nation‐wide land census, and
        launch a land census in Lomé to identify zones and neighborhoods with large revenue potential. The
        prior action would make a major contribution to the achievement of the objective to mobilize tax
        revenues and enhance the efficiency of tax collection. The reorganization and modernization of the
        cadastre and land census would optimize property tax collection. The relevance of this prior action is
        rated satisfactory.
       The overall relevance of prior actions to the objective is rated satisfactory.


Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 2 - Fiscal Management: Public Resource Management

     PA5 (establishment of a high-level inter-ministerial Public Investment Committee to scrutinize and
        prioritize all public investment proposals, including PPPs) was informed by the Togo Public

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



  Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review (World Bank, 2016), Togo Technical
  Assistance Report (IMF, 2016), Technical Assistance Report on Public Investment Efficiency (IMF,
  2016), and Joint Technical Assistance Report on Public Investment Management Assessment (IMF
  and World Bank, 2016), according to the Program Document for FMIR1 (pages 19-20). A high-level
  inter-ministerial Public Investment Committee would help improve the planning and selection of public
  investment projects. There were no assurances, however, that the decisions of the committee would
  be final and binding. Because the government would still need to choose projects and implement
  projects, the relevance of this prior action is rated moderately satisfactory.
 PA6 (publication of a new manual to guide the selection of Public Investment Plan (PIP) projects, and
  inclusion of the three-year rolling PIP in the Annual Budget). The public investment management
  process in Togo had suffered from serious shortcomings resulting in a very low Public Investment
  Management Assessment (PIMA) rating on infrastructure governance. The PIP was not underpinned
  by proper appraisal and cost‐benefit analyses and investments were not properly prioritized. The
  budget covered only annual and not multi-year investment plans. The result was a system
  of "stop‐go" public investments that were vulnerable to cyclical swings in the economy. The
  publication of the PIP manual and budgetary provisions for three-year rolling PIP plans aimed to
  improve the policy and institutional framework underlying public investment management. However,
  publishing a decision manual provided no assurance that the government would actually choose to
  approve priority projects and implement them effectively and efficiently. The relevance of this prior
  action is rated moderately satisfactory.
 PA7 (settlement by the government of all outstanding obligations to commercial banks for past "pre-
  financed" investments). The past practice of "pre‐financing" public investments through the
  banks reflected poor investment planning and led to a rapid accumulation of expensive domestic
  debt. In a "pre-financing" arrangement, the government contracted with a private sector company,
  typically on a sole-source basis, to undertake a public investment project; the private sector company
  would then take out a loan for the project from a commercial bank, with the government guaranteeing
  the private loan and subsequently assuming responsibility for all payments. While the practice had
  been halted beginning in 2017, legacy obligations remained a hindrance to better public investment
  spending. The settlement by the government of all outstanding obligations with the banks related to
  "pre-financed" investments and the refinancing of the obligations through the issuance of securities
  with longer maturities and lower the interest rates would help reduce the burden of past public
  investment decisions on public finances. The prior action would make a major contribution to the
  achievement of the objective. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
 PA8 (publication of a new Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy for debt sustainability). Debt
  management had been guided by WAEMU and IMF targets but lacked an adequate medium-term
  debt strategy (MTDS) and risk management framework. The WAEMU convergence criteria included a
  target for total public debt‐to‐GDP ratio of 70 percent by 2019. While external public debt declined
  from 21.7 percent to 19.9 percent of GDP during 2015‐2017, domestic debt surged in 2016 due to the
  "pre‐financing" of public investment, accounting for three‐fourths of total public debt
  by end‐2017. Debt service had become a major burden on the budget, consuming about one-half of
  revenues in 2017. The prior action would make a moderate contribution to the achievement of the
  objective to enhance the efficiency of debt management. The publication of the MTDS alone would
  not necessarily lead to debt sustainability over the medium term because debt sustainability would still
  depend on disciplined government financing and debt management decisions. There was no
  information available about the actual quality of the MTDS at the time of the publication of MTDS in
  October 2018, and hence the relevance of this prior action would be rated as
  moderately unsatisfactory at that time. However, since then, in October 2019 (before this operation
  closed in December 2019) at the Fifth Review (page 6) of the Extended Credit Facility (ECF)

                                                                                              Page 7 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



       arrangement approved in 2017, the IMF concluded that "Public debt is expected to fall below 70
       percent of GDP from 2020 and to decline below the benchmark for countries with medium debt
       carrying capacity (net present value of public debt of 55 percent of GDP) in 2023." Hence, this prior
       action is rated moderately satisfactory.
      The overall relevance of prior actions to the objective is rated moderately satisfactory.


Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 3 - Financial Viability and Service Delivery in the Energy Sector

      PA9 (offsetting of government payments to the CEET against tax arrears and bridge financing of
         CEET cash payment to the CEB) was informed by the Togo Systematic Country Diagnostic (World
         Bank, 2016) and the Energy Sector Policy Review (World Bank, 2017), according to the Program
         Document for FMIR1 (page 25). The agreement would clear government arrears to CEET and CEET
         arrears to CEB. The prior action would make a major contribution to the achievement of the objective
         in the energy sector. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
        PA10 (issuance of decree setting the principles for periodically determining the CEET’s retail
         tariff). The decree would adopt the key principles for determining a transparent tariff-setting
         methodology that reflected the cost of each segment – wholesale power, wheeling power, distribution
         and retail – and promoted the operational efficiency of the utility. The prior action would make a
         major contribution to the achievement of the objective to strengthen financial viability and service
         delivery in the energy sector. If necessary, the new methodology would provide for the provision of an
         explicit subsidy or other financing mechanism that would ensure that costs were fully covered. At the
         same time, the mechanism would allow for a social tariff that benefitted the poor who would get
         access to reliable and affordable electricity services. The relevance of this prior action is rated
         satisfactory.
        PA11 (establishment a centralized payment system of the government fuel subsidy and the electricity
         bills to the CEET). The centralized payment system would provide a sustainable solution to the
         problem of non-payment of electricity bills by central administration and would make a
         moderate contribution to the achievement of the objective to strengthen the financial viability of, and
         service delivery in, the energy sector. It establishes the principle that the Ministry of Economy and
         Finance should be directly responsible for covering the electricity bills of all government entities in a
         single payment. This avoided the problem of budgets not being allocated for electricity bills, or
         budgets being allocated but later diverted to other spending items. A centralized payment system
         would help facilitate but not necessarily ensure that subsidy and bill payments are actually made by
         public agencies, hence the relevance of this prior action is rated moderately unsatisfactory.
        PA12 (approval of the CEET's revenue protection program deploying smart meters). Given the high
         cost of electricity in Togo, efficiency improvements had to be integral to the effort to improve the
         financial viability of the sector. A revenue protection program for medium‐voltage customers,
         high‐consumption low‐voltage customers, and the public sector aimed to improve efficiency. The use
         of smart meters would help cut operational inefficiencies at the CEET, which had suffered
         from distribution losses of as much as 16 percent. But improving the operational and financial viability
         of the CEET required more than the deployment of smart meters. The relevance of this prior action is
         rated moderately satisfactory.
        PA13 (approval of the CEET performance contract). The CEET's old performance contract with the
         government for 2016‐2020 did not include targets to improve efficiency at the utility, nor did it contain
         incentives and penalties linked to the results or provide for proper results verification
         mechanisms. A revised management performance contract providing for efficiency improvement


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



         targets would enhance the operational and financial performance of the CEET. The prior action would
         make a major contribution to the achievement of the objective to strengthen financial viability and
         service delivery in the energy sector. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 4 - Financial Viability and Service Delivery in the ICT Sector

      PA14 (adoption of the ICT Sector Policy for 2018-22). The articulation of a strategic vision for the ICT
         sector would bring more clarity to the sector. The government was expected to commit to: the
         adoption of universal access, the development of infrastructure-based competition, the
         implementation of number portability and national roaming, and the adoption of regulatory tools to
         ensure the quality of ICT services. The sector policy statement plan was expected to include detailed
         action plans outlining activities, responsibilities, and measurements for the evaluation of activities. The
         prior action would make a moderate contribution to the achievement of the objective to strengthen the
         financial viability of, and service delivery in, the ICT sector. The adoption of market competition and
         the strengthening of regulation would help. The relevance of this prior action is rated
         moderately satisfactory.
        PA15 (publication of a reference offer from TOGOCOM providing for fair, non-discriminatory, and
         transparent access to wholesale broadband services). TOGOCOM had taken undue advantage of
         its monopoly power in the middle mile segment of the market by offering access to its network at rates
         and conditions that were unfair to competitors. This regulatory measure would require the regulator to
         publish a wholesale reference offer from TOGOCOM which would provide the terms and conditions
         under which it would ensure fair, nondiscriminatory, and transparent access to wholesale broadband
         services. The prior action would make a major contribution to the achievement of the
         objective. The regulatory measure would establish an open access regime in the international and
         national bandwidth capacity markets. An open access regime would lower tariffs for
         end‐users, increase network usage, and unleash demand for broadband services. The relevance of
         this prior action is rated satisfactory.
        PA16 (issuance of a standard model and guidelines for the granting of ISP authorizations). The
         results chain linking this prior action to the achievement of the PDO was credible. The issuance of a
         standard model and guidelines for the granting of Internet Service Provider (ISP) authorizations by the
         Ministry for Posts and ICT would provide for the regulatory framework for ISP licenses. The prior
         action would make a moderate contribution to the achievement of the objective to strengthen the
         financial viability and service delivery in the ICT sector. The issuance of the guidelines would allow
         the government to start issuing ISP licenses and hence facilitate the entry of new service
         providers. The relevance of this prior action is rated moderately satisfactory.
        PA17 (approval of a bill to open the TOGOCOM for an “active” minority private shareholding). The bill
         would invite a minority private shareholding, expected to be not less than 30 per cent of the capital in
         TOGOCOM. The minority investment would be solicited through a neutral, transparent, and
         non‐discriminatory international bidding process that was designed to attract a high‐quality
         investor. The prior action would make a major contribution to the achievement of the objective. The
         new private capital would help support the expansion of TOGOCOM's network, enhance the quality
         of its services, and reduce costs significantly, eventually leading to lower tariffs for final users. The
         relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
        The overall relevance of prior actions to the objective is rated satisfactory.



Rating

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)




Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program defined a set of nine results indicators to measure attainment of the program
outcomes. Five indicators were dropped in FMIR2 – the PIMA rating of public investment spending efficiency,
relative to potential; the terms of past "pre-financed" investments; improved financial performance of the CEET;
international internet bandwidth bits per second per internet user; and the wholesale price of international
capacity. Five indicators were added – the share of new public investment projects funded in the annual budget
consistent with prioritized PIP based on new manual; the debt service-to-revenue ratio of medium- and long-
term debt; the CEET net margin; the number of internet users; and, the ICT Development Index score.


                                     Associated
    RI (number and description)        Prior                 Baseline / Target                    Status
                                      Actions
Pillar 1 - Fiscal Management: Tax Revenue Efficiency and Mobilization
RI1. Reduction in tax exemptions, in PA1        Baseline (2016): 3.4 percent of GDP            Actual
percent of GDP.                      PA2        (updated from 3.5 percent of GDP).             (2019): 2.3
                                                                                               percent of
                                                   Target (2019): less than 2.1 percent of     GDP
                                                   GDP.
RI2. Increase in property tax         PA3          Baseline (2016): 0.1 percent of GDP         Actual
revenues, in percent of GDP           PA4          (updated from 0.58 percent of GDP)          (2019):
                                                                                               0.15
                                               Target (2019): at least 0.3 percent of GDP      percent of
                                               (revised from 0.68 percent of GDP)              GDP
Pillar 2 - Fiscal Management: Public Investment and Debt Management

RI3. Share of new public investment PA5            Baseline (2016): 0 percent                  Actual
projects funded in the annual budget PA6                                                       (2019): 100
consistent with prioritized PIP based              Target (2019): 75 percent                   percent
on new manual, in percentage.
RI4. Debt service-to-revenue ratio     PA7         Baseline (2016): 66.6 percent              Actual
(interest plus amortization of medium- PA8                                                    (2019):
and long-term debt)                               Target (2019): less than 59 percent         63.15
                                                                                              percent
Pillar 3: Financial Viability and Service Delivery in Key Infrastructure Sectors: Energy and ICT
RI5. Increase in revenue collection PA9           Baseline (2016): 36 percent                 Actual
rate of CEET from the general         PA11                                                    (2019):
government.                                       Target (2019):  95 percent or more (revised 82.86
                                                  from 75 percent)                            percent


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



RI6. Difference between the CEET        PA10         Baseline (2016): Franc de la Communauté         Actual
retail tariff (weighted average) plus                Financière Africaine (CFAF) 27 per kilowatt-    (2019):
subsidy and the cost of service.                     hour (kWh) (updated from CFAF 30 per            CFAF 39
                                                     kWh)                                            per kWh

                                                     Target (2019): CFAF 10 per kWh or lower
RI7. CEET net margin                    PA12         Baseline (2016): 2 percent (updated from        Actual
                                        PA13         2.15 percent)                                   (2019): -
                                                                                                     12.26
                                                     Target (2019): 2 percent or more                percent
RI8. Number of internet users           PA14         Baseline (2016): 528,076                        Actual
                                        PA15                                                         (2019):
                                                     Target (2019): 1,000,000 or more                3.04 million
RI9. ICT Development Index              PA16         Baseline (2016): 1.86                           Actual
                                        PA17                                                         (2017):
                                                     Target (2019): 2.30                             2.15 - no
                                                                                                     data for
                                                                                                     2019


Pillar 1 - Fiscal Management: Tax Revenue Efficiency and Mobilization

      RI1 (reduction in tax exemptions, in percent of GDP) was appropriate to measure the results of actions to
       enhance the efficiency of tax collection by rationalizing tax exemptions. This results indicator was linked
       to the prior actions to reduced tax exemptions, including on VAT. This results indicator is rated
       satisfactory .
      RI2 (increase in property tax revenues, in percent of GDP) was appropriate to measure the result of
       efforts to enhance the efficiency of tax collection by improving the land tax administration. According to
       the ICR (page 16), this results indicator was linked to two prior actions – institutional improvements in
       land tax administration and administrative improvements in land titling and land census-taking in the
       capital, as well as the facilitation of tax payments online and through mobile phones. The link to the first
       prior action is clear, but that to the second prior action is less so. Specifically, online and mobile
       payment systems should help facilitate tax payments in general, but not necessarily lead to an increase
       in property tax revenues. This results indicator is rated moderately satisfactory.

Based on the foregoing ratings, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 1 is rated satisfactory.

Pillar 2 - Fiscal Management: Public Resource Management

      RI3 (share of new public investment projects funded in the annual budget consistent with the prioritized
       PIP based on the new manual) was appropriate to measure the result of actions to enhance the
       efficiency of public investment spending. This results indicator was linked to two prior actions – creation
       of the Public Investment Committee, prioritization of capital projects for the PIP using stringent technical
       criteria under a new manual, and three-year budgeting for PIP projects. The indicator was well defined,
       had credible baseline data and a clear target, and had available data to measure achievement of the
       target. This results indicator is rated satisfactory.



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



      RI4 (debt service-to-revenue ratio) aimed to measure the results of actions to improve public investment
       and debt management. This results indicator was linked to two prior actions – the settlement of
       obligations to commercial banks related to past "pre-financed" investments and the publication of a new
       Medium Term Debt Management Strategy emphasizing debt sustainability. However, because there are
       numerous factors that could affect debt service (the numerator in the indicator) and revenue (the
       denominator) other than the settlement of debt obligations to commercial banks and the publication of a
       new debt strategy, this results indicator is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

Based on the foregoing ratings, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 2 is rated moderately
satisfactory.

Pillar 3 - Financial Viability and Service Delivery in the Energy Sector

      RI5 (increase in the revenue collection rate of the CEET from the government) was appropriate to
       measure the results of actions to improve the financial viability of the energy sector by settling arrears to
       the CEET and the CEB. This results indicator was linked to two prior actions – the "regularization" the
       government's payment obligations to the CEET and the CEET's payment obligations to the CEB, and the
       creation of a centralized system for government payments to the CEET and for the statutory fuel
       subsidy. This results indicator is rated satisfactory.
      RI6 (difference between CEET retail tariff (weighted average) plus subsidy and the cost of service was
       appropriate to measure the results of actions to improve the financial viability of the energy sector by
       reforming the CEET retail tariff setting practices. This results indicator was linked to the prior
       action to adopt of a new methodology for periodically determining and updating the CEET's retail tariff
       that was cost-based. This results indicator is rated satisfactory.
      RI7 (CEET net margin) was appropriate to measure the results of actions to improve the financial viability
       of the energy sector by introducing improvements in the CEET's operational and financial
       performance. This results indicator was linked to two prior actions – the approval of the CEET's
       Revenue Protection Program involving the deployment of smart meters and the amendment of the
       CEET's performance contract with the government with targets for management efficiency
       improvements. However, given the time needed to implement the Revenue Protection Program and the
       new performance contract, the impact of the reforms on the corporate net margin would not have been
       immediate but would have taken some time to be realized. Hence, the attribution of the prior actions
       made in 2016 to the results indicator measured in 2019 would have been weaker than expected. This
       results indicator is therefore rated moderately satisfactory.

Based on the foregoing ratings, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 3 is rated moderately
satisfactory.

Pillar 4 - Financial Viability and Service Delivery in the ICT Sector

      RI8 (number of internet users) aimed to measure the results of actions to improve the financial viability
       of and the quality of service in the ICT sector. This results indicator was linked to two prior actions – the
       adoption of an ICT sector policy covering universal access, infrastructure-based competition, number
       portability, national roaming, and regulation for quality of service, and the publication of a reference offer
       from TOGOCOM for fair, non-discriminatory, and transparent access to wholesale broadband
       services. The underlying logic for the choice of this indicator was that increased competition and open
       access in the ICT sector would raise the number of internet users. However, there could arguably be
       many other factors driving the increase in the number of internet users other than the competition

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



        measures supported by the FMIR series. Thus, the unique and direct attribution of the results indicator
        to the prior actions is weaker than envisioned and this results indicator is rated moderately
        unsatisfactory.
       RI9 (ICT Development Index) aimed to measure the results of actions to improve the financial viability of
        and the quality of service in the ICT sector. This results indicator was linked to two prior actions – the
        issuance of a standard for granting ISP licenses and the opening of TOGOCOM to minority private
        shareholding. The underlying logic for the choice of this indicator was that increased competition and
        open access in the ICT sector would be reflected in improvements in the country's score on the ICT
        Development Index. Published annually since 2009 by the International Telecommunications Union
        (ITU), the index is a composite of 11 indicators measuring ICT access, ICT use, and ICT skills. While the
        foregoing logic has merit, the suitability of the index to measure financial viability in the ICT is weak. An
        indicator reflecting the financial standing and performance of TOGOCOM, the telecommunications
        service provider, would have been more suitable to measure financial viability. Moreover, and
        unfortunately, due to changes in the index construction methodology, the ITU was unable to publish the
        ICT Development Index in 2018 and 2019. Hence, only the 2017 data was available to use for the FMIR
        series and therefore this results indicator is rated unsatisfactory.

Based on the foregoing ratings, the relevance of the results indicators for Pillar 4 is rated moderately
unsatisfactory.

Overall, the relevance of the results indicators is rated moderately satisfactory.


                        Relevance Ratings for RIs by Pillar, and Efficacy Ratings
                                          Efficacy Rating for Pillar Efficacy            Overall Efficacy
Results Indicator      Relevance Rating
                                          RI                   Rating                    Rating
                                      Pillar 1
RI1                    Satisfactory       Substantial
                                                               Moderately
                       Moderately
RI2                                       Modest               Satisfactory
                       Satisfactory
                                      Pillar 2
RI3                    Satisfactory       High
                                                               Moderately
                       Moderately
RI4                                       Modest               Satisfactory
                       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                         Moderately
                                      Pillar 3
                                                                                         Satisfactory
RI5                    Satisfactory       Substantial
RI6                    Satisfactory       Negligible
                                                               Unsatisfactory
                       Moderately
RI7                                       Negligible
                       Satisfactory
                                      Pillar 4
                       Moderately
RI8                                       Modest               Moderately
                       Unsatisfactory
                                                               Satisfactory
RI9                    Unsatisfactory     Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To mobilize tax revenues through enhancing the efficiency of tax collection.

               Rationale
               Outcomes. The program substantially met one of the two outcome targets for the objective to mobilize tax
               revenues.

                     Tax exemptions were reduced from 3.4 percent of GDP in 2016 (baseline) to 2.3 percent of GDP in
                      2019 (program closing date), almost fully achieving the target to reduce tax exemptions to less than
                      2.1 percent of GDP.
                     Property tax revenues increased from 0.1 percent of GDP in 2016 to 0.15 percent of GDP in 2019,
                      partially achieving the target to raise property tax revenues to 0.3 percent of GDP. Property taxes
                      remained a relatively new and small revenue source in Togo.




               Rating
               Moderately Satisfactory



               OBJECTIVE 2
               Objective
               To enhance the efficiency of public investment spending and debt management.

               Rationale
               Outcomes. The program met the two outcome targets for the objective to enhance the efficiency of public
               investment spending and debt management, albeit after a one-year delay. However, the second indicator
               (debt service-to-revenue ratio) was a weak indicator for the objective to enhance the efficiency of debt
               management.

                     The share of new public investment projects funded in the annual budget, consistent with prioritized
                      PIP based on the new manual, rose from 0 percent in 2016 to 100 percent in 2020, exceeding the
                      target of at least 75 percent, albeit after a one year delay (the target was set for 2019). PPPs had

                                                                                                                Page 14 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



       been excluded from the PIP selection process, however, contrary to the requirements of PA5. The
       ICR (pages 24-25) considered the government decision to end the practice of "pre-financing" public
       investment to be a major achievement.
      The debt service-to-revenue ratio (interest plus amortization of medium- and long-term debt) was
       reduced from 66.6 percent 2016 to 63.15 percent in 2019, missing the target to reduce the ratio to less
       than 59 percent of GDP. According to the ICR (page 17), the ratio was expected to be reduced to 58
       percent of GDP in 2020, meeting the target, albeit after a one-year delay (the target was set for
       2019). The ICR (page 25) adds the government had been able to extend debt maturity from 4.8 years
       in 2018 to 5.1 years in 2019.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the energy sector.

Rationale
Outcomes. The program substantially met one but failed to meet the other two of three outcome targets set
for the objective to strengthen financial viability and service delivery in the energy sector.

      The revenue collection rate of the CEET from the government increased from 36 percent in 2016 to
       82.86 percent in 2019, almost fully achieving the revised target of 95 percent. Arrears were eliminated
       to zero by 2019, from CFAF 49.3 billion in 2019.
      The difference between the CEET retail tariff (weighted average) plus the subsidy and the cost of
       service rose from CFA 27 per kWh in 2016 to CFAF 39 per kWh in 2019, failing to meet the target
       of CFAF 10 per kWh or lower. The difference rose rather than declined because the subsidy
       increased, reflecting higher operational costs at the CEET, according to the ICR (page 26).
      The CEET net margin dropped from 2.15 percent in 2016 to -12.26 percent in 2019, failing to meet the
       target of 2 percent. The poor performance was due to continued technical losses and unanticipated
       expenses at the CEET, according to the ICR (page 26).



Rating
Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 23
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



                  To strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the ICT sector.

                  Rationale
                  Outcomes. The program exceeded the first of the two outcome targets set for the objective to strengthen
                  financial viability and service delivery in the ICT sector. However, the indicator (number of internet users)
                  was a weak indicator for the objective. No data was available to assess the achievement of the second
                  outcome target using the original indicator (value of the ICT Development Index). However, the objective to
                  strengthen the financial viability of the ICT sector by partly privatizing the state-owned telecommunications
                  service provider was exceeded.

                        The number of internet users increased from 528,076 in 2016 to more than 3.04 million, exceeding the
                         target of at least 1 million.
                        The value of the ICT Development Index increased from 1.86 in 2016 to 2.15 in 2017. There was no
                         data available to determine whether the target for an index value of at least 2.03 by 2019 was
                         achieved. Notwithstanding the lack of data for this assessment, or even whether the availability of the
                         index data would have actually measured financial viability in the ICT sector (see Section 4), using the
                         scale of the privatization of TOGOCOM as an alternative indicator (as the ICR does, page 27), the
                         privatization by the government of 51 percent of TOGOCOM exceeded the aim for the privatization of
                         a minority share in the company.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall efficacy of the program is rated as moderately satisfactory, almost fully achieving one of the two
outcome targets for the first objective, fully achieving one of the two outcome targets for the second objective,
almost fully achieving one of three outcome targets for the third objective, and achieving one of two outcome
targets for the fourth objective.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome


                                                                                                                    Page 16 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)




Rationale

The relevance of prior actions was moderately satisfactory – the prior actions were linked to the achievement of
the program objectives in convincing or credible results chains and made major to moderate contributions to the
achievement of the objectives. The relevance of results indicators was moderately satisfactory – the results
indicators were mostly adequate to measure the impact of the prior actions on the achievement of the program
objectives, although there were attribution issues with two indicators. Most results indicators were clearly
defined, had baseline data and clear targets, and had available data for measurement, except for one. The
efficacy of the first objective to mobilize tax revenues through enhancing the efficiency of tax collection was
rated moderately satisfactory. The efficacy of the second objective to enhance the efficiency public investment
spending and debt management was rated moderately satisfactory. The efficacy of the third objective
to strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the energy and ICT sectors was rated
unsatisfactory. The efficacy of the fourth objective to strengthen the financial viability and service delivery in the
ICT sector was rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk. The successful presidential elections in February 2020, held without much disruption or
violence and with the incumbent President winning a fourth five-year term, provides a reasonably supportive
political environment to sustain the development outcome of the FMIR series. Political commitment to reform
measures supported by the FMIR appears to be solid on many fronts, according to the ICR (page 33). Tax
reforms are likely to be sustainable because they have been embedded in the legal system, including in the
General Tax Code, the Book of Tax Procedures, and the Land Code. The process for project selection has
significantly improved with the PIP becoming part of the regular three-year rolling budget. The "pre-financing" of
investment projects has been discontinued. In the privatization of TOGOCOM, the government exceeded the
original plan and privatized 51 percent in the company.

Institutional Capacity Risk. Institutional capacity risk across various agencies implementing the FMIR
reforms is a serious concern, according to the ICR (page 33). The government replaced the Director General
and the Board of Directors of the CEET in June 2020 on concern that the operational and financial performance
of the CEET had been weaker than expected. The government expects the new management to turn around
the poor performance of the CEET. Separately, the OTR appears to face "difficulties in the enforcement of tax
collection." And capital project selection by the Public Investment Committee has not been as transparent as
expected.

Macroeconomic Risk. After growing 1.8 percent in 2020, the economy is expected to recover slightly in
2021. The Bank (Global Economic Prospects, January 2021) projected a 3.4 percent GDP growth rate for 2021
while the government forecasts growth at 4.8 percent. The forecasts are subject to considerable downside risks,
however, considering that Togo remains a low-income and a debtor country. The outlook for the economy is
compounded by damage suffered by Togo in the past year, with the worsening of the COVID-19 pandemic and
the attendant global economic downturn, which, among others, cut remittances by more than 7 percent globally

                                                                                                       Page 17 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



in 2020 – Togo relies on remittances for over eight percent of GDP.

COVID-19 Risk. The COVID-19 pandemic has taken a major toll on Togo's economy. The Bank approved a
US$70 million credit from the IDA in September 2020 for the Togo Emergency COVID-19 Development Policy
Operation to: strengthen the crisis response framework for better health outcomes; mitigate the negative poverty
and social impacts of the crisis; and lay the foundations for economic recovery. The IMF allowed an immediate
disbursement of US$131.3 million (four times larger than previously foreseen) in April 2020 from the three-year
Extended Credit Facility Arrangement, originally approved in 2017 for US$239.3 million, to help Togo address
the human and economic implications of COVID-19 pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Analytical Foundations. The preparation of this program was informed by analytic work by the Bank,
including: the Togo Systematic Country Diagnostic (2016), the Togo Public Expenditure Management and
Financial Accountability Review (2016), the Technical Assistance Report on Debt Management Performance
Assessment (2016), and the Energy Sector Policy Review (2017). The program design also drew lessons from
joint analytical work by the Bank and the IMF, including: the Joint Technical Assistance Report on Public
Investment Management Assessment (2016) and the Joint Technical Assistance Report on Medium Term Debt
Strategy (2017).

Link to Other Bank Operations. The reforms supported by the programmatic series in energy and ICT were
integrated with the objectives of other Bank operations in Togo in these sectors. In particular, two projects led
to, or supported, the reforms promoted by the FMIR series.

      The Togo Energy Support and Investment Project, approved in 2017, aimed to improve the operational
       performance of the power sector and increase access to electricity in Lomé. This project expanded the
       electricity network in the capital and encouraged improvements in the operations of the CEET.
      The Second Phase of West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Program, approved in 2013,
       aimed to increase the geographical reach of broadband networks and to reduce costs of communications
       services in Togo (and Mauritania). This project would build up the ICT infrastructure for Togo. Using this
       physical infrastructure, the FMIR series would promote measures that would enhance access to ICT
       services.


Risk Identification and Mitigation. The Bank identified three risks to the program as either substantial or high
(under both FMIR1 and FMIR2) and proposed mitigation measures. The analysis by the Bank of the ex-
ante risks were thoughtful and detailed, and the mitigation measures appear to have been appropriate to the
nature and severity of the risks.

      Political and governance risk was considered high because of the "unstable" political and security
       situation. The Bank suitably recommended that the government strengthen its dialogue and

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



       communication program to convince stakeholders, vested interests, and the general population of the
       urgency of the reforms supported by the program.
      Macroeconomic risk arose principally from the high level of public debt. To mitigate the risk, the Bank
       urged the country's development partners to continue supporting the government's policy and structural
       reform program focused. The Bank's advice appeared to have been well coordinated with that of the
       IMF. Togo was implementing an Extended Credit Facility arrangement n 2017-2020 which included,
       among its quantitative performance criteria, periodic targets for the domestic primary fiscal balance,
       government guaranteeing of domestic loans, and net domestic arrears accumulation.
      Institutional capacity risk was widespread across agencies. Similarly, the Bank's analysis of this risk was
       highly detailed, citing the fragility of the state, the highly centralized structure of governance, and the
       government's poor performance record. For its part, the Bank committed continued technical assistance
       to the government, including through the Economic Governance Project, to strengthen the capacity of
       key institutions and to help address gaps in the government's ability to deliver public services.


Stakeholder Consultation. The Program Documents indicated that consultations with stakeholders of the
FMIR series were done within the context of consultations in the preparation of the Bank's Togo Systematic
Country Diagnostic and Togo Country Partnership Framework and the government's National Development
Plan.

Development Partners Coordination. The Bank collaborated with the IMF and the European Union on the
fiscal reform program supported by the FMIR series. The Bank also collaborated with the Millennium Challenge
Corporation, the foreign aid agency of the U.S. government, on reforms in the ICT sector.

      The fiscal reform measures included in this programmatic series and those supported by the IMF under
         the three-year ECF arrangement approved in May 2017 were coordinated.
        Separately, the African Regional Technical Assistance Centre in West Africa (AFRITAC), a collaboration
         between the IMF and several bilateral and multilateral partners, helped prepare the new investment
         manual to guide the selection of projects for the Public Investment Plan.
        The Bank linked the actions simplifying Togo's tax system (PA2) to the fiscal directives of the West
         African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU).
        The IDA and the European Union jointly financed the Economic Governance Project, approved
         in October 2017, that committed to support the implementation of the Pillar 1 reforms of the FMIR series.
         The project provided technical assistance to the government to improve domestic revenue
         mobilization, public investment management, and public accountability and monitoring mechanisms for
         improved service delivery in priority sectors.
        The Bank and the Millennium Challenge Corporation cooperated to support reforms in Togo's ICT
         sector.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



Rationale

Monitoring. According to the ICR (page 33), the Bank closely monitored progress with the FMIR
reforms and assisted the government to monitor the results indicators.

Adaptation. In the transition from FMIR1 to FMIR2, the Bank adjusted the triggers for the second operation in
view of either changed conditions or for the purpose of defining more specific prior actions.

      The trigger regarding simplifying the tax system was revised to become the PA2. The change was
         justified.
        The trigger regarding broadening the tax base was revised to become PA3. The change was
         justified. The prior action was highly specific as to the transfer of the cadastre to the Revenue
         Authority. Moreover, the harmonization of the tax and customs databases had been implemented by the
         government before the approval of this program..
        The trigger regarding strengthening medium term investment planning was revised to become PA6. This
         change was necessary because the 2019 Budget Act had not been enacted at the time of program
         approval.
        The trigger regarding the use and payment of electricity was revised to become PAs 11 and 12.
        The trigger regarding improving electricity sector planning and governance was dropped to become
         PA13.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The overall performance of the Bank is rated as moderately satisfactory. Bank performance in the
design/preparation stage was moderately satisfactory. The prior actions were informed by Bank and IMF
analytic work, integrated with other Bank operations in Togo, and aligned with the implementation capacity of the
national authorities. The Bank identified the ex-ante risks to the implementation of the program, and proposed
mitigation measures. Bank performance at implementation was moderately satisfactory. The Bank provided
technical assistance to the government and contributed to capacity building for fiscal, energy and ICR sector
reforms. It coordinated with the IMF, the RTAC, the WAEMU and the EU on the fiscal reform program, and with
the Millennium Challenge Corporation on reforms in the ICT sector. It adapted the triggers for use as prior
actions for DPF2. And it helped the Ministry of Economy and Finance with monitoring the results of the reforms.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not present any evidence or measure of the social and poverty impact of this operation. The ICR
(page 29) argued, however, that reform measures supported by this project would have led, or would lead, to
positive social and poverty impacts, as cited ex-ante in the Program Documents for FMIR1 (page 26-28) and
FMIR2 (pages 26-28), including: increased fiscal space for social spending; improved access by poorer
households to land tiles and hence to mortgages; improved access by the poor to more reliable and less costly
electricity services; and improved access by enterprises to ICT services, with positive effects on employment
prospects, including for the poor.



b. Environmental

According to the ICR (page 29), the program had no negative environmental effects, but had some potential
positive environmental effects. Improvements in the efficiency of the CEET would have cut the use of carbon
fuel sources, with beneficial climate impacts. Increased imports of energy from Nigeria and Ghana inferred that
a greater share of Togo’s power was generated from hydropower. The use of natural gas also helped substitute
for heavy fuel oils. The ICR did not present any quantitative measure of these impacts (for example, the amount
of carbon emissions reduced).



c. Gender

According to the ICR (page 29), the new General Tax Code would have positive gender effects, Articles 5 and
6 of the new General Tax Code would hence recognize a woman as the head of a household and treat the
woman head of household in the same manner as the male head of household. In addition, a one-stop shop
was created to serve women entrepreneurs, tasked with facilitating the process by which women entrepreneurs
obtained tax services and tax information that would facilitate their participation in public procurement.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presents a succinct and results-focused record of the project. The discussion of the predecessor and
related programs, both of the Bank and other development partners, is instructive, both of the context of the prior
actions supported by this programmatic series and the next generation of reforms needed to advance the
program objectives.


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



The assessment of efficacy in pages 23-28 is candid. On revenue mobilization, the political crisis in 2017
delayed the implementation of the land census, and property tax collection remains negligible. On public
investment management, the scrutiny of capital projects for the PIP was delayed past the 2019 budget deadline,
and PPPs were not included in the review process. In the energy sector, the electricity subsidy increased
because of higher operational costs at CEET, and the tariff adjustment is proving politically difficult.

The assessment of results indicators in Table 4 and Annex 1 is confusing. Five of the results indicators that
were dropped during the appraisal of FMIR2 are still included in these tables and judged as having been fully,
partially, or not met.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Extensive and continuous country dialogue is vital to deepening reforms supported by development
policy operations. In this programmatic series, the Bank continued its dialogue on ICT reform with the country
authorities even as it seemed uncertain the government would pursue the reforms or that the reforms would be
significant. The ICR (page 35) credits the high-policy dialogue with the Ministry of Economy and Finance and
the Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport for the government exceeding the target to sell a minority share to a
private investor. The government eventually sold a 51 percent share in TOGOCOM to Agou Holding, a decision
that is expected to accelerate the development of the ICT sector through foreign investment.

Long-term and sustained technical assistance is critical in development policy operations where
institutional capacity building is a vital focus of structural reforms. In many cases, short-term ad-hoc
technical assistance, while helpful for particular tasks, does not yield maximal capacity building results. In this
programmatic series, technical assistance was provided to the Ministry of Economy and Finance to help craft the
new Medium-Term Debt Management Strategy. But according to the ICR, more sustained technical assistance
is needed to strengthen the capacity of the agency to implement various elements of the strategy including
targeting a desired composition of the government debt portfolio, quantifying and managing the cost-
risk tradeoffs embedded in the debt portfolio, and understanding and communicating to stakeholders the

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Togo Fiscal Reform Credit (P159844)



linkages of the debt strategy with the macroeconomic framework. Similarly, while technical assistance was
provided in the preparation of the new manual to guide the selection of capital projects for the Public Investment
Plan, more sustained technical assistance is needed to build the capacity of the Public Investment Committee to
conduct medium-term investment planning and budgeting, both in a technically proficient and reasonably
transparent manner, according to the ICR.

While international diagnostic and performance indicators convey useful information, development
policy operations must be discriminating in using these as results indicators for highly specific program
objectives. In this programmatic series, the rating for public investment spending efficiency on the Public
Investment Management Assessment (PIMA) and the score on the ICT Development Index were not available to
measure the results of reforms advanced in public investment management and in the ICT sector
respectively. The PIMA ratings could not be updated in time, and the ICT Development Index was not published
in 2018 and 2019. Beyond questions over data availability, program planners should assess whether these
broad performance indicators are appropriate to measure the results of very specific development policy
actions. Togo's composite score on the 11-indicator index on ICT readiness (infrastructure and access), ICT
use (intensity), and ICT capability (skills), produced by the ITU, would have been an overly broad measure of
progress on the specific objective to strengthen financial viability in the ICT sector. An indicator measuring the
financial standing and performance of TOGOCOM, the lead enterprise in the telecommunications market, would
have been a more suitable and direct measure of financial viability.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 23
