     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022398

1. Program Information



 Country                                        Practice Area (Lead)
 Serbia                                         Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                              Approved Operations
 2                                               2

 Operation ID                                    Operation Name
 P155694                                         Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1




 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-86940                                     31-Mar-2018                                        207,515,267.85

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Jan-2017                                    31-Mar-2018
                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                                 200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                  200,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                              207,515,267.85                                            0.00




P161184_TBL
 Country                                        Practice Area (Lead)
 Serbia                                         Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                                   Operation Name
 P161184                                        Public Exp. & Public Utilities DPL2 ( P161184 )




                                                                                                      Page 1 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)                Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-86940,IBRD-88310                                                                              182547856.98

  Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
  20-Mar-2018

                                                 IBRD/IDA (USD)                            Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                              200,000,000.00                                              0.00

  Revised Commitment                               200,000,000.00                                              0.00

  Actual                                           182,547,856.98                                              0.00



 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Zeljko Bogetic                Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The PEPU-DPL Series had the following objectives: (A) Improve public expenditure management through
strengthened public financial management and public administration reform; (B) Improve the financial
sustainability and efficiency of energy sector public enterprises; and, (C) Improve the financial sustainability and
efficiency of transport sector public enterprises and state-owned companies. (PD DPL1, 2016, pp.1-2; and PD
DPL2. 2018, pp. 1-3).

For the purpose of this Review, we have unpacked these into four objectives:

        Objective One: Strengthen public financial management to improve public expenditure management;
        Objective Two: Public administration reform to improve public expenditure management;
        Objective Three: Improve financial sustainability and efficiency of energy sector public enterprises; and,
        Objective Four: Improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of transport sector public enterprises
         and state-owned companies.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The PEPU-DPL Series was structured around four pillars/policy areas that were identical to the four objectives
above.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



Pillar I had two prior actions (PD, DPL1, Table Annex 1, p.38; and PD, DPL2, p. 13).

      PA #1 (DPL1): The Ministry of Finance adopted the framework for monitoring the implementation of the
       Law on Deadlines for Payments in Commercial Transactions, which has been revised to include public-
       public transactions, including those of state-owned enterprises.
      PA #2 (DPL2): The Borrower has: (a) issued the Decree on Work and Role of Budget Inspection, to
       strengthen the budget inspection supervision and enforcement function. (b) adopted the Public Internal
       Financial Control (PIFC) Strategy and its associated action plan, to provide a framework for planned
       future developments of financial management and control and internal audit functions; and (c) through its
       Ministry of Finance, amended the Rulebook on the Budget Execution System, in order to ensure that
       accurate, complete and up-to-date information on budget commitments are available at the time when
       budget commitments are incurred.

Pillar II had three prior actions (PD, DPL1, Table Annex 1, p.38; and PD, DPL2, pp. 15-16).

      PA #3 (DPL1): Borrower adopted the Law on the Ceiling on Public Sector Employees setting the criteria
       of determining the maximum number of employees in the public sector, from 2015 to 2018, as well as the
       scope and limits for reducing their number in order to achieve the established said maximum; and (b)
       established, as required by said law, the first institution-level limits on the number of employees in the
       public sector.
      PA #4 (DPL1): The Borrower adopted the Law on the Salary System of Public Sector Employees to
       rationalize the public sector pay structure.
      PA #5 (DPL2): The Borrower has: (a) amended the Law on Public Sector Employees Salary System. (b)
       enacted the Law on Employees in Public Services; and (c) enacted the Law on Salaries of Employees in
       Bodies of Local Sub-Government Units and Provincial Authorities, all with the objective to provide the
       legal framework for the mapping of positions between the Public Sector Jobs Catalogue and the new pay
       grades set forth in the Law on Public Sector Employees Salary System.

Pillar III had five prior actions (PD, DPL1, Table Annex 1, p.39; and PD, DPL2, p. 19-21).

      PA #6 (DPL1): The Borrower: (a) through its Council of the Energy Agency, approved a 3.8 percent
       increase of the electricity tariff for guaranteed supply; (b) amended the Energy Vulnerable Customers
       Program to increase coverage of targeted beneficiaries; and, (c) increased the budget for said program.
      PA #7 (DPL2): The Borrower, through the Council of the Energy Agency, has approved an increase of
       the electricity tariff for guaranteed electricity supply in calendar year 2017 and continued to protect
       vulnerable households from such electricity tariff increase by increasing the number of beneficiaries of
       the Energy Vulnerable Customers Program in calendar year 2017 compared to calendar year 2016.
      PA #8 (DPL1): The Borrower, through the Supervisory Board of Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS) (state-
       owned electricity company): (a) adopted a labor optimization plan for 2016-2019 setting out the medium-
       term targets, process, compensation packages, selection criteria, grievance mechanisms and timeline for
       reductions in staffing; and (b) issued the first call for voluntary separations to implement the 2016 target
       for net staff reduction.
      PA #9 (DPL2): The Borrower, through the Supervisory Board of Elektroprivreda Srbije (EPS) has: (a)
       updated the labor optimization plan for calendar year 2017, including annual targets, compensation
       packages, eligible categories, selection criteria, and grievance mechanisms for EPS; and (b) issued the
       second call for voluntary separations.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



      PA #10 (DPL1): The Borrower adopted a financial consolidation plan for Srbijagas (state-owned gas
         company) that defines measures to increase revenues and reduce costs.

Pillar IV had five prior actions (PD, DPL1, Table Annex 1, p.40; PD, DPL2, pp. 25-27).

      PA #11 (DPL1): The Borrower: (a) implemented a new framework for railways financing through
         conclusion of the track access contracts between the state-owned infrastructure rail company and the
         state-owned freight and passenger rail companies and approving a public service obligation agreement;
         and (b) adopted new performance criteria for the state-owned infrastructure, freight and passenger rail
         companies.
        PA#12 (DPL1): The Borrower: (a) through the Decisions of the General Assemblies of the respective
         railway companies, adopted labor optimization plans for 2016-2020 setting out the medium-term targets,
         process, compensation packages, selection criteria, grievance mechanisms and timeline for reductions in
         staffing; and (b) through the management of the respective railways companies, initiated the 2016 target
         for staff reduction by communicating to the companies’ respective employees the option for their
         participation.
        PA #13 (DPL2): The Borrower, through each Railway Company has a) updated its labor optimization plan
         for calendar year 2017, including the annual targets, eligibility criteria, compensation packages, and
         grievance mechanisms; and (b) achieved the targets for calendar year 2017 set forth in said labor
         optimization plan.
        PA #14 (DPL2): The Borrower: (a) implemented a new framework for railways financing through
         conclusion of the track access contracts between the state-owned infrastructure rail company and the
         state-owned freight and passenger rail companies and approving a public service obligation agreement;
         and (b) adopted new performance criteria for the state-owned infrastructure, freight and passenger rail
         companies.
        PA #15 (DPL2): The Borrower, through PERS, has prepared and approved a framework for a service
         level agreement to be entered with MCTI, for purposes of a) defining the performance standards for
         different road classes, based on pavement conditions, operational standards, and safety;(b) require the
         Borrower, through MCTI to provide an agreed financing for roads to achieve the agreed performance
         standards; and (c) holding PERS accountable for agreed performance standards.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The PEPU-DPL Programmatic Series consisted of two IBRD loan operations: DPL1, which was approved for
USD 200 million, disbursed USD 207.5 million; and DPL2, which was also approved for USD 200 million but
disbursed USD 182.5 million. Differences between approved and disbursed amounts were due to changes in
the USD/EUR exchange rate.

DPL1 was approved on January 18, 2017 and became effective on May 29, 2017 and closed on March 31,
2018 as originally scheduled. DPL2 was approved on March 20, 2018 and became effective on July 10, 2018,
and closed on August 30, 2019, as originally scheduled.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)




The objectives were highly relevant to country conditions, the government’s strategy and the Bank-supported
country strategy at appraisal and closing.

The country was facing a mounting fiscal and debt crisis. After a long period of stop-and-go reform in 2014, a
new government was elected in part on a platform to implement major fiscal consolidation and to reverse
adverse debt dynamics. It also aimed to initiate structural reforms to improve the efficiency of large state-
owned enterprises . Public debt had reached almost 76 percent of GDP at end-2015, more than a 30-
percentage point increase since 2010, reflecting unsustainable increases in public sector wages and
pensions and direct and indirect subsidies to overstaffed, inefficient, loss-making state-owned enterprises
(SOEs). The government agreed with the IMF on a Stand-By Arrangement and began implementing difficult
fiscal consolidation. By 2016, the fiscal deficit was reduced to 1.2 percent of GDP (from 6.7 in 2014 and 3.5 in
2015) and public debt began to decline but there remained a large fiscal and SOE reform agenda.

The objectives dovetailed with the government’s National Economic Reform Program and the Fiscal Strategy
for 2016-18, which emphasized medium-term fiscal consolidation and a reduction of public debt to below 50
percent of GDP. Building on short-term improvement in the control of the wage bill in 2015, which saw a
reduction in public sector wages and freeze on government employment, the Strategy outlined further
ambitious fiscal reforms that included restructuring of large SOEs, rationalizing their employment, and
strengthening their financial positions. Both government strategies were anchored in the EU membership
accession process. Finally, the PEPU-DPL Series’ objectives aimed to contribute to the first focus area of the
Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 2016-2020 on economic governance and
the role of the state. The Series directly supported CPF objectives on sustainable management of public
spending, effective public administration and improved service delivery; efficient and sustainable public power
sector and transport companies. CPF focus areas and objectives reflected Systematic Country Diagnostic’s
identified constraints, which included fiscal sustainability and financial and overall macro stability,
strengthening government capacity and institutions, and SOE reform.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The theory of change was credible with prior actions clearly linked to and expected to contribute to
the objectives. Assumptions behind prior actions appear sound; electricity tariff adjustment was expected to
lead to higher revenues to improve the financial position of the electricity company. The poverty impact of
this action was appropriately mitigated by the expansion of a relevant social protection program. By limiting
the future fiscal and quasi-fiscal transfers to the energy companies, the reforms helped increase fiscal space
that could be used to increase social spending and productive public investments. Similarly, prior actions on
a new framework for financing railways and performance standards, in conjunction with other
actions, contributed to improving financial performance of railways, limiting fiscal risks to the budget.

Prior actions

Pillar I – Strengthen public financial management to improve public expenditure management

PA #1 (DPL1) addressed the long-standing and politically difficult public-public arrears problem, which
undermined fiscal and financial discipline and the quality of PFM. It was a difficult measure to adopt and it

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



potentially had a large impact on the objective of strengthening public financial management to improve
expenditure management. The prior action aimed to contribute to the objective of improving public financial
management and expenditure management by limiting fiscal risks from these arrears to the budget,
improving aggregate fiscal discipline and public resource allocation as well as public service delivery in public
administration, energy and transport sectors. This prior action contributed to this objective through the
implementation of the amended Law Deadlines for Payments in Commercial Transactions (“RINO Law”),
specifically through the adoption of the monitoring framework. (Relevance of PA #1: HS).

PA #2 (DPL2) expanded the monitoring framework for arrears by focusing on lagging elements of the public
financial management system. The arrears problem was multifaceted and required not only a
monitoring framework but also strengthening of government capacity and supporting mechanisms for
monitoring and management of arrears through better supervision and financial management controls, and
tighter requirements to register arrears. (Relevance of PA #2: HS). The relevance of the prior actions under
the Pillar I is judged to be highly satisfactory.

Pillar II -- Public administration reform to improve public expenditure management

PA#3 (DPL1) aimed to address poor management of public employment and the public sector wage bill
to support long-term fiscal consolidation and efficiency of the public sector. The lack of effective control on
employment and wages led to a rising public sector wage bill, undermining efforts for fiscal consolidation. To
address it, the Law on Ceiling on Public Sector Employees was enacted to provide staffing ceilings for
individual government institutions. (Relevance of PA3: S).

PA#4 (DPL1) streamlined the legislative framework for public sector pay and employment. Serbia’s
previous system of public sector pay and employment was excessively complex, with “71 different elements
of
remuneration, 16 different base salaries, 900 job coefficients and more than 2,200 job titles.” The adoption
of the umbrella Law on the Salary System of Public Sector Employees rationalized the public sector pay
structure. A single spine pay system was expected to improve transparency, equity, predictability, and control
by ensuring that equal positions across different occupations are paid equal wages. The prior action
targeted an important fiscal challenge and its contribution to the public administration reform was expected to
be significant. (Relevance of PA#4: S).

PA#5 (DPL2) moved these reforms further along the results chain by supporting amendments to the Law
on the Salary System of Public Sector Employees and enactment of two laws on employment in public
services and subnational governments, which helped establish an effective pay grading system within a
unified legal framework (Relevance of PA#5: S). The relevance of prior actions under the Pillar II are judged
to be satisfactory.

Pillar III -- Financial sustainability and efficiency of energy sector public enterprises

PA#6 (DPL1) addresses the underpricing of electricity, which was at the root of financial losses of the state
electricity company EPS. Without tariff adjustments, no improvement in the financial position of the EPS was
possible. This was part of the EPS medium-term financial consolidation plan and contributed to limiting fiscal
risks to the budget from EPS's inability to service state guarantee loans, which were a significant contingent
liability for the budget. The action allowed EPS to cover 95 percent of operating costs; as such, it could be
expected to significantly improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of EPS. To cushion the impact on
the poor, the action doubled the budget allocation for targeted social assistance, expanded targeted


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



households from 60,600 to 80,500, and increased coverage of poor households under the Energy Vulnerable
Customers (EVC) Program. The increase in tariff was critical to addressing the poor financial performance of
EPS and the EVC measure addressed its impact on the poor. (Relevance of PA#6: HS).

PA#7 (DPL2) extended the measures from PA#6 to 2017: tariff increased was approved for 2017 calendar
year and it further increased coverage of targeted beneficiaries for the protection of the poor in 2017. The
value added was that tariff increases would be approved on an annual basis. In this case, the social element
of tariff increases—enhanced coverage of vulnerable households—was also extended. (Relevance of PA#7:
S).

PA#8 (DPL1) directly addressed overstaffing and the adequacy of the EPS workforce, the other critical
component of EPS restructuring and financial consolidation. EPS had a significant surplus of employees
when benchmarked with similar companies in the region. It was estimated that 15 percent of its workforce
was redundant (PD, DPL1, p.20). The action ensured that EPS Supervisory Board: (a) adopted a
labor optimization plan for 2016-2019 setting out medium-term targets, processes, compensation packages,
selection criteria, grievance mechanisms and a timeline for reductions in staffing; and, (b) issued the first call
for voluntary separations to implement the 2016 target for net staff reductions. The plan featured a
combination of natural attrition and voluntary reduction of employment with incentives and involuntary
separation with severance pay in a subsequent stage. (Relevance of PA#8: S).

PA #9 (DPL2) extended the EPS labor optimization measures of PA#8 to calendar year 2017, also setting
annual targets, compensation packages, eligible categories, selection criteria, and grievance mechanisms for
EPS; and issued the second call for voluntary separations. While the PA#8 resulted in the adoption of the
medium-term optimization plan and started the call for voluntary separations, this needed to be followed by
annual actions. (Relevance of PA#9: S).

PA#10 (DPL1) targeted the financial turnaround and financial sustainability and efficiency of the other
large energy company, Srbijagas (state natural gas company), which was among the largest loss -makers in
the country with short-term liabilities to the government of about 3.3 percent of government revenues in 2015.
The underlying problems were multiple: lack of financial discipline and low collection, excessive debt, and
weak internal controls, among others (PD, DPL1, p.22, paragraphs 56-57). The prior action targeted adoption
of a comprehensive financial consolidation plan for Srbijagas that defined measures to increase revenues
and reduce costs on a sustainable basis. (Relevance of #PA: S).The relevance of prior actions under Pillar III
is judged to be satisfactory.

Pillar IV -- Financial sustainability and efficiency of transport sector public enterprises and
stateowned companies

PA #11 (DPL1) targeted the Railways company’s poor financial performance underpinned by low labor
productivity and traffic intensity, overstaffing, and overdue investment in upgrading the network; these issues
also reflected lack of clarity about track access and performance criteria for both freight and passenger rail
companies. This action had the government implement a new framework for railways financing through
conclusion of the track access contracts between the state-owned infrastructure rail company and the
stateowned freight and passenger rail companies and approve a public service obligation agreement; and
adopt new performance criteria for the state-owned infrastructure, freight and passenger rail companies.
(relevance of PA#11: S).




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



 PA#12 (DPL1) sought to address overstaffing and arbitrariness in employment practices of the
 Railways company. The action sought to adopt (a) labor optimization plans for 2016-2020 with medium-term
 targets, process, compensation packages, selection criteria, grievance mechanisms and timeline for
 reductions in staffing; and (b) initiate the 2016 target for staff reduction by communicating to the companies’
 respective employees the option for their participation. The action, if implemented, was expected to lead to a
 30 percent reduction in staffing by 2020 compared with 2014 (PD, DPL1, p.26, paragraph 67). (Relevance of
 PA#12: S).

 PA #13 (DPL2) extended the PA#12 which was the adoption of the medium-term optimization plan by
 updating the Railways company’s labor optimization plan for 2017, including the annual targets, eligibility
 criteria, compensation packages, and grievance mechanisms; and by achieving the targets for 2017 set forth
 in the plan. Each year, the annual plan must be updated in view of actual progress with implementation.
 (Relevance of PA#13: S).

 PA #14 (DPL2) aimed to support the restructuring of the Railways via new contractual framework for railway
 operating companies through track access charges and public service obligation for the infrastructure
 and passenger railway companies respectively. This was an important component of reform because these
 obligations helped the government limit budgetary financing to the companies. (Relevance of PA#14: S).

 PA #15 (DPL2) was targeting improvements in the policy framework for company Putevi Srbije that
 manages national road and tolled motorway network. The budget was providing substantial transfers to the
 company without clear and monitorable service agreements and standards. The action approved a
 framework for a service-level agreement to be entered into with the Ministry of Construction, Transportation
 and Infrastructure (MCTI) for purposes of a) defining the performance standards for different road classes;(b)
 requiring the Borrower, through MCTI to provide agreed financing to achieve the agreed performance
 standards; and (c) holding PERS accountable for agreed performance standards. The results chain was
 relatively clear but required a number of actions for it to contribute to the improvement in the financial position
 of the road company, including that newly defined standards are implemented as verified by appropriate
 checks or audits and the financing is used in line with allocations. (Relevance of PA#5: MS).

 The relevance of prior actions under Pillar IV is judged to be satisfactory.

 With the relevance of prior actions under the first pillar highly satisfactory, under the second, third and fourth
 pillar satisfactory, overall rating for relevance of prior actions is satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Description of RIs by Pillar, the PAs they support, baseline and target values, and status




                                                                                                        Page 8 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



                                                                                          Status (If the RI has been
                                                                                           dropped prior to the final
       RI (number and
                                     Associated PA                  Baseline/target       approved operation in the
          description)
                                                                                           series, note “Dropped” in
                                                                                               place of “actual”)
Pillar 1: Improved public expenditure management through strengthened public financial management
RI1: share of executed
payments for public-to
public commercial
                                                            Baseline (2015): 60 percent       Actual (2019): 95.4
transactions which were
                                       PA1, PA2
previously registered as
                                                             Target (2018): 90 percent        Actual (2018): 95.8
commitments within
deadlines prescribed by
legislation
R2: number of employees
in the public sector, as
determined by the Law                                         Baseline (2015): exceed
on the Ceiling on Public                                                 limit
                                                                                            Actual (2018): does not
Sector Employees, does                    PA3
                                                                                                  exceed limit
not exceed the total of                                        Target (2018): does not
institutional-level limits set                                        exceed limit
under the Law and its
decisions
R3: share of positions
within education, health
                                                              Baseline (2015): 0 Target
and social protection               PA3, PA4, PA5                                          Actual (2018): 0 percent
                                                                  (2018): 75 percent
sectors mapped to new
grades
Pillar 3: Improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of energy sector public enterprises
R4: convergence of the
                                                              Baseline (end-2015): 64
guaranteed electricity
                                                               percent of market parity Actual (2019): 77.3 percent
                                       PA6, PA7
supply tariff to reach
                                                                Target (end-2018): 80    Actual (2018): 55.8 percent
                                                               percent of market parity
market parity level
                                                              Baseline (2014): 60,000
                                                              households, of which 27
                                                                 percent were female
                                                                                             Actual (2018): 76,604
      R5: number of total                                               headed
                                                                                           households, of which 53
 beneficiaries of the Energy                PA6, PA7
                                                                                            percent female headed
     Vulnerable Program                                         Target (2018): 70,000
                                                                                                  households
                                                              households, of which 30
                                                                 percent were female
                                                                 headed households
RI6: increase in the share           A7, PA8, PA9             Baseline (2015): 0 Target Actual (2019): 4.2 percent
of the EPS workforce with                                          (2018): 5 percent


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



education above secondary                                                                Actual (2018): 3.4 percent
level


                                                           Baseline (2015): 80 percent Actual (2019): 91.8 Actual
RI7: Srbijagas’ collection
                                         PA10               Target (average for 2016-    (2018): 92.3 percent
rate of current receivables
                                                                 18): 87 percent.         (average 2016- 18)
RI8: Approval of 10-year
development plan of the
Gas Transport Operator
and 5-year development
plan of the Distribution                                     Baseline (2016): No Target
                                         PA10                                                  Actual (2018): No
System Operator, which                                                (2018): Yes
were in accordance with
the adopted economic and
financial appraisal
methodology
Pillar 4: Improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of transport sector public enterprises
                                                             Baseline (2015): RSD 13.5 Actual (2019): RSD 13.04
RI9: level of annual direct                                              billion                      billion.
budget operational support               PA14
to the Railways Companies                                      Target (2018): RSD11        Actual (2018): RSD 11.29
                                                                         billion                       billion
                                                                                            Actual (2019): 80 (labor
RI10: labor productivity                                                                    productivity), 10 percent
(measured by train                                                                          (cargo), and 15 percent
                                                                Baseline (2015): zero
kilometers per employee)                                                                        (track utilization).
and in asset utilization              PA11, PA14
                                                             Target (2018): 15 percent
(measured by passengers                                                                     Actual (2018): 19 (labor
                                                                 (for both indicators)
per kilometer of track and                                                                  productivity), 27 percent
ton per kilometer of track)                                                                  (cargo), and 3 percent
                                                                                                 (track utilization)
                                                                                           Actual (2019): 25 percent
RI11: Reduction in the                                          Baseline (2015): zero           (from 2016 base)
annual wage bill of                    PA12, 13
Railways companies                                           Target (2018): 25 percent Actual (2018): 23 percent
                                                                                                (from 2016 base)
RI12: Progress with
government in agreeing
with Putevi Srbije (Roads of                                  Baseline (2016 budget):
Serbia) on performance
                                         PA15                                                  Actual (2018): No
levels for the different road                                 No Target (2019 budget):
classes with associated                                                   Yes
guaranteed funding levels
committed



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)




Rationale

Indicators under Pillar 1

RI1 was clearly stated and outcome oriented, with clear baseline and target and directly related to the objective
of strengthening PEM and PFM.

It was also impacted by PA #1 and #2 on payment arrears. While this was only one indicator measuring
progress in this area, it was important and relevant given the pervasive problem of arrears. (Relevance of
RI1=S).

The relevance of Results Indicator measuring achievement of Pillar I is judged to be satisfactory.

Indicators under Pillar 2

RI2 is a clearly measured achievement of PA #3 establishing the ceiling on public sector employees. It was
linked in a clear results chain from the objective two on public administration reform via prior action #3 to RI2,
which is in turn is the same as DLI3 in the parallel operation, the Modernization and Optimization of Public
Administration Program for Results (PforR). (Relevance of RI2: S).

RI3 was somewhat revised under DPL2, moving the emphasis from paid wages to mapping of positions to new
pay grade system). RI3 is linked to the PA#3, PA#4, and PA#5, and objective two. The revised indicator and
target were similar to and incentivized by DLI1 in the PforR (Relevance RI3: S).

The relevance of Results Indicator measuring achievement of Pillar II is judged to be satisfactory.

Indicators under Pillar 3

RI4 was conceptually linked with PA#6 and PA#7. However, “market parity levels” were not uniquely defined and
subject to interpretation. A quantitative target measuring cost recovery, for example, would have been less
ambiguous than market parity. This was a weakness in the definition and design of this indicator, as also noted
in the ICR. (Relevance of RI4: MS).

RI5: The target for 2018 was revised down under DPL2 to 70,000 households, of which 30 percent were female
headed households. It measured well the impact of PA#6 and #7 that sought to cushion the impact on the poor
of increases in electricity prices by expanding the social protection program for vulnerable households. It also
measures well the progress towards the achievement of objective 3. Definition of RI5 is clear and data on
vulnerable households available. Relevance of RI5: S).

RI6 was revised under DPL2 from the original reduction in annual EPS wage bill relative to 2014 from baseline
zero to 10 percent in 2018. RI6 aimed to measure the impact of PA#7 and PA#8 establishing and implementing
labor optimization plan to reduce substantial excess employment in EPS. Part of the optimization plan also dealt
with the adequacy of the workforce but this was not the primary aim of the PAs 6-7. In that regard, RI6 does not
measure the impact on EPS employment or wage bill. It does not directly measure progress towards
strengthening financial sustainability and efficiency of EPS. In that regard, the original formulation of RI6 was
more relevant than the revised version. (Relevance of RI6: MU).



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



RI7: This indicator measured adequately the impact of PA# 10 on the adoption of the financial consolidation plan
of Srbijagas with respect to collection of revenues. It is recognized as an important step towards actual
strengthening of financial position of the company. However, it does not fully measure the impact on cost,
pastdue receivables, nor improving the company’s overall financial position. In that regard, the indicator is partial
and an intermediate outcome sought by the action. Also, it measures only one dimension of progress towards
objective 3 with respect to the financial sustainability and efficiency of the company. The indicator is clearly
defined. (Relevance of RI7: MS).

RI8 measures an input. Its measurement of the impact of the financial consolidation plan of Srbijagas is indirect
and ambiguous. It is unclear how much it measures progress towards the objective 3 of strengthening financial
sustainability of energy companies. On the other hand, it does show a link with unbundling of distribution
systems and modernization of the company, which could lead to lower distribution losses. (Relevance of RI8:
MU).

The relevance of Results Indicators measuring achievement of Pillar III is judged to be moderately satisfactory.

Indicators under Pillar 4

RI9 measured the impact of PA#14, which aimed to established new contractual framework for access to tracks
and public service obligations that would allow rationalizing of the budget support. Performance criteria for these
enterprises were also adopted. These were structural changes expected to lead to improved financial
performance and, therefore, reduced budget support on a sustained basis. (Relevance of RI9: S).

RI10 measured improvements in labor productivity (measured by train kilometers per employee) and in asset
utilization (measured by passengers per kilometer of track and ton per kilometer of track) relative to 2015, The
indicator was well defined and measured impact of prior action (PA#14) and contributed to objective 4 in a
logical chain, leading from the improvement in labor productivity, asset utilization and passengers carried that
measured the impact of the new financing framework and performance criteria, contributing improving financial
sustainability and efficiency of the company. (Relevance of RI10: S)

RI11 aims to measure impact of PA#12. It is clearly defined with baseline and target but the indicator could have
been strengthened if it was based on data from the audited financial statements. However, such statements
were unavailable so annual financial reports of the company were used as the data source (Relevance of RI11:
S.).

RI12 is qualitative, and more in the nature of action than an indicator measuring impact of PA#15. It is unclear
the extent to which the indicator measures progress towards objective 4 of financial sustainability and efficiency
of public transport companies. (Relevance of RI12: MU).

The relevance of Results Indicators measuring achievement of Pillar IV is judged to be satisfactory.

Given the satisfactory relevance of indicators under the first and second pillars and moderately unsatisfactory
under the third, and satisfactory under the fourth pillar, overall relevance of RIs is judged satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)




   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthen public financial management to improve public expenditure management

               Supported by PAs 1- 2
               Progress measured by RIs 1.

               Rationale
               The share of executed public-to-public transactions increased strongly, exceeding the target, and laying the
               foundation for improved payment discipline and stronger public financial and public expenditure management.
               Achievement of RI1 target is rated High. As a result, the achievement of Objective 1 is judged to be Highly
               Satisfactory.



               Rating
               Highly Satisfactory



               OBJECTIVE 2
               Objective
               Public administration reform to improve public expenditure management.

               Supported by PAs 3, 4 and 5
               Progress measured by RIs 2 and 3

               Rationale
               The achievement under this objective was limited. On the positive side, the number of employees in the
               public sector, as determined by the Law on the Ceiling on Public Sector Employees, did not exceed the total
               of institutional-level limits set under the Law and its decisions, which prevented continuation of excessive
               employment in the public administration; this contributed to the preconditions for public administration reform.
               (The target for RI2 was fully achieved—High.). However, the broad intention of this reform--that public sector
               employment is matched with skills needed for efficient administration and professional requirements -- was
               not achieved in part because reduction of employment was not targeted but voluntary, due to political
               constraints. This resulted in the departure of skilled staff and the emergence of skills shortages in some parts
               of the public sector. This reform has not progressed during the pandemic (2020), which shifted government
               priorities. Both RIs were supported by similar DLIs in the PforR. (RI3 achievement was Negligible). With one
               achievement of the targets for one indicator High and one Negligible, overall achievement of this objective is
               judged to be Moderately satisfactory.


                                                                                                                 Page 13 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)




Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of energy sector public enterprises

Supported by PAs 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10
Progress measured by RIs 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8

Rationale
Objective 3 was supported by PAs targeting an increase in electricity tariffs (PA#6 and 7), employment
rationalization of EPS (PA#8 and 9), and the adoption of the financial consolidation plan by Srbijagas
(PA#10). Overall, the achievement under this objective was very limited with most indicators falling short on
achievement and some on relevance as well. The main example is that planned increase in the guaranteed
electricity supply tariffs--which was the key measure necessary for the improvement of the financial position
of the electricity company--fell short of the target (RI4 achievement was rated Modest.).

The increase in the share of the workforce of the EPS was neither achieved nor particularly relevant as it did
not adequately capture the impact of the PAs nor would its achievement be reasonably expected to contribute
to Objective 3. Moreover, recent analysis of EPS financial performance by Serbia’s fiscal watchdog agency,
Fiscal Council, indicates that overall financial performance during 2015-18 did not improve, that operating
profitability remains extremely low and that the company lacks significant resources to ensure adequate
operations and maintenance and basic investments needed to maintain the capital stock, its medium term
plan. (Fiscal Council, “Analysis of Operational Performance and Recommendations for Reform and
Investments,” 14, 2019). Achievement of RI7 is judged Negligible.

The collection rate of the Serbiagas did increase, exceeding the target but this indicator did not adequately
capture the impact of the PA nor overall improvement in financial sustainability and efficiency of the company.
Exogenous factors, including falling natural gas prices during the period 2015-19, might have also provided
incentives for commercial and household customers to increase their payments and, therefore, collection
rates. Therefore, it is not clear that the improvement in the collection rate can be fully, or even partially,
attributed to the internal improvement in efficiency of collection, which could then contribute to the overall
efficiency sought by the Objective 3. For these reasons, despite nominal achievement, this indicator is judged
Modest.

The approval of development plans were neither particularly relevant, nor were they achieved. Plans alone do
not imply an improvement in the financial sustainability nor gains in efficiency as sought by the Objective 3.
This Review judges achievement of this indicator as Negligible.

By contrast, one achievement under this objective was substantial increase in the beneficiaries of the Energy
Vulnerable Program. While neither the associated prior action nor this reform and the associated indicator
directly contributed to the objective of strengthening of financial sustainability and efficiency of EPS, it did so

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



indirectly. By providing subsidies to vulnerable population, it makes the increases in tariffs more socially
sustainable over the long term. Also, the indicator explicitly took into account gender dimension of “electricity
vulnerability” because female headed households were particularly vulnerable as noted by the
Poverty/Social Analysis. Notably, 31.9 percent of households in Serbia are headed by a female. In addition,
female-headed households spent a much larger share of expenditure on energy (13.2 percent) than male-
headed households (11.3 percent) (PD, DPL1, Annex 4, P. 53, 57).).Taking into account the strong relevance
and design of this indicator to measure the impact of the prior action, the achievement of RI5 target is judged
High.

Overall, with only one indicator High, two Modest and two Negligible, the achievement of this objective is
considered Moderately satisfactory.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve financial sustainability and efficiency of transport sector public enterprises and stateowned
companies

Supported by PA# 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15
Results Indicators: 9, 10, 11, and 12

Rationale
Actions under this objective substantially contributed to the its achievement. For example, the government
reduced budgetary support to transport companies, hardening their budget constraint and laying the
foundation for improved financial management and financial sustainability of the companies. Achievement of
Target is judged Substantial.

It is also notable that important indicators of labor productivity and cargo were exceeded albeit not for asset
utilization of passenger rail. These indicators well measured the impact of the corresponding PA and progress
to Objective. Achievement was judged Substantial.

The targeted reduction in the wage bill was achieved with some delay, contributing to the stronger financial
position of the transport companies even though it was not fully clear if it was achieved with sustainable
reduction in excess employment. Indicator achievement is judged Substantial.

Progress with government in agreeing with Putevi Srbije (Roads of Serbia) on performance levels for the
different road classes with associated guaranteed funding levels committed was not achieved but progress
was reported and guaranteed funding is expected to improve financial performance in the future. Indicator
Achievement is judged Modest.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 23
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



                  With three result indicators (RI9-11) Substantial and one (RI12) Modest, the achievement of this Fourth
                  objective is judged Satisfactory.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

RI Relevance and Efficacy Ratings


                                                            Efficacy rating (from
                                                                  RI and/or                                     Overall Efficacy
          Results Indicator               Relevance                                     Pillar Efficacy
                                                              complementary                                         Rating
                                                                  evidence)


 Pillar 1: Improved public expenditure management through strengthened public                                    Moderately
 financial management                                                                                            satisfactory

                                                                                    Highly satisfactory ("all
                        RI1                    S                    High             pillar RI targets are
                                                                                          rated high")

 Pillar 2 Improved public expenditure management through public administration reform
                                                                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    ("At least half Pillar RI
                        RI2                    S                    High
                                                                                       targets are rated
                                                                                      modest or better")


                        RI3                    S                 Negligible


 Pillar 3: Improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of energy sector public
 enterprises
                        RI4                   MS                  Modest            Moderately satisfactory


                                                                                                                         Page 16 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



                                                                   ("Most pillar RI targets
        RI5                    S                    High             are rated modest or
                                                                            lower")
        RI6                   MU                  Modest

        RI7                   MS                  Modest

        RI8                   MU                 Negligible
  Pillar 4: Improve the financial sustainability and efficiency of transport sector public
                                        enterprises
        RI9                    S                 Substantial
                                                                  Satisfactory ("Most (two
       RI10                    S                 Substantial        thirds or better) RI
                                                                     targets are rated
                                                                  Substantial; no targets
       RI11                    S                 Substantial       are rated negligible")
       RI12                   MU                  Modest

Overall, the reforms supported by the Series helped strengthen fiscal consolidation, substantially reduce public
debt, and improve financial position of state enterprises. As a result, the economy and the budget entered the
COVID19 crisis in 2020 in a much stronger position than before the reform. This permitted the government to
provide large fiscal response during the pandemic to help cushion the social and economic impact (Fiscal
Council, April 2021).

With achievement of the first objective highly satisfactory and the second and third moderately satisfactory and
fourth satisfactory, the overall efficiency rating efficacy is Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions was rated satisfactory. The achievement of objectives was rated satisfactory.
Results indicators were generally well defined. Data were available to measure achievements. However,
relevance of a few indicators could have been improved to better capture the impact of the prior actions. Prior
actions were well selected, supporting an ambitious reform agenda, and many could have been expected to
meaningfully contribute to achievement of objectives. A somewhat weaker element of design were results
indicators, whose quality and consistency varied somewhat, in some cases featuring indirect links with prior
actions and objectives, with respect to the second and third objectives. Two results indicator targets (out of 13)


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



were moderately revised down to make them more realistic given the longer-than-expected time for reform
implementation.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risk to development outcomes going forward is substantial, notwithstanding achievements on significant fiscal
consolidation and progress with structural reform agenda supported under the Series. The Series tackled some
of the difficult reform areas—public administration reform and SOE reform—in addition to measures to
strengthen PFM and expenditure management, which may encounter resistance, especially from the SOEs.
Political and governance risks to implementation and outcome remain, including political sensitivity to wage
policy reforms. These risks will be partially mitigated by a new DPF on public sector efficiency and green growth,
which is under development, and that will give sector ministries more control over replacing departing staff, while
enabling strategic redistribution across functions. Stakeholder and social risks remain substantial because of the
potential resistance by unions and employees to rightsizing of the workforce in state enterprises and by public
concern about the social impact of electricity tariff adjustments. One risk that did decline is the macroeconomic
risk, which is now considered moderate. This reflects substantial progress on macroeconomic reform, primarily
fiscal consolidation which resulted in a significant reduction in public debt, from 76% of GDP in 2015 to 53% in
2019, overperforming on the original baseline trajectory of public debt in the Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA)
on approval of the first operation. The wider fiscal space, even with the large fiscal response to the COVID19
crisis in 2020 and additional borrowing by the government planned in 2021 (Fiscal Council, April 2021) has
reduced macroeconomic risks to the achievements of this programmatic series.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The quality of the prior actions was substantial under all pillars. Prior actions were well linked to the objectives.
Most reflected substantial reform actions that helped push the broad reform agenda forward, such as the
increase in electricity tariffs, reduction in the payment arrears, and increase in the number of beneficiaries of the
Energy Vulnerability Program as well as substantial actions in support of the strengthening of the financial
position of transport companies. At the same time, the ambition of some of the reforms supported by prior
actions was probably unrealistically high for the time frame, especially with respect to the reform of energy
SOEs. This also reflects the overestimation on the part of the Bank of institutional capacity and underestimation
of political economy constraints to some of the difficult reforms such as the rightsizing of the civil service and
SOE workforce, which was necessary for long-term sustainability. With the hindsight, therefore, more realistic
time frame for difficult reforms would have made for a stronger design. Also, several results indicators had



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



limited relevance in measuring progress towards reform objectives. Fewer and more directly relevant indicators
would have made for a better design.

The design reflected the key lesson from the past that in order to ensure sustainable fiscal consolidation and
restructuring of major SOEs, Serbia needed to address head on financial sustainability of these companies with
politically difficult actions and reforms that included tariff increases, reduction of payment arrears, the wage bill,
and achieve other improvements in indicators of SOE productivity. Also, the CLR of the previous CPS FY12-15
has highlighted the need to closely align the Bank’s operations with government’s objectives. The Series was,
indeed, closely aligned with the government’s reform program and, in particular, its Fiscal Strategy. Also, the
CLR highlight the need to ensure a strong link between the Bank’s knowledge and design of the operations (see
below).

The analytical underpinnings behind the Program design was strong. The 2015 Public Expenditure and Financial
Assessment report which stressed the need to improve arrears monitoring, payment discipline, and ex ante
commitment controls, directly informed corresponding prior actions. Also, significant technical assistance from a
Bank administered trust fund supported by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs and the European
Commission, and from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and other development
partners, informed reforms. It is also notable that the PEPU DPL series was closely linked and reinforced by the
Bank's SOE Reform DPL series, the PforR on Modernization and Optimization of Public Administration, and the
Competitiveness and Jobs project.

The Bank appropriately assessed key ex ante risks as substantial, especially on the political, governance, and
stakeholder/social fronts as well as on the macroeconomic framework, given the large scale of fiscal adjustment
involved. The Bank also carried out solid poverty/social and environmental risk analysis that informed the
design, especially on the protection of vulnerable households.

Finally, in the preparation of the Series, the Bank team engaged in extensive consultation within and outside the
government. The consultations were held with representatives of the EU, the IMF, Swiss State Secretariat for
Economic Affairs and the European Commission, and EBRD, as well as the Fiscal Council, Serbia’s fiscal
watchdog agency. The team has consulted the Council’s independent assessments of the fiscal situation and
SOEs. The collaboration at the team level, with regular exchange of information and team meetings, with the
IMF was especially strong.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank team has monitored progress toward achievement of targets using the results framework during the
life of the series but it is not clear if similar monitoring on the part of the government and relevant SOEs has
continued on an ongoing basis.




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



All PEPU-DPL1 indicative triggers were converted to Prior Actions (PAs) for PEPU-DPL2 with minimal changes
to PAs #1 and #3 to better reflect the pace of reform. Results indicators 1 and 11 were revised somewhat during
negotiations of the second operation to better reflect the associated prior actions.

The Bank adapted and implemented mitigating measures to address risks identified ex ante (e.g., stakeholder
and social risks) by engaging in consultations with the government, unions, SOEs, and other government
agencies, and experts and development partners. The Bank’s support for the expansion of the vulnerable
groups program was a mechanism directly addressing the social risks. The Bank undertook regular
macroeconomic monitoring but more could have been done to ensure that the monitoring and evaluation of
program indicators was an integral part of the government’s M&E framework. The Bank has also used technical
assistance from a Swiss agency as noted above to address identified technical capacity constraints.

There was significant stakeholder and donor coordination. The Bank collaborated and coordinated well with the
IMF and other development partners. The IMF focused on macro-critical parts of public financial management
and public administration reform while the Bank program complemented the Fund, especially in the areas of
clearance of energy sector arrears and reform of Srbijagas. The Bank coordinated with the EBRD on the
restructuring of railways companies, and EBRD parallel restructuring loan focused on the complementary issue
of the governance of the electricity company. Finally, the Bank coordinated with the EU, which also supported
the Bank program as the structural reforms were framed in the context of Serbia’s EU membership accession
process.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank performance is judged Satisfactory. The objectives and prior actions were highly relevant and selected
based on extensive analytical work and technical assistance, and in close coordination and complementarity
with the IMF and other development partners. At the same time, the Bank assessed key risks appropriately and
mitigated social risks through poverty/social analysis which informed the sound design of an important prior
action and associated indicator.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty



                                                                                                 Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



The DPL Series acknowledged the potential negative impact of some prior actions (PA #12 and #13) related to
rightsizing of the workforce of EPS and Railways companies as well as the prior action #6 on increasing
electricity tariffs. It supported support packages to redundant workers as well as the doubling of the budget for
and expanding the coverage of the targeted social protection program for households vulnerable to electricity
prices. The actual impact on redundant workers was more limited than expected because most of the reduction
in employment that occurred happened as a result of natural attrition with retiring workers and some departing
voluntarily. In terms of the impact on vulnerable households, there were notable impacts. In 2017, the average
number of beneficiary vulnerable households increased from around 42,000 to 64,000 and the benefit was
further extended to cover a new beneficiary group: households that have members with disabilities (Energy
Subsidy Reform Facility (ESRF), Serbia brief, ESMAP, February 2018). Poverty rate (at $5.5 dollars in PPP
terms) declined from 25.3 in 2015 to estimated 17.4 percent in 2020. The 2021 Macro-Poverty Outlook for
Serbia notes that “the Serbian economy entered only a mild recession of -1 percent in 2020 thanks to the
significant fiscal stimulus program of around 13 percent of GDP; a result, there was not a substantial increase in
poverty, which is estimated to be close to its 2019 level.” (p.1).



b. Environmental

Prior actions on electricity tariffs and railways and associated reform agenda, if sustained, are likely to have
some positive environmental impacts but only over the medium-to-longer term because of the time needed for
Serbia’s economy to reduce its dependence on coal and fossil fuels for electricity generation and heating. PA #6
on increases in electricity tariffs contributed to some rationalization of demand for electricity, which is largely
generated from coal and other fossil fuels. Also, prior actions on Railways restructuring (#11 and #13) likely had
favorable impact on the more efficient use of tracks and, therefore, may have contributed to improved efficiency
and use of fossil fuel with concomitant benefits for the environment.



c. Gender

Prior Action (#6) on the social protection program contributed to protecting female headed households
vulnerable to electricity price increases. The share of female headed household in the program went up from 27
percent in 2015 to 53 percent in 2018, much higher than the target. Given that female headed households are
much more vulnerable to changes in electricity prices due to their different income levels, this was an important
social measures to cushion the impact of the adjustment in electricity tariffs.



d. Other

None identified.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



The ICR is candid and comprehensive. It lays out well the country context at approval and during the life of the
Series. It is detailed, specific, and rich in data, including explicit reference to data sources. It provides a clear
and credible theory of change. It discusses prior actions and their rationale in sufficient detail. Presentation of
the achievement and results framework is clear and easily understandable. Finally, it provides a candid
reassessment of risks to development outcomes. Therefore, the quality of the ICR is rated high.


a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
 Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
 Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

 Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                   ---                   Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                    ---                   High


12. Lessons

This Review concurs with the lessons from the ICR, which are summarized below. The fourth lesson is revised
to include emphasis on social protection mechanisms to counter the negative impact on the vulnerable. The
Review adds lessons on results indicators and reform ambition.

    1. Development partner coordination, supportive technical assistance, complementary Bank operations, a
       programmatic approach, and strong analytic underpinnings were key factors in the success of this DPL
       series.
    2. Incentivizing implementation of prior actions with DLIs from a parallel PforR did not ensure the
       implementation of the new wage policy due to political sensitivities and the need for additional analysis.
    3. Strong political will is decisive for advancing complex, politically sensitive reforms and for effectively
       negotiating with vested interests, as is government ownership and communication strategy towards
       stakeholders. In this case, two key ministers supporting the design of the series left during
       implementation, creating a challenge for some reform components.
    4. Political sustainability of DPL supported structural reforms with negative social impact can be enhanced
       when reforms are accompanied by mitigation measures to cushion the impact on the vulnerable, be it
       through the compensation packages in the context of redundancies or expanded social protection
       mechanism to cushion the impact of increases in social sensitive prices of public utilities.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?



                                                                                                        Page 22 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Exp. and Utilities DPL1 (P155694)



No




                                                                             Page 23 of 23
