     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022564

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P167651                                     Improving Fiscal Management

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Philippines                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-89320                                  31-Mar-2020                                         450,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2019                                 31-Mar-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           450,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            450,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        450,000,000.00                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Judyth L. Twigg                Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective of the Philippines Improving Fiscal Management Development Policy
Loan was "to improve fiscal management with three development objectives: (a) strengthening tax policy; (b)
enhancing public finance management and budget planning; and (c) strengthening fiscal risk management of
public assets."


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program supported three policy areas and five prior actions (Loan Agreement, page 5).

Pillar 1 - Strengthening Tax Policy aimed to increase the revenue potential of the economy and the
economic efficiency of tax policy by taking regulatory measures against tax base erosion.

      PA1. The Government has increased the excise tax on petroleum products.
      PA2. The Government has expanded the value-added tax (VAT) tax base by repealing special laws
       with non-essential VAT exemptions.


Pillar 2 - Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget Planning aimed to strengthen budget
planning and budget execution by improving the central government budget management system and
improving the predictability of the budget.

      PA3. The Government implements a centralized budget management system as part of its adopted
       budget reform agenda.
      PA4. The Government has shifted from obligation-based budget planning and execution to a one-year
       cash appropriation for the national budget.


Pillar 3 - Strengthening Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets aimed to strengthen the resilience of
fiscal operations to climate and disaster risks by formulating and implementing a policy for the financial risk
management of public assets, establishing an institutional framework for the financial risk management of
public assets, and structuring financial instruments that insure against the financial risks to public assets.

      PA5. The Government is implementing a policy for comprehensive financial risk management of public
       assets against disasters, by setting up the required institutional infrastructure and putting in place
       financial instruments that insure key assets.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The program was estimated to cost US$450 million at appraisal.

Financing. The program was financed by a loan of US$450 million from the IBRD.

Dates. The program was approved on March 15, 2019, became effective on May 24, 2019 and closed as
scheduled on March 31, 2020.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




Relevance to Government Priorities. The program objectives were relevant to the development priorities
advanced by the Philippines in response to these challenges.

      The government launched the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program (CTRP) in 2016 to: (a) make the
       country’s tax system more equitable, efficient, and competitive, and (b) generate sufficient revenue to
       finance the country's socioeconomic development agenda. The CTRP consisted of six tax reform
       packages in support of the country's inclusive growth strategy, each of which focused on a different
       area of tax policy and aimed to achieve targets related to revenue generation, economic efficiency, and
       fiscal equity.
      The first of six tax reform packages under the CTRP, the Tax Reform for Acceleration and Inclusion
       (TRAIN), was passed by Congress and signed into law (Republic Act 10963) in 2017 and became
       effective in 2018. TRAIN reduced personal income tax rates; adjusted the estate and donor’s tax;
       broadened the VAT base by limiting exemptions; adjusted excise taxes on tobacco, automobiles, oil,
       and mineral products; and introduced an excise tax on sugar-sweetened beverages and cosmetic
       procedures. The first policy area under this development policy operation (strengthening tax
       policy) and the two prior actions under this pillar (increase the excise tax on petroleum products and
       expand the VAT tax base by repealing special laws with non-essential VAT exemptions) supported two
       priorities under TRAIN – adjust excise taxes on tobacco, automobiles, oil, and mineral products,
       and broaden the VAT tax base by limiting exemptions.
      To complement reforms in fiscal revenues, the government prepared separate draft legislation in 2017
       to advance reforms in fiscal expenditures. The proposed Budget Modernization Act aimed to: (a)
       modernize the public budgeting system; (b) accelerate program delivery; and (c) strengthen
       accountability. The law would establish an annual appropriations system on a cash basis (instead of
       expenditure obligations); strengthen cash flow management by implementing the Treasury Single
       Account (TSA); and establish the Office of the Comptroller General. A tool for government cash
       management, the TSA is a unified structure of government bank accounts that enable the consolidation
       and optimum utilization of government cash resources. The second policy area under this development
       policy operation (enhancing public financial management and budget planning) and the two prior
       actions under this pillar (implements a centralized budget management system, and shifts from
       obligation-based budget planning and execution to a one-year cash appropriation) supported two
       priorities under the proposed Budget Modernization Act – adjust excise taxes on tobacco, automobiles,
       oil, and mineral products, and strengthen cash flow management by implementing the TSA
       and establishing an annual appropriations system on a cash basis.
      The government also pursued a comprehensive approach to mitigating fiscal risks, by better managing
       the costs of frequent and large climate shocks and natural disasters that were often borne by the
       national government budget (for the reconstruction of destroyed core assets, which often did not have
       or had inadequate insurance coverage). With support from development partners, the government
       developed the Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Strategy in 2015, which aimed to sustain
       economic growth by protecting public finances against the economic damage and fiscal costs of natural
       disasters. The third policy area under this development policy operation (strengthening fiscal risk
       management of public assets) and the prior action under this pillar (implement a policy for
       comprehensive financial risk management of public assets against disasters, by setting up the required
       institutional infrastructure and putting in place financial instruments that insure key assets) supported
       two priorities under the Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Strategy – protect against the economic
       damage and fiscal costs of natural disasters..



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




Relevance of Bank Group Strategy. The program objectives were consistent with the Bank Group's strategy
in the Philippines.

      At program appraisal, the program objectives were aligned with the "engagement areas" of the Country
       Partnership Strategy for the Republic of the Philippines for the Period FY2015-2018 (CPS). The first
       and second program objectives were aligned with the first outcome, "strengthened public finances,
       fiscal transparency and financial accountability," under the first engagement area, "Transparent and
       Accountable Government," of the CPS. The third program objective was aligned with the first outcome,
       "increased physical and financial resilience to natural disaster and climate change impacts," under the
       fourth engagement area, "Climate Change, Environment, Disaster Risk Management" of the CPS.
      At program closing, the program objectives were aligned with the "focus areas" of the Country
       Partnership Framework for the Republic of the Philippines for the Period July 2019-December 2023
       (CPF). The first and second programs objectives were aligned with the fourth objective, "improved
       budget execution and revenue management," under the second focus area, "Competitiveness and
       Economic Opportunity for Job Creation," of the CPF. The third program objective was aligned with the
       tenth objective, "increased resilience to natural disasters and climate change," under the third focus
       area, "Addressing Core Vulnerabilities by Building Peace and Resilience," of the CPF.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The program defined five prior actions to achieve the program objectives.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 1 - Strengthening Tax Policy

      Causal Chain. Part of the first of the CTRP, the adjustment of excise taxes on petroleum products and
       the elimination of non-essential exemptions to the VAT would address tax policy problems associated
       with the decline in the real value of excise taxes (.
      PA1 (increase the excise tax on petroleum products) was informed by Tax Policy Notes for More
       Inclusive Growth: Inputs to the New Administration (2016) and analytic and advisory services delivered
       under the Game Changers for Inclusive Growth Program (2016-2020). The results chain was
       convincing. Increasing the excise tax on petroleum products would help boost tax revenues. Excise
       taxes had been fixed in nominal terms in the Philippines since 1997. Consequently, the real value of
       excise taxes had been greatly reduced with inflation. In the case of the excise tax on petroleum
       products, the substantial increase in gasoline and diesel prices since 1997 had greatly reduced the real
       value of the excise tax; the tax burden on the excise tax for gasoline fell from 46 percent in 1997 to 9
       percent in 2013 (the decline was even more pronounced for diesel). The prior action would make a
       major contribution to the achievement of the objective to strengthen tax policy. The increase in the
       excise tax would not only help boost tax revenues. With almost 60 percent of fuel and lubricants
       consumed by the top income decile, the decrease in the burden of fuel taxes had had a regressive
       redistributive incidence. Under this tax reform plan, part of the additional tax revenues from the tax
       increase would be earmarked for human capital and social investment, including for the Unconditional
       Cash Transfer program. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



     PA2 (expand the VAT tax base) was informed by Tax Policy Notes for More Inclusive Growth: Inputs to
      the New Administration (2016) and analytic and advisory services delivered under the Game Changers
      for Inclusive Growth Program (2016-2020). The results chain was convincing. The efficiency of the VAT
      in the Philippines was low, partly reflecting the large number of exemptions. VAT efficiency was 35
      percent, compared to the average of 40 percent in the ASEAN and 63 percent in the East Asia and
      Pacific region. The prior action would make a major contribution to the achievement of the objective to
      strengthen tax policy. The reform would repeal 54 of 61 special laws that had granted non-essential VAT
      exemptions. At the same time, VAT exemptions that protected the poor and vulnerable would
      be preserved. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.

Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 2 - Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget Planning

     Causal Chain. The shift from an obligation-based to a one-year cash-appropriation-based national
      budget and the deployment of a new budget and treasury management system would address public
      financial management problems associated with the intermingling of continuing-year and current-year
      appropriations and the lack of an integrated accounting and monitoring system. The cash-appropriation-
      based national budgeting system would impose internal discipline in the execution of expenditures,
      while the new budget and treasury management system would strengthen the internal control of
      payments and facilitate better monitoring of budgets.
     PA3 (implement a centralized budget management system) was informed by: the Public Expenditure
      and Financial Accountability Assessment (2016); Support to Identify and Develop Strategies to Scale up
      Budget Execution and Provide Front-Line Service Delivery (2017); Reimbursable Advisory Services
      Supporting Public Financial Management in the Philippines, 2018-2019; and the Public Investment
      Management Assessment (IMF and World Bank, 2018). The results chain was convincing. A centralized
      budget management system – the Budget and Treasury Management System (BTMS) – would help
      address weaknesses in public financial management. According to the Public Expenditure and
      Financial Accountability Assessment (2016), weaknesses in public financial management were affecting
      budget transparency and reliability. The assessment found that “the lack of an integrated computerized
      system contributes to the difficulty in consolidating and reporting information in a timely
      manner. Reconciliations between the records of the recipient unit and the downloading entity are often
      delayed. These deficiencies constitute a major continuing public financial management impediment and
      can only be addressed through developing a comprehensive, distributed, integrated accounting and
      performance information system. Such an investment would provide substantial returns in improvements
      in fiscal discipline and efficient service delivery against government intentions for its programs.” The
      relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.
     PA4 (shift from obligation-based to a one-year cash appropriation-based national budget) was informed
      by: the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment (2016); Support to Identify and
      Develop Strategies to Scale up Budget Execution and Provide Front-Line Service Delivery
      (2017); Reimbursable Advisory Services Supporting Public Financial Management in the Philippines,
      2018-2019; and the Public Investment Management Assessment (IMF and World Bank, 2018). The
      results chains were convincing. The PEFA Assessment (2016) found that “using continuing
      appropriations that are difficult to identify separately in the accounting system reduces the clarity of the
      budget because the expenditures remaining are not disaggregated between those covered by the
      current year appropriations and those incurred against continuing appropriations from previous years.
      The present degree of budget reliability does not provide the Government with a budget that is reliable
      enough to provide fiscal discipline and for agencies to plan the effective provision of services.” The
      annual appropriation system provided authority to incur obligations during the year, as a firm
      commitment of funds for the procurement of specific goods or services, with the actual contract

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



         completion taking many months after obligation. The prior action would make a major contribution to the
         achievement of the objective to enhance public financial management and budget planning. The
         obligation-based appropriation therefore provided limited discipline in execution of expenditure within the
         budget year and introduced unpredictability in cash management. The relevance of this prior action is
         rated satisfactory.

 Relevance of Prior Actions for Pillar 3 - Strengthening Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets

       Causal Chain. Creating a registry of public assets managed by a new Office of Public Asset Registry
        and testing an indemnity-based insurance program for high-risk government assets would begin to lay
        the foundations for the management of fiscal risks related to the destruction of, and damage to, public
        assets due to natural and climate disasters Better fiscal risk management, in addition to improved public
        budget management and stronger tax revenue mobilization, would enable the government to better
        deliver on the nation's public investment program.
       PA5 was informed by: Financial Protection Against Natural Disasters: An Operational Framework for
        Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (2014); Improving Public Assets and Insurance Data for Disaster
        Risk Financing and Insurance Solutions - Technical Contribution to the Asia Pacific Economic
        Cooperation Finance Ministers’ Process (2017); Developing a Public Asset Registry for the Philippines -
        Inventory and Conceptual Design (2018); Managing Disaster-Related Contingent Liabilities in Public
        Finance Frameworks - Technical Contribution to the APEC Finance Ministers’ Process (World Bank and
        OECD, 2018); and Supporting the Implementation of the Disaster Risk Financing Strategy of the
        Government of the Philippines, 2014-2018 (2018). The results chain was convincing. The Philippines
        incurred regular and significant losses to public and private assets as the result of frequent typhoons
        and earthquakes. At the same time, public assets were either uninsured or under-insured. The PEFA
        Assessment (2016) cited weaknesses in public asset management and reporting, noting that each
        agency managed its own non-financial assets. The Commission on Audit consolidated the available
        information in its Annual Financial Report showing the balances on different non-financial assets, but the
        accuracy of the data was doubtful. The establishment of a comprehensive public asset registry would
        be key first step toward improving public asset management and insurance against natural disasters
        and climate risks. The reform included the creation of a new office of Public Asset Registry at the
        Bureau of the Treasury, a vital institutional measure for better asset management. The institutional
        reforms would be complemented by a pilot indemnity-based insurance program (an insurance policy that
        compensates an insured party for certain unexpected damages or losses up to a certain limit – usually
        the amount of the loss itself), under the oversight of the Bureau of the Treasury, for strategic high-risk
        national government assets. The relevance of this prior action is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



The operation defined five results indicators.

                                                          Baseline / Target                    Status
     RI (number and          Associated Prior
      description)               Actions
                                    Pillar 1: Strengthening Tax Policy
                                                 Baseline: 0.2 percent of GDP (2017)
  RI1: Revenue from the                                                                 Actual: 0.7 percent of
                                    PA1           Target: At least 0.5 percent of GDP
   petroleum excise tax                                                                     GDP (2019)
                                                                  (2019)
                                                 Baseline: 4.3 percent of GDP (2017)
 RI2: Revenue from the                                                                  Actual: 4.5 percent of
                                    PA2           Target: At least 4.6 percent of GDP
            VAT                                                                             GDP (2019)
                                                                  (2019)
                Pillar 2: Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget Planning
                                                  Baseline: 0 percent of payments (by
                                                  value) are processed through BTMS
 RI3: Share of payments
                                                                  (2017).                Actual: 30 percent
    processed through               PA3
                                                      Target: At least 10 percent of            (2019)
         the BTMS
                                                  payments (by value) are processed
                                                             through BTMS
                                                  Baseline: Disbursements were 68.5
 RI4: Deviation between                            percent of total funds approved by
    the annual budgets                                Congress for the most recent
                                                                                         Actual: 84 percent
  approved by Congress              PA4               completed budget year 2017
                                                                                                (2019)
   and executed yearly                           Target: Disbursements are more than
           budget                                   80 percent of funds approved by
                                                     Congress for budget year 2019
                      Pillar 3: Enhancing Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets
                                                      Baseline: Zero departments /
                                                   agencies have data captured in a         Actual: Five
                                                     National Asset Registry (2017).        government
                                                    Target: At least 5 departments /      agencies (DOE,
      RI5: Number of
                                                 agencies (Department of Education ; DOH, DPWH, NIA,
  departments / national
                                                 Department of Health; Department of and DSWD) had their
government agencies, with           PA5
                                                      Public Works and Highways ;        assets listed in the
   data captured in the
                                                   National Irrigation Administration ;    National Asset
 National Asset Registry
                                                   and Department of Social Welfare        Registry (2019)
                                                    and Development) will have data
                                                     captured in the National Asset
                                                          Registry by end-2019



Relevance of Results Indicators for Pillar 1 - Strengthening Tax Policy

      RI1 was fully adequate to measure the impact of PA1 (increase excise tax on petroleum products)
       on progress toward the targeted outcome. Increases in revenue from the petroleum excise tax, as
       a percentage of GDP (which would normalize the nominal PHP value of the revenue), were

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



      expected to be principally due to the increase in the excise tax rate on petroleum products. The
      definition of the results indicator was clear; there was credible baseline data and a clear target;
      and credible data was available to measure the achievement of the target. This results indicator is
      rated satisfactory.
     RI2 aimed to measure the impact of PA2 on progress toward achievement of the targeted
      outcome. The assumption with this indicator was that increases in revenue from the VAT, as a
      percentage of GDP (which would normalize the nominal PHP value of the revenue), would be due
      to the repeal of tax laws and rules granting non-essential VAT tax exemptions. The essential
      question, however, is whether the results indicator would measure only the increase in the VAT
      revenue that was attributable to the reduction of the VAT tax breaks. The ICR (pages 12-13) offers
      an alternative measure that was drawn by the Department of Finance – "incremental VAT revenue
      from adjustments in VAT exemptions," which, while left undefined in the ICR, was later clarified to
      mean "the additional revenue from the reform each year if a VAT exemption for a good or service
      were removed, based on the quantity consumed of that good or service." However, this indicator
      (introduced after project completion) is that it did not have a target. As the ICR admits, "the
      [original] results indicator could have been formulated so as to more accurately clarify attribution to
      Prior Action 2." This results indicator is rated moderately satisfactory.

Relevance of Results Indicators for Pillar 2 - Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget
Planning

     RI3 (was fully adequate to measure the impact of PA3 on progress toward the targeted
      outcome. The definition of the results indicator was clear, and credible data
      was available. Since the Department of Budget and Management directed that payments
      exceeding PHP 1 million be processed through the BTMS, the results indicator would be confined
      only to payments exceeding PHP 1 million (US$20,000), consistent with the circular. This results
      indicator is rated satisfactory.
     RI4 aimed to measure the impact of PA4 on progress toward the targeted outcome. The definition
      of the results indicator was clear; there was credible baseline data and a clear target; and credible
      data was available. The results indicator was defined as the disbursement rate on the budget
      approved by Congress; a high disbursement rate would signify a low deviation between the
      approved budget and the executed budget. The assumption was that the one-year cash
      appropriation system would raise the disbursement rate on the approved budget. However, any
      improvement in the disbursement rate could not be solely driven by a changeover from obligation-
      based to cash-based budgeting. There could arguably be other factors, including more efficient
      budget execution by government agencies. For this reason, this results indicator is rated
      moderately unsatisfactory.

Relevance of Results Indicators for Pillar 3 - Strengthening Fiscal Risk Management of Public
Assets

     RI5 was fully adequate to measure the impact of PA5 on progress the targeted outcome. The
      assumption was that the creation of the National Asset Registry and the establishment of an
      indemnity insurance program would allow government agencies to record government assets in an
      official public registry, and enable them to have the assets insured against disaster risks. The
      definition of the results indicator was clear, and credible data is available. This results indicator is
      rated satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




                                                            Efficacy Rating
                                                              (from RI or      Pillar Efficacy            Overall Efficacy
                Results Indicator     Relevance Rating
                                                            Complementary          Rating                     Rating
                                                               Evidence)
                                       Pillar 1: Strengthening Tax Policy
                       RI1               Satisfactory             High
                                         Moderately                             Satisfactory
                       RI2                                    Substantial
                                         Satisfactory
                   Pillar 2: Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget Planning
                                                                                                            Satisfactory
                       RI3               Satisfactory             High
                                                                                 Moderately
                                         Moderately
                       RI4                                       Modest         Satisfactory
                                        Unsatisfactory
                         Pillar 3: Enhancing Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets
                       RI5               Satisfactory         Substantial       Satisfactory

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen tax policy.

               Rationale
               The program exceeded the first target to strengthen tax policy, and nearly achieved the second.

                     Revenue from the petroleum excise tax increased from 0.2 percent of GDP in 2017 to 0.7 percent of
                      GDP in 2019, exceeding the target of 0.5 percent of GDP. TRAIN adjusted the excise taxes rates on
                      14 petroleum products in 2018 and made additional changes in 2019 and 2020. The increase in
                      revenue from petroleum products drove the increase in overall tax revenue, which rose from 13.6
                      percent of GDP in 2017 to 14.5 percent of GDP in 2019 . Achievement of RI1 is rated High.
                     Revenue from the VAT increased from 4.3 percent of GDP in 2017 to an estimated 4.5 percent of
                      GDP in 2019, missing the target for an increase to 4.6 percent of TRAIN introduced several changes
                      to the VAT: (a) a total of 54 exemptions pertaining to eight beneficiary sectors were repealed,
                      broadening the tax base; and (b) the remaining exemptions, which were designed to protect the poor
                      and the vulnerable, were expanded The reform raised the turnover threshold for exemption from VAT
                      for companies, from PHP 2 million to PHP 3 million, and prescribed an accelerated processing of VAT
                      refund applications, setting the target at 90 days from the filing of an application. According to the ICR
                      (pages 11-13), incremental VAT revenues as a result of the tax exemption reform was 0.045 percent
                      of GDP from 2017 to 2019. Meanwhile, total VAT revenue rose from PHP 706 billion in 2017 to PHL



                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



       833 billion in 2019. Hence, the reform of VAT exemptions would account for only 6.7 percent of the
       increase in VAT collections over two years. Achievement of RI2 is rated Substantial.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance public finance management and budget planning.

Rationale
The program achieved the outcome targets to enhance public financial management and budget planning.

      The share of payments processed through the BTMS increased from zero in 2017 to 30 percent in
       2019, exceeding the target that at least 10 percent of payments, by value, be processed through the
       BTMS. The Secretary of the Department of Budget Management issued a circular letter in
       January 2019 requiring all national government agencies to use the BTMS for high-value transactions
       (transactions of PHP 1 million or more) by July 1, 2019. These transactions represented only 5
       percent of the total number of transactions in 2018 but approximately 30 percent of expenditures by all
       spending units, in terms of value, in 2019. These transactions were executed through the
       TSA. Achievement of RI3 is rated High.
      The Department of Budget and Management and the Bureau of the Treasury were the first oversight
       agencies to use the BTMS, while other agencies, including the Department of Public Works and
       Highways and the Department of Trade and Industry, started preparations for the adoption of BTMS
       in 2018. BTMS covers the execution and utilization phases of the budget cycle and supports public
       financial management functions It provides standard workflows and signing authorities for the budget
       utilization process, generating standard forms, documents and reports in digital form and
       producing comprehensive financial reports, at the consolidated and agency levels and at the
       disaggregated level, which cover financial statements, standard and custom reports, and planning and
       performance management reports. The decision to cover high-value transactions at all national
       government agencies in the BTMS accelerated the deployment of the BTMS in 2019.
      The disbursement rate on the annual budget (actual disbursements, as a share of total funds in the
       annual budget approved by Congress) improved from 68.5 percent in 2017 to 79.9 percent in 2018
       and 84 percent in 2019, exceeding the target of 80 percent by 2019. The proposal for a cash-based
       budget planning and management system was initially resisted by Congress. A draft Budget
       Modernization Law with provisions for cash-based budgeting and other reforms was submitted to
       Congress in 2018 but was not passed. That decision led to the re-enactment of the 2018 budget
       instead for the first four months of 2019. The amended 2019 budget was subsequently approved by
       the Congress in February 2019 and, while it confirmed the introduction of cash-based appropriations,
       the legislation provided for a one-year obligation limit for appropriations as a transitional
       arrangement. The President’s veto message in April 2019 asserted that a cash-based budget for 2019
       would be mandated nevertheless; this arrangement would ensure the availability of cash resources for
       priority development projects. However, because of the delayed passage of the 2019 budget and the
       conduct of national and local elections in May 2019, authorization was given only for the

                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



       implementation and payment of infrastructure projects until the end of 2020 (provided that the funds
       for these projects were obligated no later than the end of 2019).

The target for the results indicator (RI4) associated with the prior action was met – the disbursement rate on
the FY 2019 budget was 84 percent, above the 80 percent target – but the one-year cash-based national
budgeting system was yet to be fully implemented. there is an issue of results attribution with this
indicator. According to the ICR (pages 14-15), other factors may have driven the improvement in the
disbursement rate. Reforms were under way over several years to reduce the under-utilization of
appropriations: (a) the validity period for obligations was reduced; and (b) the monitoring and review of
allocations and expenditures was intensified. The ICR also states that while the government remains
committed to changing the long-established obligation-based system that has persisted for more than 30
years, the transition to a cash-based budgeting system will likely require several years of institutional learning
and adjustment. Given the poor relevance of the indicator, achievement is rated Modest



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen fiscal risk management of public assets.

Rationale
The program achieved the outcome target to strengthen fiscal risk management of public assets.

      Five government agencies had submitted their list of their assets to the public asset registry by
       December 2019, meeting the target that at least five departments / agencies will have their asset data
       included in the National Asset Registry by end-2019. Achievement of RI5 is rated Substantial.
      To establish the institutional framework for the financial risk management of public assets against
       disasters, the government: (a) created a new Asset Registry Division under the Bureau of the
       Treasury; (b) designated the Bureau of the Treasury as the agency in charge of managing the Public
       Asset Registry; and (c) issued Development Budget Coordination Committee Resolution No. 2019-
       4 establishing a Working Group, comprised of the Office of the President and the key oversight
       agencies, that would adopt a common policy on the management of national government non-financial
       assets and set the groundwork for a permanent governmental body on asset management. To
       develop instruments that insure key assets, the government provided budgetary funding in the
       General Appropriations Act of 2019 for: (a) the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
       Fund; (b) the public asset indemnity insurance program; (c) a public asset insurance program that
       would reduce the government’s contingent liability and ensure that sufficient resources were available
       for the reconstruction of public assets. The budgetary provision would allow the renewal and
       expansion of the parametric catastrophe risk insurance program that would provide liquidity to
       government agencies and 25 provinces in response to severe events.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The program exceeded the first and nearly achieved the second target for objective to strengthen tax policy. The
program achieved the two targets for the objective to enhance public financial management and budget planning,
but there were attribution issues with the second outcome. The program achieved the target for the objective
to strengthen fiscal risk management of public assets. Overall, the degree of achievement of the program
objectives is rated Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The program objectives were relevant to the development challenges faced by the Philippines in raising public
      spending on capital investment and human development: the prior actions to increase the excise taxes
      on petroleum products and to eliminate non-essential exemptions to the VAT were relevant to boosting tax
      revenues, thereby increasing the fiscal space for public investment and more inclusive social spending; the prior
      actions to introduce cash-based budgeting and a centralized budget and treasury management system were
      relevant to address weaknesses in public financial management; and the prior action to strengthen the risk
      management of public assets was relevant to address regular losses incurred by the government as a result of
      natural disasters. The targets associated with the four out of the five outcome indicators were achieved, while
      the fifth – incremental VAT revenue as a result of tax exemption reform – fell only slightly short of the
      target. There was an attribution issue with improvement in the budgetary disbursement rate because the shift to
      a cash-based budgeting system, on which the result was associated, was not fully implemented. Overall, the
      shortcomings were minor, and the operation's outcome is rated Satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                        Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



Political Risk. Past uncertain support in Congress for the one-year cash appropriation system poses
political risks to the sustainability of the development outcome of this operation. Because the cash budgeting
system had been adopted by an amendment to the annual appropriation act for 2019, and with caveats
rather than through a more enduring Budget Modernization Law as originally proposed, it remains plausible
that the reform could be reversed or weakened by future annual appropriation acts.

Policy Risk. The executive branch provided stronger policy support for the reforms than the
legislature. According to the ICR (page 20), the strength of the dialogue "provides an assurance of policy
consistency and ownership of the reform objectives, not only of the oversight agencies, but also of the line
agencies executing the reforms on the ground," helping mitigate the risks to the development outcomes of
this operation. In response, the Bank has prepared a programmatic series of three development policy
operations to maintain momentum for the reforms. The first in the series, which aims to
promote competitiveness and enhance resilience to natural disasters, was approved by the Board in
December 2019, and included prior actions and triggers related to tax policy, public financial management
and budget planning, and public asset management. The second was approved in December 2020, and the
third is slated for approval in December 2021.

Institutional Capacity Risk. As cited by the Project Document, weak institutional capacity adds to the risks
to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this program. Complex inter-government relations and,
sometimes overlapping mandates across public agencies present challenges for effective implementation. In
addition, implementation capacity has frequently been compromised by fragmentation in the bureaucracy, a
dearth of managerial staff, weak managerial information systems, a lack of performance incentives for the
civil service, and corruption.

Macroeconomic Risk. According to the Bank's East Asia (EAP) and Pacific Economic Update – Uneven
Recovery of April 2021, the Philippines economy contracted the most and will likely recover the slowest
among ten developing economies in the Region in 2020 (excluding the Pacific Island economies). GDP
shrank 9.5 percent in 2020, and output is not expected to return to the level attained in the fourth quarter of
2019 until the third quarter of 2022. The slow recovery should convince policymakers of the added urgency
of fiscal reforms to support economic growth. On the other hand, it could give politicians another argument to
postpone reforms, on the premise that difficult measures would exact a toll on public welfare.

COVID-19 Risk. The Philippines reported the strictest lockdown (average daily score of 66 on Oxford
University's Stringency Index, where 100 = strictest) in the EAP region (median average daily score of 50 on
the index), but recorded the highest COVID-19 deaths per million (84 deaths per million) in the region
(median of 4 deaths per million). It has also conducted the second-to-lowest number of tests per confirmed
COVID-19 case (17) in the region (median of 113 per million), and has so far delivered only 1.46 million
vaccinations in mid-April 2021 to a population of 109.6 million. Limited success with the health response
would heighten the risk of a slower economic recovery, and hence exacerbate the risk of greater political and
public resistance to difficult reform measures.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




Lessons from Experience. Program design was informed by extensive analytic work produced by, or
with the assistance of, the Bank and other development partners:

      assessments, studies, and reports related to tax reform, public financial management, and fiscal
       risk management of public assets – 10 of these analytic products are listed in Section 3.B, and
       include, the PEFA Assessment (2016), the Public Investment Management Assessment (IMF and
       World Bank, 2018), and the Financial Protection Against Natural Disasters: An Operational
       Framework for Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (2014);
      analytic and advisory services delivered through the Game Changers for Inclusive Growth Program
       (P159649 related to tax policy and tax administration reform, including on the CTRP, TRAIN,
       changes in excise taxes, and VAT tax reform; and,
      a simulation of the distributional effects of the CTRP using the EPIQ structural macro model.

The reforms supported by this program were aligned with related Bank operations in the Philippines
preceding or following this program:

      The Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown
       Option (Cat-DDO) approved in 2011, and the Second Disaster Risk Management Development
       Policy Loan with a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown Option approved in 2015, aimed to enhance
       the capacity of the government to mitigate disaster risk and manage the socio-economic and fiscal
       impacts of natural disasters.
      The Social Welfare and Development Reform Project approved in 2009, aimed to strengthen the
       effectiveness of the social protection agency to efficiently implement the Conditional Cash
       Transfer Program, the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program, and the National Household
       Targeting System for social protection programs, and the Second Social Welfare and Development
       Reform Project approved in 2016, aimed to support the Conditional Cash Transfer program to
       improve the use of health and education services by poor children.

Risk Identification and Mitigation. The Program Document (pages 41-42) rated two of nine operational
risks to the project as substantial, and recommended mitigation measures.

      Political and governance risks were substantial and would be mitigated by: choosing reform
       objectives and targets that had a high degree of government ownership; intensifying the dialogue
       with the economic team of the government; and continuously assessing the degree of support for
       the reform program.
      Institutional capacity risks were substantial and would be mitigated by: technical assistance and
       operational support to the supervising and implementing agencies; continuous policy dialogue
       among government agencies themselves; and transparency measures at government agencies to
       better anchor the reform objectives.
      An important shortcoming at the design stage is that the Bank appears not to have completely
       vetted the risks related to legislative action on the shift from an obligation-based to a one-year
       cash-based national budget system. The proposed Budget Modernization Law providing for a cash-
       based budgeting system was not passed by Congress.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




Stakeholder Consultation. The Bank and the government conducted consultations about the program
with stakeholders using: (a) public meetings on the Philippine Development Plan for 2017-22, with which
the program objectives were aligned. These involved extensive discussions nation-wide, organized around
thematic clusters, with various stakeholders; and (b) consultative meetings of the Philippine Development
Forum, the principal mechanism by which the government engages civil society, academe, the private
sector, and legislative representatives in dialogue on the country's development agenda. These involved
discussions about the program objectives and results target in 2017 and 2018.

Development Partners Coordination. The ICR (page 19) reports that the Bank consulted many
development partners on the design of the program: (a) on tax policy and administration reform –IMF,
ADB, and the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; (b) on public financial management and
budget reform – IMF, ADB, the UNDP, European Union, USAid, JICA, Agence Française de
Développement, and the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade; and (c) on disaster risk
finance management – the ADB and JICA..



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring. The government reported comprehensive data and information updates to the Bank.

Adaptation. As this was a stand-alone operation, there were no issues with triggers (prior actions to the next
series in the program) made necessary by changed circumstances and priorities. The ICR (page 21), however,
reported that the Bank had prepared a three-part programmatic development policy operation to succeed this
program with at least six prior actions related to this program: (a) directive for all national government agencies
to adopt the BTMS for all transactions above PHP 1 million; (b) creation of a body to formulate and recommend
public asset management policies; (c) implementation of a risk-layering strategy by setting financial instruments
to meet the funding needs of disasters; (d) an increase in excise taxes (this time, on alcohol and e-cigarette
products); (e) operationalization of the indemnity insurance of public assets; and (f) the adoption of an asset
management policy to improve financial risk management derived from natural disasters and climate
change. The prior actions and triggers of the new series are linked to the prior actions and development
objectives of this program.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)




Rationale

The Bank's performance on program design is rated moderately satisfactory. The Bank drew on extensive
analytic and advisory work on tax policy, public financial management and budget planning, and the fiscal
risk management of public assets to prepare this program. The Bank ensured that consultations were
conducted with stakeholders and with development partners. The Bank, however, appears not to have fully
vetted the risks related to legislative action on the cash-based national budget system. The Bank's
performance on program implementation is rated satisfactory. The program was properly monitored, and the
Bank linked the reforms supported by this operation with the objectives of succeeding development policy
operations. Overall, the Bank's performance is rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The Program Appraisal Document (pages 35-38) explained that the reforms supported by this program were
expected to have positive poverty and social impacts.

      On Strengthening Tax Policy. The increase in the excise taxes on petroleum products and the repeal of
       VAT tax exemptions would reduce the after-tax income of all households. The impact would be 1.3
       percent of household income, on average, across all households, and 1.4 percent of household income
       for the poorest quintile. To mitigate these effects, the government would deploy an Unconditional Cash
       Transfer program as well as transport subsidies for poorer households
      On Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget Planning. The budget planning and execution
       reforms would benefit the poor by improving the effectiveness and transparency of government spending
       in areas benefitting poorer households, particularly agriculture, education, and public works.
      On Strengthening Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets. The protection of public assets from natural
       disaster risks would benefit the poor and vulnerable. Recent studies of the economic and human losses
       from typhoons (tropical cyclones) in the Philippines showed that: (a) the average short-run effect of
       typhoons was to depress incomes by 6.7 percent, net of public and private transfers; (b) the income
       losses translated nearly one-for-one into reductions of household expenditures, decreasing the average
       household expenditure by 7.1 percent in the average year; (c) households did not mitigate storm-induced
       losses through consumption-smoothing strategies (in-kind transfers, savings, or borrowing) but instead
       by making large adjustments to their relative spending on different types of consumption and investment,
       reducing their spending on human capital investments (medicine, education, and high nutrient foods);
       (d) typhoons caused infant mortality to rise the calendar year after the storm itself had passed as a result
       of these reductions in household spending; annual average deaths reached 1,130 female infant deaths
       per million households, corresponding to 55 percent of the baseline infant female mortality rate.

The ICR (pages 17-18) provided some evidence of these social and poverty impacts.


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



      On Strengthening Tax Policy. The Unconditional Cash Transfer program had become the single largest
       social mitigation measure under TRAIN. Cash grants were provided to poor households and indigent
       senior citizens who did not directly benefit from lower personal income tax rates but were adversely
       affected by higher prices due to excise taxes and the repeal of VAT tax exemptions. In 2018, some PHP
       22.29 million was allocated to 9,288,993 households. In 2019-20, another PHP 18.44 billion was
       released to 5,122,276 households. The cash grants amounted to PHP 200 per month in 2018, and PHP
       300 per month in 2019-20.
      A study by the Bank in 2019, using the structural macro model EPIQ, concluded that the Unconditional
       Cash Transfer program led to a substantial reduction in poverty. The poverty rate, measured as the
       share of population living on less than US$3.20 per day, dropped from 24.7 percent in the baseline to
       23.3 percent in 2020 under TRAIN. Although the Unconditional Cash Transfer program would end in
       2021, the poverty rate would decrease by an additional 0.6 percentage points in 2021-30, compared to
       the baseline.
      On Enhancing Public Financial Management and Budget Planning and on Strengthening Fiscal Risk
       Management of Public Assets. Measures related to public financial management and the risk
       management of public assets were not expected to directly impact the distribution of incomes. However,
       indirect effects could occur. More efficient public financial management and a more strategic response to
       fiscal risks from natural disasters would, in principle, free up government resources for social spending.



b. Environmental

The Program Appraisal Document (pages 38-39) stated that the reforms supported by this program were expected
to have positive environmental impacts.

      On Strengthening Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets. With the reforms, improved information on
       assets owned by the government would allow faster damage assessments and pre-agreed rehabilitation
       plans and , insurance mechanisms would unlock funds for the rehabilitation of key infrastructure assets and
       public buildings.

The ICR (page 18) added to the discussion of the environmental impacts but presented no additional evidence.

      On Strengthening Tax Policy. The increase in the excise taxes on petroleum products would likely reduce
       the use of fuel and have a positive impact on environmental pollution. The ICR did not quantify this effect.
      On Strengthening Fiscal Risk Management of Public Assets. The acquisition and publication of data on
       public assets would help promote risk-informed development planning by the government. Budgetary
       procedures for public asset rehabilitation (in the event of natural disasters) would ensure that sufficient
       funding was allocated for reconstruction work, and that the standards for reconstruction work required
       under environmental impact assessments were dutifully met.



c. Gender




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



According to the Program Document (page 38), it was not suitable to "gender-tag" this tax policy, public financial
management, and fiscal risk reform operation.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR ably explained the context for the reform measures supported by this operation: (a) the
macroeconomic setting and the justification for policy priorities placed on tax revenue mobilization, public
financial management, and the management of fiscal risks to public assets; (b) the relationship of the prior
actions to the wider program for policy reform in these areas; and (c) the relationship of this operation to other
Bank programs in closely related policy areas, including succeeding development policy operations.

The assessment of the results indicators was candid. Despite the contribution of tax exemption reform to
incremental VAT revenues, the growth in general economic activity still accounted for the larger part of gains in
VAT revenues over two years. The ICR contends that the results indicator could have been formulated "so as to
more accurately clarify attribution [of the result] to Prior Action 2."

The assessment of the program outcomes was equally candid. The program achieved the target for the
disbursement rate on the national budget, but the government has yet to fully implement the one-year cash-
based national budgeting system, on which the result was predicated. Clearly, other reform measures,
pursued outside the purview of this program, had driven the higher budgetary disbursement rate. The ICR
lists several possible explanations, based on evidence about related reform measures that were implemented
by the government before this operation.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
 Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

 Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Improving Fiscal Management (P167651)



Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR (pages 20-21), with some adaptation.

Prior actions that require legislative action are subject to considerable risk, owing to complex political
dynamics in legislatures. A proposed Budget Modernization Law providing for a shift from an obligation-
based to a one-year cash-based national budget was not approved by the bicameral legislature. Compensating
measures could not fully implement a cash-based national budget: (a) the final budget for 2019 adopted an
obligation-based budget with a one-year obligation limit, ostensibly as a transitional arrangement; and (b) the
Presidential veto mandated a cash-based budget but could only apply the system to infrastructure projects until
the end of 2020. The ICR admits that it will likely take time to shift from the three-decade-old obligation-based
budget to a cash-based budget.

Knowledge products and technical assistance are vital to designing complex reforms. Extensive
analytical work on tax policy helped design the Comprehensive Tax Reform Program for the Philippines, stage
the tax reform process over a six-part legislative package, and choose the prior actions supported by this
operation – the increase in excise taxes for petroleum products and the repeal of non-essential exemptions to
the VAT. Analytical and advisory services were also helpful in preparing the Unconditional Cash Transfer
program supported by this operation as a social amelioration measure to help mitigate the impact of tax reform
on poor households. The knowledge-based work also helped sustain the momentum for reforms in a new
development policy loan series succeeding this operation.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
