     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022554

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147147                                    URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1910                                  30-Jun-2020                                         10,364,850.39

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2017                                30-Jun-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           20,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            10,469,970.82                                               0.00

 Actual                                        10,401,203.56                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur              Vibecke Dixon                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) were to: (i) create an enabling policy framework and enhance
   urban policy making capacity in relevant agencies at the national level; and (ii) strengthen city planning,
   management and service delivery capacity in five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs) (Financing Agreement
   page 4, Project Appraisal Document para 21).




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Sep-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project consisted of five components (PAD para 25 to 31):

   Component 1. Urban Information: Building an Urban Management Information System
   (UMIS) (appraisal cost US$1.5 million, actual cost US$0.32 million). This component would finance: (i)
   technical assistance to create the database and web architecture for the UMIS; (ii) design and
   implementation of surveys, and analysis of data gathered by municipalities; (iii) annual data updates as well
   as maintenance of hardware and software of the UMIS.

   Revised Component 1 - The scope of this component was reduced to the Municipal Finance module only
   and the updating of the UMIS in subsequent years was dropped, as this was deemed unnecessary since its
   set-up would be finalized just prior to the closing date (Restructuring Paper, para 9). The TTL clarified
   (May 5, 2021) that US$1.18 million was cancelled from the component.

   Component 2. Urban Institutions: Institutional and Capacity Development (appraisal cost US$4.5
   million, actual cost US$3.7 million). This component included: (i) implementation of an Urban
   Planning Functional Review of the urban planning functions and capacities of Ministry of Urban
   Development and Housing (MUDH) and other relevant agencies, as well as the planning functions and
   capacities under the participating PCCs, and the preparation of an Action Plan for technical assistance to
   be supported by the project; (ii) technical assistance and advisory services for capacity development in
   MUDH and the Participating PCCs in select areas, including urban policies, procurement, contract
   management, financial management and internal audit, all in accordance with the functional review; (iii)
   preparation of a series of policy notes and strategy papers in four defined policy work streams as follows:
   (a) Planning and Land Use Management, (b) Urban Regeneration through public-private partnerships, (c)
   Affordable Housing, (d) Municipal Finance; and (iv) provision of training through in-country structured
   training programs, as well as customized out-of-country group and individual training programs.

   Revised Component 2 - no change.

   Component 3. Urban Integration: Strengthening Urban Planning at National and Local Levels
   (appraisal cost US$5.0 million, actual cost US$4.25 million). This component would integrate urban
   planning and development, supported by technical consultancies, goods, and information technology-
   related hardware and software, including training, for: (i) development of curriculum for urban planning
   practitioners; and (ii) preparation of local Strategic Development Plans (SDPs) at the five PCCs, taking
   into account an inventory of existing planning and land use conditions, land use efficiency and


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



  service provision. The component would include development of guidelines, manuals, tools
  and systems, including procurement of satellite imagery, for carrying out local planning functions.

  Revised Component 3 - Item (ii) “Strategic Development Plans” was renamed as “Strategic Development
  Frameworks”, to be consistent with the Government’s preferred terminology (Restructuring Paper para 9).

  Component 4. Urban Investments: Feasibility and Design Studies for Urban Infrastructure (appraisal
  cost US$7.0 million, actual cost US$1.2 million). This component would support the preparation of multi-
  year Capital Investment Plans (CIPs) linked to the Strategic Development Plans (SDPs) and feasibility
  studies for both priority and catalytic projects in the five participating PCCs.

  Revised Component 4 - According to the Restructuring Paper (para 9), the feasibility studies for Catalytic
  Investments was dropped. The restructuring paper also clarified that (a) the preparation of the capital
  investment plans were for PCCs, and not directly for MUDL; and (b) priority projects be within cities’ capital
  investment plans.

  Component 5. Project Management and Administration (appraisal cost US$2.0 million, actual cost
  US$2.0 million). This component would finance upgrading of office equipment and furnishings as well as
  project management.

  Revised Component 5 - no change.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The actual project cost was US$10.4 million, substantially lower than the appraisal estimate
  of US$20.0 million (see reasons under the financing bullet below).

  Financing. The project was financed entirely by the IDA credit. The actual amount disbursed was US$10.4
  million significantly lower than the original commitment of US$20.0 million. At the time of restructuring, the
  scope of several components was reduced (as discussed above) and US$8.53 million was cancelled
  (Restructuring Paper, para 11). The team explained (May 5, 2021) that the grant was made in SDR and
  during the project implementation, the SDR appreciated against US dollar, thereby generating a surplus of
  financing by as much as USD1.5 million, which accounts for a portion of the excess financing that needed to
  be cancelled. An additional US$1.0 million was cancelled through a Portfolio Restructuring Paper for
  reallocation to COVID-19 relief, reducing the total project financing to US$10.47 million.

  Borrower Contribution. At appraisal, no Borrower contribution was planned. There was no subsequent
  Borrower contribution until project closing.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 13, 2017, became effective on October 5, 2017 and closed on
  June 30, 2020 as scheduled.

  Restructuring. The project underwent a Level 2 restructuring on September 29, 2019. The PDO was not
  revised. At the time of restructuring, US$8.53 million was cancelled, reflecting a portfolio-wide decision
  between the Ministry of Finance and the World Bank. At this time, the decision was also made as to not
  extend the closing date of any operation in Afghanistan. The results framework was revised: the first
  PDO indicator "National Urban Policy formulated and under implementation, achieving early-stage results"


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



   was modified as “National Urban Policies for Housing Supply and Municipal Financial Performance
   Formulated” to align with Government priorities, and the second PDO indicator “National urban
   development planning framework in place” was dropped.

   The intermediate results indicator was adjusted to reflect the reduced scope of the project, namely by
   reducing implementation of the UMIS to the first module on Municipal Financial Performance, linked to the
   Municipal Incentive Fund (MIF) (Restructuring paper, para 10).

   Split Rating. Although the PDOs were not revised, the restructuring substantially reduced the ambition of
   the project. Several activities were dropped, and the first PDO indictors were revised. Therefore, a split
   rating will be conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Afghanistan's political and economic situation has remained fragile since the appraisal of
this project. It is classified as a Fragile and Conflict-Affected (FCV) country by the World Bank. Economic
growth and investment recovery has been constrained by security challenges. Three-quarters of the
Afghan population has been displaced at some point during the four decades of conflict (PAD page 1). A
wide range of disparities exists between different regions and within each region. While Herat, Mazar-i-
Sharif, Jalalabad, and Kandahar have largely benefited from cross-border trading with neighboring
countries, isolated interior provinces have been badly affected by the conflict.

Sector Context: Afghanistan is experiencing rapid urbanization and cities host a quarter of the
population. However, the cities are constrained by inadequate urban planning and weak municipal
governance. Afghan cities carry significant potential for advancing social and economic welfare, if properly
managed (PAD page 2).

Alignment with Country Priorities: The project objectives are fully aligned with the Afghanistan National
Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF) 2017-2021. The key goals of ANPDF are to: (i) create a
network of dynamic, safe, and livable urban centers; (ii) fully exploit the economic growth opportunities that
cities offer; and (iii) decentralize urban planning to the local level, while promoting participatory urban
governance mechanisms. An Urban National Priority Program (U-NPP, 2016 - 2025) was launched to
provide a roadmap to achieve these goals (ICR page 5).

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy: The project objectives are highly aligned with the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY2017 - 2022, especially the first pillar "Building Strong
and Accountable Institutions” and sub-objective 1.2 “Improved performance of key government ministries
and municipalities”. The project objectives are also aligned with the third pillar "Social Inclusion" as
the participating PCCs are also major recipients of vulnerable displaced populations and rural-urban
migrants.

According to the PAD (para 12), this project represents the first phase of the World Bank's support for
strategic urban development in Afghanistan. This approach consists of providing, first technical, policy and
institutional support aimed at creating an enabling policy framework and capacity at the national and local

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



               levels to strengthen city planning, management and service delivery to five PCCs. This would be followed at
               a later stage, by a performance-based Cities Investment Program (CIP) aimed at strengthening the role of
               PCCs in promoting economic growth through catalytic investments and improved urban service delivery.
               The project would also complement the Government's and World Bank-financed "Citizens' Charter
               Afghanistan Program (CCAP)", which has broad outreach across the entire country at the community and
               district level, by targeting municipalities in large provincial population centers. The next phase would focus
               on the supporting the investment projects.

               However, while there is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and
               World Bank strategies, the relevance of the objectives is pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect
               a potential solution to a development problem. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational
               environment in Afghanistan, a shortcoming here is the lack of clarity in the PDO formulation around what
               outcomes were to be expected, i.e. in what ways this would improve peoples’ lives. Focusing on “an
               enabling policy framework and enhanced institutional capacity” alone is not outcome focused and does not
               help in understanding what development results were expected as a consequence of the project. These
               may be longer term targets but identifying them and tracking them is an important aspect of a successful
               development operation. The relevance of objectives is rated substantial.

               The PDOs were not revised.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Create an enabling policy framework and enhance urban policy making capacity in relevant agencies at the
                             national level.

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change (ToC) for this objective was as follows: inputs such as creation of an Urban
                             Management Information System (UMIS) at the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MUDH)
                             would result in outputs such as reliable data to make appropriate policy decisions. Technical Assistance (TA)
                             and training for capacity development in the areas of urban policies, financial management would lead to a
                             stronger Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MUDH). In addition, MUDH would be further supported
                             by policy notes on (a) Planning and Land Use Management, (b) Urban Regeneration, (c) Affordable Housing,
                             and (d) Municipal Finance. These activities were expected to contribute to the project objective of an enabling
                             policy framework and enhanced urban policy making capacity in relevant agencies at the national level
                             (i.e. MUDH and the Independent Directorate for Local Governance (IDLG)).



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



The project design did not consider the timeframe needed to carry out these institutional reforms. Also,
relevant agencies at the national level was not clearly specified in the PDO formulation.

Outputs

      The web architecture and database for the Urban Management Information System (UMIS) was not
       created as originally targeted.

      The functional review on "planning and land use management" was carried out as originally
       planned. This resulted in the preparation of a “National Spatial Planning Framework” (NSPF) to (a)
       clarify the role of each institution in urban planning; (b) reduce overlapping mandates; and (c)
       enhance cooperation. The functional review diagnosed institutional weaknesses and an Action Plan
       was prepared to build capacity for urban planning and management; urban information systems, data,
       and analytics to support. The ICR reports (page 14) that the training was provided on core but does
       not provide figures on number of people trained.

      The functional review on "affordable housing" was carried out as planned. Deep Dives’ into
       eight aspects of the housing market was carried out including: Land Supply; Construction materials
       and techniques; Housing Typologies and Standards; Developers and construction firms; Market
       segmentation; Permitting; Infrastructure; and Housing sector governance. Two policy notes on
       housing policy were prepared: (a) revision of the Afghanistan Building Codes to accommodate low-
       income housing needs; and (b) revision of the Mortgage Law to address deficiencies (ICR page 13).
      Two separate papers and consultancies regarding the mortgage law, and three papers on the revision
       of the building codes were completed.

      The functional review on "urban regeneration" was carried out as planned. The policy papers
       and dialogue on Urban Regeneration led to the establishment of a Directorate of Urban
       Regeneration (ICR page 13).

      As planned, the Urban Planning Functional Review (UPFR) and Capacity Building Action Plan
       were completed. The UPFR confirmed that there was a nearly complete vacuum of urban analytics,
       equipment, or training to support urban policymakers to advance the goals of the Urban National
       Priority Program. The Action Plan was endorsed by MUDL and is under implementation.

      The project supported in creating other directorates: Directorate of Spatial Development
       Framework (SDF); Directorate of National Spatial Strategy and Planning (NSSP); Directorate of
       Spatial Urban Management Information System (SUMIS); Directorate of Regional Planning; and
       Directorate of Detailed Planning.

      As planned, the project supported the development of Afghanistan’s first national Urban
       Planning Curriculum, including a bachelors’ degree, short courses for policymakers, and learning
       materials. The curriculum is intended to help equip current and future urban planners with skills to plan
       and manage Afghanistan’s urbanization effectively (ICR page 15).

Outcomes



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



The original PDO indicator "National Urban Policy formulated and under implementation, achieving
early stage results" was not achieved. Also, the ICR does not provide evidence on the outcomes of the
newly created Directorate of Urban Regeneration. The ICR reports (page 43) that Urban Regeneration would
become a key policy dimension in addressing issues of informal settlements in Afghanistan.

The outcome indicator “National urban development planning framework in place” was dropped at
restructuring. However, the ICR notes (page 12) that it was achieved. A new Urban Development
Planning Framework was adopted by the government in September 2020. The email dated July 2, 2021 from
the project team clarified that the "Urban Development Planning Framework" was referred to as the “National
Spatial Planning Framework” (NSPF). The ICR notes (para 44) that the NSPF defines the new planning
approach that MUDL started to adopt. It includes procedures, guidance manual and ordinance. However,
MUDL would need to prepare further tools and instruments to support full implementation of the NSPF.

Although, some of the outputs such as functional reviews were carried out, only one PDO indicator was
achieved. Therefore, the efficacy of this objective is modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Create an enabling policy framework and enhance urban policy making capacity in relevant agencies at the
national level.

Revised Rationale
The title of the relevant ministry - the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MUDH) was changed to
Ministry of Urban Development and Land (MUDL) in December 2018. With the shifting policy priorities, the
restructuring narrowed the project focus. However, the objective was not revised. With the enactment of the
new Municipal Law, most relevant activities were retained. Consequently, the scope of the first component
was reduced to building the database for Municipal Finance module only and the updating of the UMIS in
subsequent years was dropped, as this was deemed unnecessary since its set-up would be finalized just prior
to the closing date (Restructuring Paper, para 9).

The revised results framework had a narrower focus on the activities related to creating an enabling policy
framework and enhancing urban policy making capacity in relevant agencies at the national level. The
PDO indicator "National Urban Policy formulated and under implementation, achieving early stage results"
was revised to "National Urban Policies for Housing Supply and Municipal Financial Performance
Formulated". The intermediate results indicators was adjusted to reflect the reduced scope of the project,
namely by reducing implementation of the UMIS to the first module on Municipal Financial Performance,
linked to the Municipal Incentive Fund (MIF) (Restructuring paper, para 10).

The Theory of Change, with the logical linkage between the revised activities to PDO was weak. With the
reduction in the scope of the UMIS to the municipal finance module only, and not a comprehensive database



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



as envisaged before restructuring, would provide limited inputs to the government agencies in fulfilling their
mandated functions.

Outputs

All outputs discussed above under objective 1 are also relevant under the revised objective. The additional
outputs of the project were:

      A Municipal Finance Performance Database was established at the national level, achieving the
       revised intermediate indicator target (the restructuring reduced the scale of UMIS database to only
       the Municipal Finance model). This is an excel tool for the government to monitor municipal finance
       performance, to calibrate performance-based transfers due to municipalities under the Municipal
       Incentive Fund. The Municipal Finance Performance module was populated with data (where
       available) to facilitate MIF implementation (ICR page 14). According to the project team (email dated
       July 2, 2021), the main data intended to populate the Urban Management Information System (UMIS)
       was collected, processed, shared with Ministry of Urban Development and Land (MUDL) and
       presented in a user-friendly way via the Strategic Development Framework (SDFs). This included data
       from surveys conducted under the project in the five PCCs and a wide range of administrative data
       across governments agencies.

      The project provided the Directorate of UMIS (Spatial Urban Management Information System
       department – SUMIS) a server and data storage and it had a mandate to create the full UMIS
       after the project closure. The project team informed IEG (email dated July 2, 2021) that recruitment
       of 17 staff for the SUMIS Directorate is ongoing, and the Directorate is expected to create the UMIS
       utilizing the UMIS system design, web architecture, and proof of concept, as well as the data collected
       as originally intended.

      The project assisted in the establishment of a Municipal Incentive Fund (MIF). This was based on
       the recommendations of the "Municipal Incentive Fund Policy Options Paper" (no target was set at
       restructuring). The paper outlined the best practice options to design performance incentives, and to
       implement and finance the Municipal Incentive Fund (MIF).

      As planned, the project provided new engineering, planning, and project management
       equipment and software to the national Urban Planning Studio, as well as Urban Planning
       Studios in MUDL Provincial Offices in the five participating PCCs. This would enable the Ministry
       of Urban Development and Land (MUDL) to fulfil its (enlarged) urban planning and management
       functions.

      Government capacity to use data beyond the Strategic Development Frameworks (SDFs) was
       supported by the setting-up of National Urban Planning Studio, Urban Planning Studios in MUDL
       Provincial Offices in the five participating PCCs, as planned. The ICR notes that human capacity
       constraints remain.

Outcomes

The narrowly defined urban policy framework was enhanced. The project conducted in-depth reviews of
the eight aspects of the housing market: (i) Land Supply; (ii) Construction materials and techniques; (iii)


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



Housing Typologies and Standards; (iv) Developers and construction firms; (v) Market segmentation; (vi)
Permitting; Infrastructure; and (viii) Housing sector governance. This informed the formulation of
Afghanistan’s first National Housing Policy, achieving the revised PDO. This was approved by the High
Council for Urban Development in 2020.

The project supported the review of the draft Municipal Law and a national policy for municipal finance
performance was introduced. achieving the post restructuring indicator “National Urban Policies for
Housing Supply and Municipal Financial Performance formulated”.

The Municipal Incentive Fund (MIF) created under this project intended to introduce rules-based fiscal
transfer mechanism to the municipalities, thereby improving municipal financial management, reporting, and
revenue mobilization. At project closure, there was no evidence that the MIF improved municipal financial
management, reporting, and revenue mobilization. The ICR notes that the MIF requires a robust data
collection and analysis effort, which is where the UMIS will focus under this first module.

In sum, to create an enabling environment and enhance urban policy making capacity in relevant agencies
(the ICR only refers to one agency, namely MUDL) the project supported the formulation of National Housing
Policy, enactment of a Municipal Investment Fund, and the establishment of several directorates viz. the
Directorate of Urban Regeneration, the Directorate of Spatial Development Framework (SDF), the Directorate
of National Spatial Strategy and Planning (NSSP), the Directorate of Spatial Urban Management Information
System (SUMIS), the Directorate of Regional Planning, and the Directorate of Detailed Planning. These
directorates reflect the institutional structure proposed in the National Spatial Planning Framework (NSPF)
(ICR pages 14 and 44) . The project laid the groundwork, and while there is limited evidence to demonstrate
the achievement of the PDO “enabling policy environment” and “enhanced urban policy making capacity in
relevant agencies at the national level (MUDL). the outputs created in terms of the policy papers indicate an
enhanced policy environment. The achievement of this objective is substantial with some shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen city planning, management and service delivery capacity in five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs).

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The project activities such as providing technical assistance in urban planning and
management were expected to result in outcomes such as enhanced urban planning and management at
local levels. This, along with support in three areas: (a) preparation of local strategic development frameworks
(SDFs); (b) preparation of Capital Investment Plans; and (c) preparation of feasibility studies and detailed
designs for priority as well as catalytic projects, was expected to achieve the PDO “strengthen city planning,
management and service delivery capacity in five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs)”. However, the results
framework did not include outcome indicators to measure this objective.

Outputs


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)




  Municipal capacity of the PCCs was strengthened by the preparation of a guidance manual for
   producing Strategic Development Frameworks (SDFs), as planned. The guidance manual
   included step-by-step guidance on the data to be collected, tools to use, and procedures for data
   analysis to produce the SDFs. The Provincial ‘Urban Planning Studios’ facilitated SDFs preparation
   through the use of base maps, satellite imagery, new engineering, planning, and project management
   equipment and software procured under the project. The ICR (page 16) notes that continued support
   would be needed to address human capacity gaps to utilize the equipment and to implement plans.

  The project supported the five PCCs to complete SDFs with multi-year Capital Investment
   Plans (CIPs), as targeted. The SDFs are an important planning tool for the PCCs, as they provide an
   officially-mandated and evidence-based framework to guide municipalities’ city management, detailed
   area planning, and service delivery (at appraisal, the PCCs lacked adequate spatial or investment
   plans). A gender-based assessment was conducted within the SDF for all 5 PCCs, as planned.

  The five participating cities had a pipeline of (approximately 20 per city) tender-ready priority
   infrastructure projects including feasibility studies (with Environmental and Social Management Plan
   (ESMPs), topographical surveys, and geotechnical surveys), designs, and bidding documents (no
   target was set at appraisal or restructuring). [According to the PAD, priority projects were to be "no
   regret" investments that require limited budget and would be relatively simple to execute]. As
   planned, the SDF for each city had at least one priority projects for women (for example,
   incorporating dedicated spaces for women-owned businesses, public spaces and amenities for
   women, and tailoring vocational courses and facilities for women’s needs).

  At restructuring, "Feasibility Study Preparation for Catalytic Projects (CPs)" was dropped. This
   removal reflected that: (i) central and local governments needed more time to select the CPs for
   preparation, informed by the SDFs and their Capital Investment Plans, which were still under
   development (at the time of restructuring). The output (there was no an indicator) was dropped.
   [Catalytic Investments were intended to be newly-identified investments linked to the capital
   investment plans of the SDFs in five cities]. The ICR reports that all Catalytic Investments would be
   prepared and financed under the follow-on Cities Investment Program (CIP). It should be noted that
   this project never intended to finance Catalytic Investment Project.

  The project team informed IEG (email dated July 2, 2021) that the equipment and data provided by
   the project is being utilized to conduct surveys and prepare detailed plans in the PCCs. For example,
   a provincial director told MUDL that thanks to the equipment provided, “they are not inviting surveyors
   from Kabul anymore to do survey in their cities, they do their own surveys. They are preparing their
   own plans now and only send it for approval to the center”. Similarly, PCCs (including their respective
   MUDL Provincial Offices) are now able to take on the assignments with which they are tasked that
   they could not previously conduct due to lack of equipment.

  Regarding the priority projects, the project team informed IEG (email dated July 2, 2021) that:
       o of 8 projects supported with pre-screening, all have been completed by municipalities in full
          from municipalities' own budgets.
        o of 18 projects supported with design, 12 are already fully implemented by the government, and
          6 are under implementation due to be completed by end of August 2021.
        o of the additional 92 projects fully prepared by the project, as of June 26th 2021, 34 projects are
          in different stages of procurement under the Bank's EZ-KAR (Component 3), 5 Projects are in

                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



                                           different stages of procurement under the Bank's CIP, and "the remaining projects are in line
                                           for implementation in 2022", from a variety of World Bank and government financing. (In total,
                                           US$21 million will be invested in the Priority Projects by the Bank's EZ-Kar and CIP projects.)

                            Outcomes

                            The PDO indicator “number of participating cities that have prioritized Capital Investment Plans (CIPs)
                            to enhance service delivery” was achieved. The CCIP for each participating city were prepared as
                            targeted. This PDO indicator is an output-level indicator. The “number of participating cities” is not an
                            outcome, as it does not say anything about what has been achieved at outcome level.

                            As mentioned above, tender ready priority investment projects were prepared, as targeted. These included
                            investments in sidewalks and street lighting, road repairs, bridges, drainage, markets and parks, essential
                            public buildings, and bus stations. The draft Priority Package was submitted just before project closing. The
                            PDO indicator "target number of residents benefiting from SDFs Capital Investment Plans, and
                            Priority Projects in the participating PCCs" was met (2.33 million, versus a target of 1.5
                            million). According to the PAD (para 22), 1.5 million beneficiaries was the estimated population of the five
                            PCCs. The achievement of this indicator may be due to rapid urbanization, as the beneficiaries were the
                            entire population of the five PCCs. At project closure, there was no evidence of improved service delivery to
                            the beneficiaries.

                            The project contributed to providing the five PCCs with tools to develop their planning, management, and
                            service delivery capacity in five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs). This enabled them to prepare “tender-ready”
                            priority investment plans. However, the ICR does not provide credible evidence that the city planning,
                            management and service delivery capacity was strengthened. The ICR (page 16) notes that continued
                            support would be needed to address human capacity gaps to utilize the equipment and to implement plans.
                            The project team informed IEG (email dated July 2, 2021) that cities have adopted and utilized thee plans.
                            For example, “In 2022, Khost has implemented the hilltop greenery in line with the recommendations of Khost
                            SDF; 14 Jalalabad infrastructure projects from the SDF were awarded for implementation by the National
                            Development Corporation (NDC, under the office of President); NDC has also been tasked to prepare
                            detailed plans and detailed design for 10 SDF infrastructure projects in each of Khost, Kandahar, Herat, and
                            Mazar-e-Sharif. The projects are to be selected from the SDF Action Plan and approved by the office of
                            President. MUDL has provided NDC with all SDFs and accompanying data, including elaboration of SDF,
                            projects sequencing, and themes, to guide project selection and preparation. The Civil Services Commission
                            is planning to hire 25 experts for each of the participating PCC municipalities (125 experts total) to support
                            SDF implementation. Cities were equipped with trainings, equipment, and a detailed guidance manual to
                            support their updates to city plans going forwards.

                            The achievement of this objective is modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)




         OVERALL EFFICACY
         Rationale
         The achievement of the first objective of creating an enabling policy framework and enhance urban policy
         making capacity in relevant agencies at the national level is rated modest due to low achievement. The
         achievement of the second objective “strengthen city planning, management and service delivery capacity in
         five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs)” is rated modest for lack of evidence. The overall efficacy under the
         original objectives is assessed as modest.




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
         Modest                                                  Insufficient evidence
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The achievement of the revised first objective of creating an enabling policy framework and enhance urban
         policy making capacity in relevant agencies at the national level is rated substantial with some shortcomings.
         The achievement of the second objective “strengthen city planning, management and service delivery
         capacity in five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs)” is rated modest for lack of evidence. The overall efficacy
         under the revised objective is assessed as substantial, with moderate shortcomings, given that 60% of the
         project resources were spent on activities contributing to the first objective.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The project was designed to provide technical assistance to strengthen urban planning at national and local
level. At appraisal, no cost-benefit analysis was carried out as the capacity building activities were not
amenable to cost-benefit analysis (PAD para 54). The PAD instead noted that the project would pursue least-
cost solutions through the competitive selection of contractors, and World Bank reviews of terms of references,
consultant selection, and technical outputs to ensure quality. To ensure this, the World Bank promoted
competitive bidding throughout, utilizing Direct/Sole Source selection only for recruiting qualified consultants.
Where benchmarks were available, the government external auditors found that the project costs were lower
compared to the MUDL's procurement for similar or superior items (ICR page 17). The project team informed
IEG that there were cost savings - the Priority Investment Project preparation under component 4 was
contracted with a US$1.9 million cost savings (the cost was US$1.1 million instead of an estimated US$3.0
million).

Administrative efficiency. There were initial procurement delays due to difficulties in attracting qualified
consultants to Afghanistan. There were procurement delays as approval was required from the MUDL’s
Procurement Department, and the National Procurement Committee for large items. This pushed the completion

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



of SDFs and Priority Projects, closer to project closing, Project restructuring was completed within five months of
the mid-term review. Despite a highly ambitious timeline, all revised activities were delivered by closing. On
balance, efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets. With substantial relevance of objectives, modest efficacy, and substantial
efficiency, the overall rating is moderately unsatisfactory (3).

Under the revised outcome targets. With substantial relevance, efficiency, and efficacy, with moderate
shortcomings, the overall rating is moderately satisfactory (4).

A split rating is applied based on the disbursement shares before and after the project restructuring in
2019, when a disbursement share was at 43.6% and 56.4% respectively (amount disbursed was US$4.52
million; actual project cost was US$10.36 million). The overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory, the
weighted value is 4 (0.436*3+ 0.564*4 =3.564).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership/commitment risk is substantial. Although the government has demonstrated
strong ownership of the programs developed under this project and has institutionalized the
recommendations developed under this project in new/revised policies, frameworks, and plans, there is high
government staff turnover.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



Political instability risk is substantial as Afghanistan remains vulnerable to insurgency (FCV context).

Financial risk is substantial as the municipal own source revenues may fall short of the investment needs in
the near term. Currently these are being support by the World Bank's Cities Investment Program (CIP)
(P160619) and Afghanistan: Eshteghal Zaiee - Karmondena Project (P166127).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Through this project, the World Bank re-engaged in Afghanistan’s urban sector after almost a decade.
  The World Bank drew lessons from the Banks work in other FCV contexts such as World Bank
  Engagement in Situations of Fragility, Conflict and Violence, 2016 and IEG’s Afghanistan Country
  Program Evaluation Report, 2002-2011. Key risks were identified at appraisal, and appropriate risk-
  mitigation measures were proposed. For example, the low capacity risk was to be mitigated through
  building capacity by this project (PAD para 49). Regarding the procurement capacity of MUDH, the
  technical assistance (under component 2) would support MUDH in planning and executing the budget in
  line with policy objectives, establish management reporting systems for effective monitoring, and make
  internal audit compliant with international standards (PAD para 51). The “conflict and violence” risk was to
  be mitigated through the selection of participating cities where the situation was less volatile (PAD para
  52).

  The project's timeline of two years and nine months was ambitious, given the “high” risk rating and FCV
  context. The ICR explains (page 25) that the short implementation period was aimed at quickly preparing
  the groundwork for subsequent urban operations (such as the Cities Investment Program (CIP). To
  mitigate the short timeline, the World Bank undertook detailed analytics and consultations, provided
  considerable guidance on the preparation of Terms of References, activated the Project Core Team
  (PCT), and mobilized and engaged institutional and high-level stakeholders (up to the Presidency) well
  before effectiveness. However, the ambitious timeline proved to be difficult to achieve due to low
  capacity. The scope of the project was reduced at the time of restructuring (see section 2 above). The
  results framework was deficient (see section 9 below).

  Overall, the quality at entry was satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank carried out high level dialogue with the government including the leadership of Ministry of
 Urban Development and Land (MUDL), High Council for Urban Development, and the office of the
 President. Safeguards supervision was satisfactory. Despite security challenges and COVID - 19, the
 World Bank carried out at least two supervision missions per year and utilized remote and third-country

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



 supervision when needed. The World Bank was pro-active and focused on high-impact activities, e.g.,
 revision of the building code and Mortgage Law, developing a national spatial planning framework (NSSP),
 and providing additional urban planning equipment. The project was impacted by a portfolio-wide decision
 to not extend any projects. The task team continued to provide implementation support during the extended
 grace period.

 Overall, the quality of supervision was satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were four PDO indicators: (i) National Urban Policy formulated and under implementation, achieving
 early stage results; (ii) National urban development planning framework in place; (iii) Number of
 Participating cities that have prioritized Capital Investment Plans to enhance service delivery; and (iv)
 Number of direct beneficiaries from the project at the five PCCs. These project indicators were not
 adequate in measuring project outcome such as: (i) creating an enabling policy framework at the national
 level; (ii) enhanced urban policy making capacity; (iii) strengthened city planning capacity in all five
 provincial cities; and (iv) strengthened management capacity in the five provincial cities.

 The results framework did not include outcome indicator to measure the achievement of the second
 objective "Strengthen city planning, management and service delivery capacity in five PCCs". The PDO
 indicator “number of participating cities that have prioritized Capital Investment Plans (CIPs) to enhance
 service delivery” is an output indicator. The “number of participating cities” is not an outcome, as it does not
 say anything about what has been achieved at outcome level.

 The methodology for selecting the direct beneficiaries for the PDO indicator "Number of direct beneficiaries
 from the project at the five PCCs" was not discussed in the PAD. According to the PAD (para 22), 1.5
 million beneficiaries was the estimated population of the five PCCs. So, this indicator was inadequate.

 The PAD (page 46) mentioned that since the project aimed to build MUDH institutional capacity, the project
 would mainstream M&E within the Policy and Planning Directorate at Ministry of Urban Development and
 Housing (MUDH).



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, the Project Core Team (PCT) monitored progress against implementation plans.
  The Quarterly Progress Reports reported implementation progress, challenges, and plans in detail, but

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



  did not report well on progress against the PAD Results Framework. M&E implementation was not
  affected by COVID-19, due to the regular use of remote M&E throughout the project. (ICR page 23).

  Regarding the mainstreaming of M&E within the Policy and Planning Directorate at MUDH, the project
  team informed IEG (May 5, 2021) that this did not happen as planned due to the sudden outbreak of
  COVID-19 and the inability to carry-out such a programmes online due to lack of client IT readiness.
  However, the project hired one M&E specialist and his contribution was very effective in building relevant
  M&E capacity within MUDL. Building on this experience, the MUDL initiated the first steps towards
  establishing a core M&E unit for Policy and Planning pending availability of budgets.



c. M&E Utilization
  The findings from the Quarterly Progress Reports were discussed with the stakeholders which led to
  effective course correction (ICR page 23).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Category "B" and three safeguards policies were applicable:

         Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). Project activities were expected to have positive
           environmental impacts both during implementation and over the long-term, through measures to be
           adopted for environmental protection, zoning regulations, and other regulatory and environmental
           mitigation procedures introduced under the Project.

         Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) was triggered because the technical assistance activities
           under Components 3 & 4 may lead to follow-on investment projects that might result in land
           acquisition. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement
           Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared.

         Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) was triggered because the feasibility and design
           studies for critical infrastructure in the selected cities were expected to cover the old city areas,
           which are rich in physical cultural resources. The ESMF would provide guidelines for "Chance Find
           Procedures" according to national law (PAD para 66).

   During implementation, feasibility studies for Priority Projects prepared under component 4 were screened
   with reference to environment and social checklist, and site-specific Environmental and Social Management
   Plans (ESMPs) were prepared for all Priority Project investments. The ICR reports that each safeguards
   policy was rated satisfactory throughout the project implementation period (ICR page 24).



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   The Ministry of Urban Development and Land (MUDL) was the implementing agency and responsible for
   the Financial Management. It maintained proper records for expenditures and submitted timely Interim
   Financial reports. During each supervision mission, the World Bank reviewed documentation and
   payments, and found them adequate.

   The annual audited financial statements were submitted with a four-month delay for the fiscal years 2018
   and 2019, because the Supreme Audit Office (SAO) was unable to hire auditors on time. In addition, there
   were delays in submission of documentation by the Project Core Team (PCT) to the external auditors.
   Since March 2018 (until project closing) the World Bank rated the project's financial performance as
   'moderately satisfactory". The audit opinion was qualified for both FY 2018 and FY 2019. According to the
   project team (May 5, 2021), initially, the auditor was not provided with a full set of supporting
   documentation and this was subsequently rectified. For FY 2018, the project team provided evidence that
   satisfied the World Bank to close the observation. At the time of the preparation of the ICR, the audit
   opinion for FY 2019 was ongoing deliberations between the Bank, the project team, and the Supreme
   Audit Office. The team confirmed (May 5, 2021) that this issues has been resolved and that the FY 2019
   audit report was unqualified.

   Procurement

   There were delays in the procurement of individuals and consultancy firms (which reflected difficulties in
   attracting qualified technical consultants to Afghanistan). The staff at the MUDL procurement department
   was trained. There were no instances of misprocurement or ineligible expenditures. The World
   Bank's Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system was used. A procurement
   specialist was hired to carry out procurement and the Bank team supported the procurement of complex
   and high value contracts. A consultancy firm lodged a complaint, which is being reviewed by the
   Bank's Integrity Vice Presidency (INT). The World Bank team informed IEG (May 5, 2021) that the
   complaint was lodged against a Lead consultant, regarding their non-payment of sub-consultants who was
   judged to have not performed per their contract. After the client reached out, the Lead consultant agreed to
   release 20% of sub-consultant’s payment immediately, and to release the remainder after settlement of
   some mutual contractual obligations between lead and the sub-consultant. INT has not reached its
   conclusion as yet.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  The assessment is based on a
                                                                                  split rating. Under the original
                                                                                  outcome targets, with substantial
                                                                                  relevance of objectives, modest
                                                                                  efficacy, and substantial
                                                                                  efficiency, the overall rating is
                                                                                  moderately unsatisfactory (3).
                                                                                  Under the revised outcome
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  targets, with substantial
                                                                                  relevance, efficiency, and
                                                                                  efficacy, with moderate
                                                                                  shortcomings, the overall rating
                                                                                  is moderately satisfactory (4).
                                                                                  The overall outcome rating is
                                                                                  moderately satisfactory, the
                                                                                  weighted value is 4.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

Following lessons are adapted from the ICR:

      The strength of client ownership, and client - World Bank relationships, is central to
       the effectiveness of Technical Assistance (TA). The project was aligned to support the
       government’s own program and the World Bank fostered a strong relationship with the
       policy-makers (up to the highest level). Senior, respected, well-networked, local consultants
       also strengthened the engagement.

      High-level coordination and ownership can mitigate against fragility and is key for the
       urban sector. Effective urban planning and management requires coordination across
       multiple sectors and tiers of government such as Ministry Level and President or Prime
       Minister’s Office, particularly so in fragile, evolving institutional environments. The project
       experience shows strong benefit from close collaboration with institutions with a high-level
       mandate for coordination – such as Afghanistan’s High Council for Urban Development
       (HCUD).

      A clear logical link between outputs and outcomes at project design can critically
       affect the achievement of project outcome. The design needs to support validation and
       implementation-readiness, after initial outputs are delivered. A programmatic approach or
       Series of Projects can enhance sustainability.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is modest for the following reasons:

      The quality of evidence is weak. The ICR does not provide a full overview of the original indicators and
        targets compared to the revised indicators and targets. The reporting is unclear and does not provide a
        sufficient level of detail to assess the achievement of PDOs against targets. The results framework in
        presented in the ICR is not fully consistent with the one provided in the PAD.

      The ICR is not internally consistent. The high rating for the first objective is not based on the evidence
        provided in the ICR, with more than half of the UMIS not implemented. Also, the modest M&E rating
        does not go well with a satisfactory overall outcome rating. The ICR did not report on progress against
        the PAD's Results Framework.

      The quality of analysis is inadequate.


  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 19
