     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



                                                                            Report Number: ICRR0022513

1. Project Data



 Project ID                             Project Name
 P122039                                SOCIAL SAFETY NETS

 Country                                Practice Area(Lead)
 Tajikistan                             Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61750,IDA-D2700,IDA-H7260         31-Dec-2015                                             6,647,125.09

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Jun-2011                           30-Jun-2020

                                       IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        3,200,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                         4,999,629.78                                                0.00

 Actual                                     4,842,124.18                                                0.00




 Prepared by              Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Anthony Martin Tyrrell   Judyth L. Twigg            Joy Maria Behrens              IEGHC (Unit 2)




 P123704_TBL
 Project ID                             Project Name
 P123704                                Targeting & payment of social assistance ( P123704 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                      Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                1805000.91

 Bank Approval Date                    Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jan-2011

                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)




                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                     2,200,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                        0.00                                     1,805,000.91

 Actual                                                    0.00                                     1,805,000.91




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financing Agreement (July 13, 2011), the project development objective (PDO) was “to improve
   the capacity of the Government of Tajikistan to plan, monitor, and manage social assistance for the poor
   through the development of a national registry of social protection and the provision of training, equipment
   and related items for improving said capacity."

   The project objective was revised in 2018 as part of a restructuring and additional financing (AF; see Section
   2e below) designed to align with an updated vision that was underpinned by implementation experience and
   legislation that supported a national rollout of the targeted social assistance (TSA) program to all 68 districts
   of the country.

   The revised project objective was “to achieve national geographic coverage of the Targeted Social Assistance
   Program and to ensure integrated delivery of services."

   Despite the change in the PDO as part of the 2018 AF/restructuring, this ICR Review does not undertake a
   split rating. This is because the change in the PDO reflected a change designed to better capture the "spirit"
   of the project, which had already evolved in scope beyond the limits of the original PDO. The January
   2018 Project Paper noted that from a pilot covering two districts in 2011, the new TSA program was expanded
   to 10 districts in 2013. Subsequently, the government approved expansion of the program to 15 more districts
   in mid-2014, and to another 15 districts in 2017. In February 2017, the TSA Law was passed, laying a solid
   foundation for the national TSA rollout planned in 2018.The Project Paper supporting the January 2018
   AF/restructuring notes (p. 10): "The Project currently consists of three components which will remain the
   same, with additional financing added to Component 3, and a new Component 4 will be added as
   follows: Component 4: Supporting national roll-out of the Targeted Social Assistance Program, including the
   National Registry of Social Protection. Under this component, the proposed AF would extend activities that
   already constitute the core of the original project design and supplement them with some new but closely
   linked activities." As such, and as confirmed by the project team in conversation with IEG, the
   AF/restructuring was focused on extending the reach or scope of the project to the final 28 districts and not
   about more fundamental change that might merit a spit rating approach.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)




  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  09-Jan-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, pp. 5-7) detailed three components. A fourth component was added
   with the introduction of Additional Financing (AF) in 2018 (as detailed in Section 2e below).

   Component 1: Establishing the National Registry for Social Protection and Supporting Development
   of the Targeted Social Assistance (Appraisal US$ 2.3 million; Actual US$2.3 million). The first
   component was to establish a National Registry for Social Protection (NRSP) to help apply a proxy-means
   test to identify the poorest households eligible for receipt of social assistance. It was also to help manage,
   monitor, and oversee payments of social assistance and provide a registry platform that could be used by
   other social protection programs. This component was to supply goods, including computer equipment,
   printers, scanners, and electrical, telephone, and internet connections, to strengthen the capacity of the
   Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (MLSP) to implement a nation-wide system of poverty-targeted
   social assistance.

   Component 2: Capacity Building for Launching and Initiating the Rollout of the Targeted Social
   Assistance Program (Appraisal US$ 0.7 million; Actual US$ 0.7 million). This component was to train
   government personnel at the central and local levels to implement and use the NRSP. It was also to build
   the capacity of the government to use the registry to control and audit payments of social assistance and
   support a small unit of local consultants, in the MLSP, to help plan for the national reform of social
   assistance.

   Component 3: Project Management (Appraisal US$ 0.2 million; Actual US$ 0.5 million). This
   component was to support project management and coordination, as well as the carrying out of fiduciary
   tasks (including procurement, financial reporting and accounting activities, audit) and other reporting for the
   project.

   Component 4: Supporting National Roll-out of the Targeted Social Assistance Program, including
   the National Registry of Social Protection (Original US$ 1.5 million; Actual US$ 1.5 million): This
   component was designed to support the establishment of an effective system to manage the delivery of
   unified social assistance as a new and consolidated TSA program in the country and its national rollout. It
   extended activities – e.g., establishing additional regional coordination centers; upgrading work places to
   ensure connectivity and stable electricity supply, and office logistics; conducting public awareness and
   information campaigns; introducing improvements in the mechanisms of TSA beneficiary selection and
   benefit delivery; and strengthening the grievance redress mechanisms that were already under way and
   core to the original project design, building on them with some additional but closely linked activities in
   support of the overall project objectives. The component also supported the design and development of a



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



  new mechanism and database of electronic disability certification for the State Medical-Social Expertise
  Service (SMSES).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  Project cost at appraisal was US$3.2 million. AF of US$1.8 million increased the project budget to US$5.0
  million, of which US$4.84 million was disbursed.

  Financing

  The PAD (pp. viii) stated that the project would be supported with an IDA grant of US$3.2 million. At
  restructuring (see below) further IDA grants in the amount of US$1.8 million were added.

  Borrower Contribution

  There was no planned or actual borrower contribution.

  Dates

  The project was approved on June 16, 2011 and became effective on October 11, 2011, with a planned
  closing date of December 31, 2015. The Mid-Term Review took place on February 2, 2015. Given
  extensions, actual project closing was on June 20, 2020.

  The project underwent a series of restructurings because of changes in its institutional context, as detailed
  below. The original PDO indicators were revised under the first restructuring in July 2014 and revised once
  again as part of a January 2018 restructuring and AF, at which stage the PDO was also revised and new
  indicators added.

  The first restructuring (August 6, 2014) reflected key changes made by the government based on a World
  Bank-implemented review of project performance. This reassessment involved a shift in all responsibilities
  for implementation from the Executive Office of the President to the line ministry as well as the transfer of
  the social protection function from the MLSP to the Ministry of Health, which was renamed the Ministry of
  Health and Social Protection of Population (MHSPP). To improve autonomy and implementation, a new
  structure called the State Agency for Social Protection (SASP) was created within the MHSPP's Division for
  Social Protection of Population (DSPP). As well as allowing for changes at the institutional level, this first
  restructuring also involved changes in the PDO indicators (three of the four PDO indicators were dropped,
  the fourth was retained, and five new ones were added), as well as changes in components and costs,
  disbursement arrangements, legal covenants, financial management, and procurement. The project closing
  date was also extended by six months to June 30, 2016. This restructuring introduced a target to achieve
  coverage of 30 districts, noting there was no target for district coverage in the original appraisal document.

  The ICR noted (p. 12) that subsequent project restructurings were designed to keep the project active while
  a delayed AF was being processed. In that regard, the second to fifth restructurings, dated April 4, 2016,
  March 9, 2017, September 28, 2017, December 15, 2017, related solely to changes in the project closing
  date.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



   The sixth restructuring and AF were introduced on January 9, 2018. The AF was intended to provide
   financing to support expansion of coverage of the TSA program to all 68 districts in the country, with a view
   to reaching a far greater number of poor and vulnerable families and ensuring sustainability of the reform
   efforts. The January 9, 2018 Project Paper in support of the AF noted that from a pilot covering two districts
   in 2011, the new TSA program was expanded to 10 districts in 2013. Subsequently, the government
   approved expansion of the program to 15 more districts in mid-2014, and to another 15 districts in 2017. In
   February 2017, the TSA Law was passed, laying a solid foundation for the national TSA rollout planned in
   2018. The restructuring also included plans for other social programs to leverage the social registry (NRSP)
   and establish an electronic mechanism for disability certification as a separate module of the management
   information system. Under the restructuring, the PDO was revised and five of the PDO indicators in effect
   as of July 2014 were changed, a sixth was retained unchanged, and four new indicators were added. The
   three original components remained unchanged although funds were added under Component 3. The
   fourth component was added.

   A final restructuring (December 18, 2019) was provided to extend the project by six months, until June 30,
   2020, as the project awaited a delayed decree for national rollout of the TSA program (to an additional 28
   districts to reach all 68 districts in the country) and to allow the project to complete required activities around
   the disability certification to attain its development objective, fully utilize project funds, and achieve project
   indicator targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
In 2010, the government addressed poverty, in part, through two main social assistance programs, the
largest of which was for electricity and gas compensation, and the other for needy families whose children
attend school. Referencing a World Bank report that underpinned the rationale and design for this project -
Tajikistan: Delivering Social Assistance to the Poorest Households (December 30, 2010, Report No. 56593-
TJ) – the PAD noted that these programs exerted almost no downward influence on poverty rates given,
inter alia, the low rate of government expenditure on the programs as well as poor targeting. The PAD also
noted that a lack of accurate and accessible information on recipients of social assistance weakened
budgeting, management, and financial controls, and that there was no national electronic registry of
beneficiaries and very limited human resources working with (often out-of-date and inaccurate) paper files
in district offices. These weaknesses in targeting, information management, monitoring, oversight, and
controls undermined the credibility of the social assistance system.

The European Union (EU), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the World Bank were supporting policy
actions to reform the social assistance system through budget support. Reforms underway prior to the start
of this project included an EU-supported pilot for the reform of social assistance in two districts that sought
to consolidate the two largest social assistance programs into a single benefit, and to use a proxy-means
test to target benefits to the poorest 20 percent of the population. The World Bank had mobilized a grant
from the Rapid Social Response (RSR) Multi-Donor Trust Fund to support the implementation and
evaluation of that pilot. The World Bank also planned to conduct an evaluation study of the pilot of poverty-
targeted social assistance that would draw on a household survey to allow for an estimation of the extent of



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



               success of the pilot in delivering social assistance to the poorest households, as well as changes in
               household consumption and health status.

               The PAD noted that the project would help to offset some of the worst consequences of poverty and could
               contribute to addressing the impact of shocks (e.g., financial crises and droughts) and would also, through
               enhanced complaints procedures and targeting, ensure greater accountability and efficiency in the use of
               public funding. As such, the project supported the first objective of the Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF, FY15-18), reducing the negative impact of the crisis on poverty and vulnerability.

               The ICR (p.18) noted that the project at design was well aligned with the National Development Strategy
               (NDS) 2006–15 (e.g., focused on improving public administration and developing human potential) as well
               the Poverty Reduction Strategy III for 2010–12 which included a social "block" and cross-cutting themes on
               institutional reforms. The project remains relevant and is well aligned with the World Bank's increased
               emphasis on human capital, a focus area of the three pillars in the current CPF (FY19-23) and among the
               key themes of the country’s long-term National Development Strategy 2016–30 (NDS 2030).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the capacity of the Government of Tajikistan to plan, monitor, and manage social assistance for the
                             poor through the development of a national registry of social protection and the provision of training,
                             equipment and related items for improving said capacity / Achieve national geographic coverage of the
                             Targeted Social Assistance Program and ensure integrated delivery of services

                             Rationale
                             A theory of change (ToC) was developed in diagrammatic form for the ICR (there was no ToC in the PAD).
                             Realization of the desired outcomes was predicated on sustained political will and financial commitment from
                             government, steady support for systems reform, and sufficient capacity to implement reform. The ToC was
                             that the purchase of information technology and software coupled with the development of the architecture for
                             a national registry and training of officials (at national, regional, and district levels) would deliver a system that
                             would be populated, maintained, and updated and that would, in turn, allow for improved government capacity
                             to plan, monitor, and manage social assistance for the poor. The project sought to maximize reforms to the
                             system of social assistance that were being supported by the EU, the ADB, and the World Bank through
                             budget support. The project built on a pilot in two districts supported by the EU that was seeking to
                             consolidate the two largest social assistance programs into a single benefit, and which used a proxy-means
                             test to target benefits to the poorest 20 percent of the population, noting that the World Bank had mobilized a
                             grant from the RSR Multi-Donor Trust Fund to support the implementation and evaluation of the pilot. The


                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



project would contribute to reduced poverty and improved income distribution through, for example, better
targeting, and would mitigate the longer-term effects of energy tariffs for beneficiaries.

Intermediate Results

At project design there were no legal and operational materials in support of the rollout of the TSA
and management information systems, and the aim was to have a full set of administrative rules and
regulations and the draft social assistance law in place by project close. These administrative aspects were in
place at project close, the TSA Bill was signed into law in February 2017, and the TSA rollout decree was
approved in May 2020. The project supported preparation of the TSA operations manual and various
directives guiding implementation of the new program at central and local levels.

At project design, a target was set to ensure that Policy and Operational Units within the MHSPP and SASP
were staffed and functioning. At project close, the SASP was set up, including a new data center. The SASP
was fully staffed, and its Director was given responsibility for the rollout of the TSA. A team of technical
consultants was supported to assist SASP in managing the TSA rollout. The ASIST Management Information
System (MIS) was developed to automate TSA programming and administration, and it is now a core
mechanism for monitoring and budgeting at all systems levels. The MIS also allows for developing and
integrating other modules beyond TSA, including cash transfers and other non-cash benefits. A new
Information Technology division was established within the SASP and separately staffed to institutionalize the
function of information system management.

Against a baseline of 0 and a target of 950, by project close 998 staff of MHSPP, SASP, and SMSES,
including at regional and district levels, were provided with training. A set of comprehensive training and
awareness materials was developed. Training on basic computer literacy was provided to data entry
operators at the district level, and information seminars were organized for workers at the municipality level.
As a result of COVID-19 restrictions, some of the staff trainings went online during the last six months of the
project.

Against a baseline of 0 and target of 4, at project close there were 5 fully established and functioning
Regional Program Coordination Centers. The regional centers serve to provide program implementation
monitoring, technical support to the district offices of the SASP, data entry, and selective data verification.
The regional centers were fully supported by the project with trained staff, computer hardware, software, and
high-speed internet connections.

Against a baseline 0 and a target of 3, by project close 3 non-TSA programs used the NRSP to register and
monitor beneficiaries.

Certification of disability was fully automated and operated through the NRSP.

Against a baseline of 0 and target of 75 percent, by project close 98 percent of TSA beneficiaries were
satisfied that the TSA program interventions responded to their needs (established by a survey undertaken
close to project close).

Outcomes




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



                            Against a baseline of 2 districts and a target of 35 districts, 68 districts were covered by the TSA program at
                            project close.

                            Against a baseline of 0 beneficiaries and a target of 1 million, there were 1.283 million beneficiaries of safety
                            nets programs (unconditional cash transfers) by project close, of whom 646,00 were female (against a target
                            of 500,000).

                            Against a baseline of 850 and a target of 1,500, by project close there were 5,150 TSA beneficiaries who
                            were elderly women living alone.

                            Against a baseline of 39,000 and a target of 65,000, by project close there were 130,000 TSA beneficiaries
                            who were women heads of households.

                            Against a baseline of 0 and a target of 200, by project close there were 460 municipalities where training and
                            awareness had been provided on mechanisms of the new TSA program

                            Against a baseline of 0 and a target of 145,000, by project close there were 146,00 certified disabled
                            individuals registered in NRSP. Against a baseline 8,000 and a target of 20,000, by project close there were
                            23,800 certified disabled individuals registered in NRSP who had also been provided with TSA benefits



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved its objective as evidenced through the realization of all outcome indicators. Targets for
                            seven of the outcome indicators were exceeded and targets for the other three were met. A national system
                            of coverage was delivered that allowed for integration of other social protection measures. New institutions
                            were established with trained staff and computerized systems, and new laws were enacted to support reform.
                            The project was technical in nature and built on policy reform efforts that were supported by the EU, ADB,
                            and the World Bank. As such, the project added value through support implementation to ensure enhanced
                            delivery of critical social protection measures.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



The PAD (p.11) noted that the project would improve the efficiency of the social assistance system by increasing
its effectiveness in reducing poverty and that it would save scarce public resources by enabling the Ministry of
Finance (MoF) to reduce reallocation of social assistance for other purposes at the district level, and by reducing
errors and fraud. The economic analysis set out in the PAD (p. 11) noted that the above-referenced 2010 World
Bank study on social assistance in Tajikistan that informed the design of the project had identified significant
inefficiency in the system. The study identified acute coverage and targeting issues. It showed, for example, that
in 2009 social assistance covered only 20 percent of the poorest quintile of households, and only 23 percent of
social assistance payments reached the poorest quintile. The study used simulations based on a scoring
formula to show that, if the public administration applied the formula, targeting accuracy would increase to 54
percent. The study also found that the MoF did not have adequate control over the funds that it transferred to
districts for payment of benefits (e.g., a system of paper registries pertained at the district level, which
complicated audit).

The ICR (pp. 25-28) undertook an efficiency analysis along a number of dimensions. With reference to
preparation and implementation efficiency, the ICR acknowledged that the timeframe for the project was long
and the Bank’s preparation and implementation support budget was significant relative to the IDA allocation. The
plan was for the project to be implemented between June 2011 and December 2015, although it ultimately ran
until June 2020 albeit in an expanded form. Implementation delays due to institutional weaknesses and the
capacity of available personnel were significant - there was no procurement for the first year - and meant that
the implementation of reforms and the associated benefits to the system and citizens were delayed. Annex 2 of
the ICR (p. 59) identified staff time and costs to be $1.549 million, which is the equivalent of about 31 percent of
the actual cost of the project. The ICR argued that significant effort was required to build political ownership of
planned reforms, coupled with sustained technical support, and that the Bank provided such support. Overall
there were 34 supervisory and technical missions between 2012 and 2020, and the ICR suggested that these
were cost-effective given that there was typically considerable cost-sharing across missions for other projects.

With reference to the cost-effectiveness of the infrastructure that the project built – the ASIST MIS developed in
2015 – the ICR noted that the initial cost of around US$375,000 and overall cost of just under $1 million
compares favorably with international experience, e.g., a 2016 review of MIS expenditure on social protection in
Latin America had initial costs ranging from US$1.7 million in Costa Rica, US$10 million in Colombia, US$17
million in Chile, US$83 million in Argentina, to US$90 million in Mexico. The system was procured from an
experienced vendor who had earlier developed a well-functioning system in the Kyrgyz Republic. About $21
million was disbursed over five years through the system on three categories of assistance (targeted social
assistance, compensation for electricity and gas, and school allowances). The ICR suggested that the system
was efficient given, for example, that the initial MIS cost worked out at an average of US$0.29 per beneficiary at
project completion, and that the cost amounts to just 0.7 percent of the social assistance actually disbursed,
even as the efficiency of the disbursement increased. With reference to efficiency of the social safety net
system, a 2012 evaluation of a 2011–12 pilot program undertaken in two districts found that the objective
scoring mechanism of the proxy means test achieved better targeting than preceding programs. Only 23 percent
of the beneficiaries of the legacy programs fell among the poorest 20 percent nationally compared to 48 percent
for the pilot. The evaluation also found that although the transfers remained inadequate overall, there were
notable gains to beneficiaries represented in increased food consumption at the household level, fewer missed
school days among children, and no negative impact on the number of women seeking work. On the other hand,
a 2014 analysis of safety nets found key inefficiencies in the hybrid manual-automated program administration
model. Finally, an analysis of the effectiveness of TSA done using a large-scale household sociological survey
in 2019 found evidence of effectiveness of the project and its beneficiary targeting mechanisms as well as room
for improvement. Positive findings included near-universal (98 percent) acknowledgment of the importance of
the cash transfers, relative ease of application, awareness of the objectivity of the decision to refuse benefits.

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



However, the survey also identified a lack of awareness of the centralized nature of decision-making. For
example, about 60 percent of participants were unaware of the other types of social support they were entitled
to. In addition, there were delays between filing and receipt of the first allowance due to the quarterly payment
schedule, and instances of inequity in benefit distribution.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated high, as the project directly engaged with critical aspects of public
policy, and the objective remains highly aligned with ongoing analysis and strategy as well as future projects.
Efficacy is rated high for the achievement of objectives. All intermediate and outcome targets were met, with
many exceeded. Efficiency is rated modest reflecting the long timeframe for project delivery and the high level of
administrative costs associated with the project. The combined ratings result in an overall outcome rating of
Moderately Satisfactory, indicating that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation and
implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (pp. 42-43) rated risk to development outcome as modest reflecting ongoing government
commitment to reform of the social assistance system, yielding what the ICR described as a fully functional
targeted national social assistance system as well as a first NRSP whose inherent flexibility is already
benefitting other programs, including facilitating utility reforms and, most recently, rapid response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. The ICR (p. 30) noted that over the project cycle, significant improvements in
institutional capacity had been achieved within central and local government that had increased uptake and
accountability of the TSA program. The project contributed to building capacity at the MHSPP and was

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



instrumental in the creation of the SASP staffed by a cadre of trained professionals who are now also familiar
with World Bank systems and procedures. At the regional level throughout the country (given the program's
national expansion), well trained personnel run the TSA program and provide a solid base of human
resources through which future initiatives can be rolled out. Five regional service centers have improved
quality of client services by considerably shortening the time of TSA application processing.

The ICR identified two key risks: continued government interest to improve efficiency of the interventions,
and longer-term fiscal sustainability to cover and potentially expand benefits. With respect to the former, the
ICR stated that reforms to date have catalyzed a shift in the government’s perception of the social sectors,
and heightened interest in further dialogue on social protection policies among the donor community. This
became even more evident in the face of increasing economic threats and vulnerabilities triggered by the
COVID-19 crisis. With respect to ensuring ongoing fiscal support and sustainability, the ICR suggested that
the systems put in place by the project are taking on far greater urgency in light of the pandemic, which is
likely to have an impact on the already limited fiscal space and domestic resource mobilization with potential
implications for the TSA. The ICR concluded that the crisis gives rise to an uncertain economic outlook, as
well as a potential increase in the share of the vulnerable requiring expanded social protection benefits,
coupled with a likely decline in sources of funding. As such, an important achievement of the project is that
the tools are in place to more effectively provide protection for those most at risk who are eligible for
assistance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was strategically relevant, drew upon a solid evidence base provided by prior analytical
  work, and was well aligned with government priorities. Engagement with government was informed by the
  World Bank’s 2010 report - Tajikistan: Delivering Social Assistance to the Poorest Households - that was
  prepared as an in-depth exploratory piece in response to a request from the government to support
  improvement of the social assistance system. The ICR noted that the project team also benefited from in-
  depth dialogue on related work led by the EU. Funding from the RSR Trust Fund supported effective
  collaboration between the MLSP, the World Bank, and EU on a small-scale pilot in two districts through
  which it was possible to develop, pilot, and evaluate targeting, registry, and payments mechanisms for
  channeling social assistance benefits to the poor.

  On the downside, the team significantly over-estimated government capacity to deliver the project within
  the planned timeframe, despite acknowledged weaknesses in the capacity of the administration to
  deliver. Implementation arrangements at approval under the Project Coordination Group (PCG, the
  implementation body under the Executive Office of the President) were weak with knock-on effects for
  procurement and overall sequencing of activity in the early stages that delayed implementation. The ICR
  (p. 33) noted that there was a delay in the PCG withdrawing the advance on the IDA grant for the project
  due to a delay in the government's internal processing of the project operations manual and
  complications with processing of the Manual of Procedures in the Executive Office of the President. As a
  result, there was no procurement under the grant for a full year. Other aspects directly under the control
  of the PCG were also delayed by a full year, including the household survey to improve the proxy means
  test and the registry/MIS tender.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 A total of 34 missions (implementation support and technical missions) were undertaken between 2012 and
 2020, during which time the TTL for the project changed only once (2012) ensuring continuity for most of
 the extended project cycle. The team also followed up virtually with the client and coordinated closely with
 the country office. The relative costs of such intensive supervision were significant. Overall project
 administration (World Bank staff input) cost for this $5 million project was US$2.023 million (ICR, p. 59), of
 which Bank supervision was US$1.549 million (inclusive of ICR costs). Almost 45 percent of supervision
 costs were consumed during FY12 and FY13, which coincides with the period during which both
 development outcome and implementation progress ratings dropped below moderately satisfactory in
 management assessment (ICR, pp. 3-4). The midterm review was completed in February 2014, and this
 helped inform implementation decisions and provided the basis for strategic changes – e.g., change in the
 implementing agency - that had a positive impact on implementation and increased disbursement as
 broadly reflected in management ratings. The ICR also noted that the team was proactive in working with
 the government to develop time-bound action plans to better structure the project rollout and to provide
 timelines to control undue slippages in implementation, although IEG notes that this realignment and the
 overall cost and intensity of support were a function of initial overestimation of government capacity to
 deliver. The team also supported large-scale IT-related procurement to reduce scope to avoid potential
 risks of contract mismanagement. With reference to supporting the effectiveness of the project in the
 broader social protection context, the team worked closely with government and other donors. The Bank
 worked closely with the EU in the early stages of the project on a pilot that provided proof of concept. Later
 the Bank worked with UNICEF to explore synergies on using the registry developed under the TSA
 program for shock response measures in disasters. The ICR also noted that the impact of the social
 protection work helped revitalize the Social Protection Working Group within the Donor Coordination
 Council.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD (p. 10) noted that the PCG was to assemble and report on progress towards achieving outcome
 targets as well as intermediate outcome targets. The PCG was to collect information from the MLSP, and in

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



 particular from its operational arm, the Agency for Social Protection. The project was to finance local
 consultants who would assist the MLSP in gathering information. The project was also to finance surveys to
 assess the effectiveness of the NRSP-based system in assessing the eligibility of applicants. As noted in
 the ICR (p. 36), project design envisaged a "from the ground up" approach, beginning with a learning pilot
 and moving on incrementally from there to overhaul outdated processes and procedures within the system.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR stated (pp. 36-37) that at project approval processes were not automated, and an interim MIS
  was used to input data from beneficiary applications with most processes in the legacy system mostly
  manual and lacking guidance documentation or standard operating procedures. The 2011 pilot provided
  lessons that helped improve processes (e.g., data entered in a stand-alone MIS). From 2015 onwards,
  the SASP took on an increasingly active role in monitoring TSA performance aided by the ASIST MIS
  that automated and streamlined TSA program delivery. The SASP had a dedicated M&E specialist
  responsible for developing procedures and guidelines and for data entry verification. A Monitoring
  Division was also established to oversee implementation of all social programs and, as the program
  expanded, the SASP took on more initiative, regularly conducting stakeholder meetings focused on
  operational monitoring of TSA performance. At the district level, enrollment and verification procedures
  improved through project-supported training. The ICR noted that the World Bank team worked closely
  with the project team and the staff of the SASP on elaborating the TSA monitoring framework. Ultimately,
  all reports on program performance were being generated electronically by project closing, with
  customization possible. This allowed for expansion and controlled rollout of the program across all 68
  districts.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on project indicators were regularly collected and reported, and the information was used for
  decision-making and planning purposes. The online ASIST MIS routinely produced reports.
  Programming and decision-making benefited from the various assessments and evaluations undertaken
  during the course of implementation, including a 2012 impact evaluation of the targeting pilot, a 2014
  study on analysis of safety nets in Tajikistan and the policy options available, and various rounds of
  beneficiary analyses throughout 2018 and 2019. Project M&E also informed Bank engagement
  decisions. For example, all decisions on costing surrounding the Tajikistan Emergency COVID-19
  project (2020-2022, US$11.3 million) were based on up-to-date statistics from the ASIST MIS and
  NRSP. Referring to the 2014 policy-based report, the ICR identified strong examples of evaluation
  influencing program design. One recommendation was to include additional categorical criteria for
  vulnerable women in the system. This was reflected in the Results Framework under the AF. As a result,
  the project introduced two PDO-level indicators (under the January 2018 AF) to trace performance of the
  TSA program with regard to households with distinct social and economic gender disadvantages
  (female-headed households, elderly women living alone).



  M&E Quality Rating
  High


                                                                                                Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was originally classified as category C but, as the ICR (pp. 38-39) noted, the environmental
   assessment category switched to Category B (partial assessment) during implementation given small-scale
   civil works and renovation and refurbishment of premises (SASP moved to a new building with renovation of
   office space and rehabilitation works including for establishment of the data center within the SASP, as well
   as for the five regional data centers). The environmental category was subsequently switched back to
   category C when all public works were completed. In all cases, the scope of works was limited enough to
   not require the development of a separate environmental framework. The ICR (p. 38) stated that the project
   complied with the World Bank’s safeguards requirements.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The PAD (p. 13) noted that the PCG within the Executive Office of the President had a satisfactory history
   in procurement and would be responsible for all procurement, which would be based on draft terms of
   reference and technical specifications that the project’s technical working group (TWG) would submit. The
   main procurement risk identified in the PAD was the potential for delay in the preparation of quality bidding
   documents. To mitigate this, the Executive Office of the President reviewed documents for consistency
   with guidelines and provided specialized support, especially on IT issues, through hiring a qualified
   consultant. However, in the initial stages of implementation, weak capacity impacted the timeliness and
   quality of overall financial management support delivered. The TWG was not effective, and as a result,
   procurement required for IT contracts was stalled as was procurement for the firm to evaluate MLSP
   capacity. This had knock-on impacts on decisions on procurement of training services and computers for
   the ministry that were to be based on recommendations of the capacity assessment report. The 2014
   restructuring saw visible improvements, with the new line ministry actively working to revitalize the
   procurement function. With time, the procurement staff produced robust procurement plans and handled
   large and complex procurement packages.

   The ICR noted that the project overcame initial financial management capacity constraints through the first
   restructuring in 2014, when two clear lines of administering the project— technical and fiduciary— were
   established, with two corresponding lead positions supervising them. Financial management functions
   improved with a new fiduciary team, under the oversight of a full-time project officer. Capacity was also
   strengthened through hiring an experienced consultant as well as two additional accounting/disbursement
   consultants. Once the updated systems and processes were in place, the financial management
   arrangements progressed satisfactorily and the MHSPP was able to generate timely quarterly interim
   financial reports. Project audit reports were generally presented without issue, and the audited financial
   statements were assessed as acceptable to the World Bank.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR noted (pp. 30-31) that the status of being a TSA beneficiary has become "highly valued" in
   Tajikistan, as this status opens up access other benefits -- funeral allowance, reduced school tuition,

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



   access to medical services, and reduction of public transportation costs -- and has become the criterion to
   receive official status of being a low-income family.

   The ICR also asserted that the project has established a solid foundation to revive discussions on devising
   compensating mechanisms to offset the adverse impact of energy reforms on the poor. The TSA has been
   recognized as a dominant instrument to address increased costs of electricity for the poor. Another Bank
   project, Tajikistan Power Utility Financial Recovery Program (2020-2026, US$134 million), uses the TSA
   rollout as an important results indicator; the project aims to mitigate the impact of increasing electricity
   tariffs on vulnerable consumers through a combination of payments under the TSA and a lifeline/block tariff
   structure.

   Finally, the Tajikistan Emergency Covid-19 Project (2020-2022, US$11.3 million) has used the systems
   developed through the project in the delivery of emergency cash transfers. Between June and December
   2020, a total of US$3 million in emergency assistance was delivered to 64,469 vulnerable families with
   children under the age of three.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               IEG rated as high both
                                                                               relevance and efficacy in line
                                                                               with the ICR. However, IEG
                                                                               rated efficiency as modest
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               reflecting the long timeframe for
                                                                               project delivery and the high
                                                                               level of administrative costs
                                                                               associated with the project.
                                                                               IEG ratings differed from ICR
                                                                               ratings which assessed both
                                                                               quality at entry and supervision
                                                                               as satisfactory. IEG rated quality
                                                                               at entry moderately satisfactory
                                                                               reflecting weak estimation of
                                                                               capacity and weak initial
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               implementaiton arrangements.
                                                                               IEG rated supervision as highly
                                                                               satisfactory given the Bank's
                                                                               tenacity in staying with the
                                                                               project and ultimately guiding it
                                                                               towards delivery of important
                                                                               outcomes.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR provided a long list of lessons under three headings – Policy, Implementation, and
Sustainability – the most important of which from IEG's perspective are:

Social assistance reform can be a long process, particularly in a setting with weak implementation
capacity, but can ultimately deliver far-reaching benefits and consequences for both the government
and citizens. In this case, policy reform efforts preceded the project, and the project itself ran
significantly over time, largely as a result of weak implementation capacity. However, improvements
to the social protection system ultimately delivered a more sustainable and efficient system that
better met the needs of citizens through more accurate targeting. As also noted in the ICR, better
targeting has both an equity and an efficiency dimension: those most in need receive benefits, and
there are social protection system-level savings associated with better targeting.

In line with IEG’s discussion of the conditions underpinning successful scaling up in Selected Drivers
of Education Quality: Pre- and In-Service Teacher Training (2019), the design of a pilot intervention
should always have scalability in mind. It is important that pilot projects clearly communicate their
objective as a building block for a national program, to ensure sustainability of the effort. This
requires stakeholder commitment and capacity.

Fiscal and operational sustainability beyond project closing is a concern, particularly as it relates to
financing the MIS/IT systems operation, retention of staff, and ensuring adequate and predictable
budget allocations from the government. Ongoing "maintenance" needs to be built into all scaling-up
efforts to ensure sustainable development.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was reasonably well organized and well argued, providing detail on various aspects including project
design and project restructurings. The ICR also developed an easy-to-understand theory of change that was
presented in diagrammatic form. A number of well-articulated lessons under various headings were developed,
some of which were specific to the project, others of which have more general resonance. In supporting the
achievements of the project, the ICR drew on M&E data as well as beneficiary surveys and impact evaluation
carried out under the project. However, the ICR's efficiency discussion focused more on sectoral rather than
project efficiency. Also, although the PAD did not provide a traditional, quantitative cost benefit analysis, the

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SOCIAL SAFETY NETS (P122039)



ICR might have considered constructing such an analysis, particularly given the duration of the project and the
breadth of expansion in coverage delivered. The split rating mechanism was applied by project time periods
rather than, as per the guidelines, achievement of each objective over the entire lifetime of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
