     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022543

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P132173                                   IN: RWSS for Low Income States

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53450                                 31-Mar-2020                                       190,042,755.22

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Dec-2013                               31-Mar-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             239,583,981.73                                            0.00

 Actual                                         190,042,755.22                                            0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Katsumasa Hamaguchi        Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement, dated February 7, 2014, the Project’s development objectives were to
   improve piped water supply and sanitation services for selected rural communities in target States through
   decentralized delivery systems, and to increase the capacity of the Participating States to respond promptly
   and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-Jul-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component A: Capacity Building and Sector Development (appraisal estimate US$93 million, actual
   US$6.9 million). This component aimed to support institutional capacity building for the Ministry of Drinking
   Water and Sanitation, later Ministry of Jal Shakti, as well as other institutions at state, district, and local
   level. To enable decentralized service delivery, this component was to train Panchayati Raj Institutions in
   key skills such as scheme design, implementation and maintenance, procurement and financial
   management. This component was also expected to finance IEC activities, including behavior change to
   improve sanitation practices, studies and innovative pilots to test new technologies, monitoring and
   evaluation as well as “Excellence Awards” for the best performing states, districts and panchayats.

   Component B: Infrastructure Development (appraisal estimate US$860 million, actual: US$361.8
   million. This component aimed to support new single- and multi-village water schemes, to rehabilitate
   existing schemes, to protect associated water sources and catchment areas, and to support improved water
   quality management. A sub-component was dedicated to household, institutional and environmental
   sanitation to complement the national sanitation campaign program to attain open-defecation-free status.
   This component also funded hiring of consultancy firms, NGOs and community-based organizations to
   support the design and implementation of the infrastructure program.

   Component C: Project Management Support (appraisal estimate US$47 million, actual
   US$12.5 million. This component was to finance staff, consultancies, offices, equipment and related costs
   for the national, state and district-level PMUs.

   Component D: Contingency Emergency Response (appraisal estimate US$0, actual US$0). This
   component was included in case a major natural disaster necessitated reallocations to support response
   and reconstruction. However, this component was not triggered.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$1,000 million. Actual cost was US$381.2
   million.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



                       Financing: The project was to be financed through and International Development Association (IDA) Credit
                       in the amount of US$500 million (revised amount US$239.6 million). Actual disbursement was US$190
                       million.

                       Borrower Contribution: The borrower was to contribute US$500 million, and the actual contribution was
                       US$191.1 million through funding from the Government of India, States and communities.

                       Dates: The project was approved on December 30, 2013 and became effective on April 8, 2014.The project
                       was closed as planned on March 31, 2020. The project was restructured three times, all of which were level
                       2 restructurings and within 10 months of the project's closing date. The first was on June 11, 2019, when
                       the Bank had disbursed US$119.28 million, to cancel US$117 million equivalent of financing and reallocate
                       between categories. The second was on July 31, 2019, when the Bank had disbursed US$119.28 million, to
                       cancel US$133 million equivalent of financing, reallocate between categories, and amend the results
                       framework to align it with the reduced financing amount. The third was on Dec 7, 2019, when the Bank had
                       disbursed US$143.70 million, to trigger safeguard policy 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources in response to
                       two Inspection Panel requests.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of project preparation, only one third of the rural households in India had access to tap water
and domestic toilets. Over 90 percent of rural households in the targeted states had access to water only
through wells and boreholes that had quality issues and were typically distant from homes. Less than
three percent had access to piped water on premises. About 67 percent of the rural population defecated
in the open.

At appraisal, the objectives were aligned with the Government of India’s Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-
17). In the Plan, the Government proposed more community-based approach to National Rural Drinking
Water Program and sanitation program, calling for a break from the past top-down approach. The
objectives were also aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy 2013-17. The project
was expected to contribute to rural water and sanitation agenda by supporting decentralized approach.

At closure, the objectives continued to be in line with the Government’s priorities. The Government
launched Jal Jeevan Mission in August 2019, which seeks to provide every rural household with tap
water connections by 2024 using decentralized approach. The objectives were also aligned with the
World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework for India FY18-FY22, which seeks to “improve
access to rural water supply and sanitation services” as one of the objectives under its focus area
“Investing in Human Capital”.
Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve piped water supply services for selected rural communities in target States through decentralized
               delivery systems (before restructuring)

               Rationale
               The project’s theory of change is presented in the ICR (p.7). The causal chain consists of capacity building,
               project management and water supply and sanitation infrastructure development, which would result in
               improved piped water supply and improved sanitation services as outcomes. This improvement in water
               supply and sanitation services is expected to lead to improved living conditions as long-term outcomes
               through reduced burden of securing daily water supplies, reduction in water- and hygiene-related illness and
               empowerment of local population including women. Key assumption was that outcomes would be achieved
               through a decentralized service delivery model rather than a top-down model, which was in line with the
               Government’s and World Bank’s strategies. The theory of change presented in the ICR is valid and includes
               necessary inputs and outputs to achieve the PDOs. The theory of change would have been better, if it
               included an aspect of sequencing of activities. As captured as a lesson of the project, infrastructure
               investment without sound capacity building activities led to significant implementation challenges.

               This theory of change applies to all of the sub-objectives and is therefore not repeated in the respective
               efficacy discussions that follow below

               Outputs

                     The project supported 1,453 Gram Panchayats (133 in Assam, 369 in Bihar, 224 in Jharkhand, and
                      727 in Uttar Pradesh). The ICR provided no baseline or target for this indicator.
                     The project commissioned 629 water schemes (0 in Assam, 153 in Bihar, 171 in Jharkhand, and 305
                      in Uttar Pradesh), off which 27 were multi-village schemes (0 in Assam, 4 in Bihar, 2 in Jharkhand,
                      and 21 in Uttar Pradesh). The ICR provided no baseline or target for this indicator.
                     974 water schemes carried out independent supervision quality checks, which was 49% achievement
                      against the original target of 2,000.
                     548 water schemes carried out social audits, which was 27% achievement against the original target
                      of 2,000.
                     No external audit of environmental performance was conducted, which was 0% achievement against
                      the original target of 200.

               Outcomes

                     335,882 households were connected with piped water as a result of the project, which was 29%
                      achievement against the original target of 1.15 million.
                     106 water schemes achieved 50% of O&M cost recovery (0 in Assam, 0 in Bihar, 27 in Jharkhand,
                      and 79 in Uttar Pradesh), which was 9.5% achievement (106/1,112) against the original target of 50%.
                      The ratio of water schemes that achieved 100% O&M cost recovery was 7.6%.



                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve piped water supply for selected rural communities in target States through decentralized delivery
systems (after restructuring)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

Following indicators’ targets were revised with the restructuring in July 2019.

      974 water schemes carried out independent supervision quality checks, which was 97% achievement
         against the revised target of 1,000.
      548 water schemes carried out social audits, which was 55% achievement against the revised target
       of 1,000.
      No external audit of environmental performance was conducted, which was 0% achievement against
       the revised target of 4.

Following indicators were introduced with the restructuring in July 2019.

      1,112 water schemes (3 in Assam, 341 in Bihar, 183 in Jharkhand, and 585 in Uttar Pradesh) were
         funded and completed under the project, of which 138 were multi-village schemes (3 in Assam, 4 in
         Bihar, 7 in Jharkhand, and 124 in Uttar Pradesh. This was 103% achievement against the target of
         1,082.
        1,453 water and sanitation committees received trainings to enhance their ability including planning,
         supervision and operation of the water schemes. This was 104% achievement against the target of
         1,400.
        Web-based monitoring system was developed to track functionality of piped water supply schemes
         and performance and sustainability of water supply service providers.
        341 water schemes marked over 80% of satisfaction with service provided, which is 53% achievement
         against the target of 646.
        1 out of 4 states adopted an O&M policy empowering Gram Panchayats to operate water schemes.

Outcomes

      335,882 households were connected with piped water as a result of the project, which was 94%
       achievement against the revised target of 356,000.
      106 water schemes achieved 50% of O&M cost recovery (0 in Assam, 0 in Bihar, 27 in Jharkhand,
       and 79 in Uttar Pradesh), which was 19% achievement against the revised target of 550.




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)




      41,809 were provided with 24/7 piped water services, which was 36% achievement against the target
       of 115,000. This quality of service indicator was introduced with the restructuring in July 2019.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve sanitation services for selected rural communities in target States through decentralized delivery
systems (before restructuring)

Rationale
Outputs

      1,659,794 people, of which 796,700 were females, were trained to improve hygiene behavior,
       sanitation, and solid/liquid waste management (SLWM) under the project, which was 21%
       achievement against the original target of 7.8 million.
      964 Gram-Panchayat Water Sanitation Committees (GP-WSCs) had at least 33% female members.
       The original target was 3,000 GP-WSCs with at least 50% female members.

Outcomes

      The number of people using improved sanitation facilities increased by more than 4 million in the
       project area, however, these outcomes were attributed to the Indian Government’s program called
       Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, not to the project intervention. The indicators measuring number of
       people using improved latrines and people provided with access to improved sanitation facilities were
       dropped at the restructuring in July 2019.
      All project GPs were verified as open-defecation free, however, this is again attributed to the Indian
       Government’s program, not to the project intervention.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve sanitation services for selected rural communities in target States through decentralized delivery
systems (after restructuring)

Revised Rationale
Outputs


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



Following indicators’ targets were revised with the restructuring in July 2019.

      1,659,794 people, of which 796,700 were females, were trained to improve hygiene behavior,
       sanitation, SLWM under the project, which was 83% achievement against the revised target of 2
       million.
      964 GP-WSCs had at least 33% female members (lowered from the original 50%), which was 80%
       achievement against the revised target of 1,200.

Following indicators were introduced with the restructuring in July 2019.

      167 GP action plans for SLWM were implemented in Project GPs, which was 835% achievement
       against the target of 20.
      1,453 GP/village or multi-village water and sanitation committees were trained to become professional
       customer-focused water service providers under the project, which was 104% achievement against
       the target of 1400.

Outcomes

      135,561 people benefited from improved grey water management under the project, which was 47%
       achievement against the target of 290,000.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase the capacity of the Participating States to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or
Emergency (before restructuring)

Rationale
The third objective was related to a Contingency Emergency Response component and allocated no funds.
The component was not triggered during the project.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the capacity of the Participating States to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or
Emergency (after restructuring)



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)




                              Revised Rationale
                              The third objective was related to a Contingency Emergency Response component and allocated no funds.
                              The component was not triggered during the project.



                              Revised Rating
                              Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Both objectives 1 and 2 are rated as Negligible.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Objective 1 is rated as Modest and objective 2 is rated as Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The PAD (p.61) included cost-benefit analysis for the project at entry, however, it did not specify the discount
   rate used.

                                The quantifiable benefits included 1) value of time saved in water collection; 2) value off incremental
                                 water supply; and 3) value of health benefits due to the reduction in the incidence of diseases.
                                Costs included capital investments and associated operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. O&M cost
                                 for water schemes was estimated to be between US$0.08 and US$0.11 per KL depending on the
                                 scheme size. O&M cost for the sanitation investments was estimated to be 5% of the capital expenditure
                                 on SLWM activities.



                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



      The overall Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of the project was estimated to be 30% with benefit cost
       ratio of 6.1. Net-present value was not calculated at appraisal. The ICR reproduced cost-benefit analysis
       at entry with a 12% discount rate and ERR was estimated to be 28% with benefit cost ratio of 5.8 and
       Net Present Value (NPV) of INR 722 million (US$ 11.5 million).
      Sensitivity analysis showed that the ERR value would decrease to 16% in the most pessimistic scenario
       where cost increased and benefits decreased by 30%.

The ICR (p.54) presented cost-benefit analysis at closure with a 12% discount rate, which was aligned with
World Bank guidance.

      Following the analysis at appraisal, project benefits included 1) value of time saved in water collection; 2)
         value off incremental water supply; and 3) value of health benefits due to the reduction in the incidence
         of diseases. To calculate the value of time saved, the analysis used wages from the Mahatma Gandhi
         National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) Program, which were higher than the wages
         assumed at appraisal.
        Following the analysis at appraisal, project costs included capital investment costs under the project and
         associated operations and maintenance costs.
        The overall ERR of the project was estimated to be 23% with benefit cost ratio of 4.6 and NPV of INR
         218million (US$ 2.9 million).
        Because time saved in water collection was the main benefit under the model, how to value time savings
         had a critical impact on the benefit estimation. With the lower and non-inflation adjusted wages used in
         the appraisal model, ERR was 12% with benefit cost ratio of 2.3 and VPV of INR 4.6 million.
        Overall, ERR and benefit cost ratio were lower than expected at appraisal mainly because of higher unit
         costs and lower project achievements. However, the values were still positive and still within a range of
         similar investments by the Bank.

Although methodology and assumption used for efficiency analysis of the project is mostly valid, the original
analysis at appraisal had some shortcomings including NPV not calculated and discount rate not cited. The ICR
not only presented analysis at closure, but also reproduced the analysis at appraisal using most recently
available data.

Operational Efficiency:

Although the project was closed as planned in March 2020, there were some challenges that impacted
operational efficiency. Procurement challenges, frequent staff turn-over and insufficient staffing in PMUs led to
implementation delays and negatively impacted project achievements.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   30.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                23.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Before restructuring: Relevance of objectives was rated high. Efficacy was rated negligible due to low
achievement. Efficiency was rated modest due to lower than expected ERR at closure and implementation
delays caused by procurement and staffing challenges. Based on high relevance, negligible efficacy and
modest efficiency, Outcome is rated Unsatisfactory.

After restructuring: Relevance of objectives was rated high. Efficacy was rated modest. Efficiency was rated
modest due to the reasons cited above. Based on high relevance, modest efficacy and modest efficiency,
Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

The value of outcome rating before restructuring is 2 (Unsatisfactory) and after restructuring is 3 (Moderately
Unsatisfactory). The share of disbursement before restructuring is 62.8% (US$119.28 million) and after
restructuring is 37.2% (US$70.76 million). The weighted value of the outcome rating before restructuring is 1.26
and after restructuring is 1.12. The value of the overall outcome rating 2.37, therefore the final outcome rating is
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were several risks that could potentially undermine the sustainability of the project's development
outcomes. These included:

      More than 80% of water schemes developed under the project have not been able to raise half of
       their O&M costs from their users as intended. Although many contracts mandate contractors to
       maintain the water schemes up to 5 years, there is no clear plan to ensure financial sustainability of
       the schemes.
      In Assam, a state policy has been approved to assign institutional responsibilities for service delivery
       and O&M, establish a tariff setting and billing collection system and provide subsidies for cost
       recovery gaps. However, there is no such polices or concrete plans for O&M in other three states.
      Construction quality issues have been reported, although the situation varies by states. According to
       an assessment conducted in Jharkhand, 91 out of 182 schemes were non-functional and 80 were
       partially functional. A review in Bihar reported that 18% of commissioned schemes were not supplying
       water. A similar review in Uttar Pradesh reported 4% of recently completed schemes were not


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



       supplying water. The review in Bihar also reported various construction quality issues including rusted
       metal works, poor quality masonry, plastering, and concrete works that require repairs.
      This lack of financial resources for O&M and emerging construction quality issues pose significant
       risk to sustainable operation of water schemes.

As of July 2021, the ICR reviewer, through a meeting with the TTLs, could not find data to
show improvement with the issues related to O&M and non-functional schemes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        The project had high strategic relevance as outlined in the relevance section and its community-
            based, participatory, and demand-responsive approaches were informed by lessons learned from
            the Bank’s earlier rural water and sanitation projects in the country.
           The PAD (p.7) outlined proposed institutional and implementation arrangements in detail at the
            national, state, district, and village levels.
           The PAD (p.9) identified weak capacity and institutional arrangements, convergence with the
            national sanitation campaign program, and effective and timely implementation of project activities
            as key risks. The following measures were proposed to mitigate these risks: 1) capacity building
            of stakeholders; 2) tapping village level water and sanitation committees for coordination with the
            national sanitation campaign program; 3) tapping the implementing agencies of other on-going
            projects; and 4) reallocation of IDA funds from low-performing states to other states. The Project
            Implementation Plan also proposed a capacity building plan including different training models
            and exposure visits to address risk of weak capacity.
           A major shortcoming at entry was overestimation of client’s capacity and commitment. Chronic
            understaffing at national, state, and district levels persisted throughout the implementation of the
            project as documented in the Aide Memoires and Mid-Term review in August 2016.
           Too ambitious project design in terms of scale and targets was another major shortcoming. Given
            the low capacity and commitment of the client, US$ 1 billion project across 2,000 sites in the four
            states was too challenging to manage without proper and realistic capacity building plan.
           The Bank also did not ensure upfront O&M policy commitments. Lack of client’s commitment
            towards O&M led to insufficient resources for O&M and substantial risk to development outcome
            as outlined above.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



       The Bank had staff based in project sates and conducted ten implementation support missions,
          which were well-documented in Aide Memoires. The reporting was generally aware of key
          implementation challenges such as chronic understaffing at PMUs at different levels.
         A major shortcoming at supervision was the Bank’s inability in responding to the weak capacity of
          PMUs caused by chronic understaffing. The Bank team tried to address this problem through
          multiple missions and letters, but it persisted throughout the project closing. Ineffectiveness of the
          response was evident from the fact that the funds allocated for project management and capacity
          building were mostly left unused.
         Late restructuring was another major shortcoming at supervision. Although the client’s reluctance
          was a contributing factor, the Bank did not take a firm approach until late 2018. The Bank eventually
          carried out the first restructuring in March 2019, only one year before project closure. The second
          restructuring, which was to amend the results framework to align it with the reduced financing
          amount, was carried out in July 2019. At this point, only 8 months were left before project closure.
          The Bank had missed an opportunity of timely course correction.
         The revised results framework could have been better. The second restructuring in July 2019
          amended the results framework to adjust the target in accordance with the actual progress on the
          ground. However, some key PDO indicators including cost-recovery, greywater and the number of
          beneficiaries of 24/7 water supply were set too ambitious again. Also, given the focus of the project
          shifted from excreta management to greywater, the second PDO statement should have been
          amended to reflect the change.
         High turnover of bank staff negatively impacted quality of supervision. The project was managed by
          four Task Team Leaders and seven Managers.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The project objectives were clearly specified in the PAD. Original PDO indicators were mostly
        relevant to capture original intended outcomes of improving piped water supply and sanitation
        services. However, indicators related to sanitation component became irrelevant as the project’s
        focus shifted to greywater related activities, thus they were amended through the restructuring
        process. Lack of detailed definition of indicators led to difficulties in accurately measuring some
        indicators including O&M costs and direct project beneficiaries.
       The PAD (p.49-51) outlined M&E design leveraging the Management Information Systems at State
        (S-MIS), Sector (LIS-MIS) and National levels. Informed by international and national good
        practices, S-MIS was designed to collect data using web and mobile technologies and aggregate
        data from village level to District and State level. LIS-MIS was to aggregate S-MIS data to Low
        Income States and report against project results framework and the performance scorecard of the

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



        targeted States. At national level, National Project Management Unit was assigned to further
        aggregate the data into national level MIS.



b. M&E Implementation
       Planned M&E system was only partially implemented. A prototype of M&E software was launched
         but was never completed, therefore the project could not use it systematically to report and
         monitor project results. The baseline survey was completed in 2017, three years after the IDA
         Credit's effectiveness. Planned integration of MIS at different levels did not materialize. Use of
         different monitoring software at national level and in Bihar State made the uptake of the new
         monitoring system even more challenging.
        Routine monitoring by PMUs were unsystematic and not well documented. For example, most
         water schemes did not carry out beneficiary surveys. The project team, at times, could not even
         know very basic facts such as how many water schemes were functional or needed repair. The
         project team commissioned ad-hoc third-party assessments and reviews to ascertain project
         status. A major contributing factor to this limited M&E implementation was chronic understaffing
         for M&E at all levels.



c. M&E Utilization
       Because M&E was not functioning well as outlined above, the project could not utilize M&E data
         as expected for project management and decision-making. The low achievement rate of PDO
         indicators even after the second restructuring (8 months before project closure) suggests the
         project’s inability to utilize M&E data for realistic target setting.
        ICR (p.22) also pointed out that PMUs were generally slow and inconsistent in following-up
         issues and actions identified and recommended by the Bank missions, mainly because of chronic
         understaffing issue.

        Overall, M&E design had some weaknesses, and implementation and utilization were poor.
           Therefore, M&E quality is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        The project was classified as category B and triggered following safeguard policies: Environmental
          Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Indigenous
          Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11, triggered by the third
          restructuring in 2019 in response to two Inspection Panel requests).
         The project suffered from poor compliance with Bank safeguard policies and procedures.

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



        Scheme-level safeguard documents were mostly lacking despite the preparation of necessary
         documents at State level, such as an Environmental Assessment-Environmental Management
         Framework, Social Assessment-Social Management Framework, Capacity Building and
         Communication Framework and an Indigenous Peoples Plan in the case of Assam and Jharkhand.
         According to a 2019 Safeguard Compliance Review, 199 water schemes did not have a necessary
         scheme-specific Environmental Management Plan regardless of its construction stages. The
         scheme-level safeguard documents were eventually produced, however, these documents should
         have been prepared before physical works.
        There was no systematic compliance monitoring even for water schemes that had scheme-specific
         safeguard documents. PMUs’ safeguards monitoring was ad-hoc and not well documented.
         Environmental Audits were planned in targeted states, however, no such audit was carried out in
         any state.
        The project had issues around community consultations and consent. The Safeguards Compliance
         Review in 2019 reported systematic gaps in community consultations and their formal agreement to
         scheme construction. It also found more than 40 schemes with pending statutory permissions even
         though their construction had started. The ICR (p.20) stated that 368 schemes partially documented
         and 275 schemes did not document at all scheme locations and associated land transfers.
        Tribal community members in Jharkhand submitted two requests to the Inspection Panel in
         November and December 2018. The inspection requests were about the construction of a water
         treatment plant and elevated storage reservoir in two multi-village schemes in Jharkhand.
         Specifically, they raised concerns about the lack of scheme-specific safeguard documents,
         shortcomings in the consultations, weaknesses in the project Grievance Redress Mechanism and
         failure to apply the Bank’s policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). The Panel
         recommended an investigation of the project to the Board in February 2019 and the Board approved
         the Panel’s recommendation in March 2019. The consultation process has been delayed due to
         COVID-19 and the investigation process is still ongoing at the time of this ICR Review (June 2021).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  Financial Management and Counterpart Funding ratings had been Moderately Satisfactory from the
  beginning, but they had been downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory since May 2019 and to
  Unsatisfactory since November 2019 respectively. According to the ICR (p.24), the project had significant
  issues in later years including claiming retention money from the contractor’s bill from the Bank, delays in
  releasing counterpart funds and contractor payments, and Government’s decision not to raise contributions
  from the beneficiary communities in Bihar, which was against the project agreement.

  Procurement:

  Procurement rating had been Moderately Satisfactory from the beginning, but it had been downgraded to
  Moderately Unsatisfactory since November 2019. ICR (p.24) reported that procurement delays
  were common throughout project implementation, which resulted in slow implementation. Primary reason
  for significant downgrading was poor procurement practice in Bihar. Bihar State PMU procured over 400
  additional water schemes without prior approval and prior clearance of safeguards documents. The

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



   additional schemes that could not satisfy necessary safeguards document requirements were declared
   ineligible and removed from Bank funding.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory

Bank Performance                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were adapted by IEG from the ICR.

Proper task sequencing could be a key factor for institution building. Infrastructure
investments and institutional building can create a positive and mutually reinforcing cycle if they are
sequenced properly. In this project, pressure to launch the procurement of large-scale infrastructure
without sound institutional capacity led to significant implementation delays and negative incentives
to abandon time-consuming capacity building activities. It would have been better to put greater
emphasis on client-led reform prior to, and during project preparation and embed time and resources
for institution building in water scheme contracts.

Weak project management could significantly undermine the achievement of project
objectives. In this project, chronic understaffing and underqualification of PMUs at national, state
and district levels negatively impacted many aspects of the operation including safeguard
compliance, procurement efficiency, implementation speed, and technical quality of infrastructure.
Major reasons include the client’s lack of priority and prior commitment towards project
management, scarcity of qualified human resources, optimistic implementation arrangements at
appraisal, and the Bank’s ineffectiveness in addressing the issues.

The lack of a sustainability framework prior to investments could contribute to substantial
risks to development outcomes. For Investment Project Financing, once funding is approved, the

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: RWSS for Low Income States (P132173)



focus tends to shift to infrastructure development and it becomes often more difficult to change or
establish necessary policies. In this project, Assam was the only state that established an O&M
policy for rural water schemes. Lack of O&M policies in other three states led to lack of financial
resources required for O&M and posed a significant risk to sustainable operation of water schemes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good overview of project preparation and implementation and is sufficiently candid about
implementation challenges and shortcomings. The ICR includes clear Theory of Change and is results-oriented.
The ICR also provides useful lessons for future operations in the similar sectors. Overall, the quality of the ICR
is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
