     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022633

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P117275                                       Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Gambia, The                                   Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59040,IDA-H5800,TF-17976,IDA-            31-Dec-2012                                           15,374,202.15
 H8800

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 01-Jun-2010                                  30-Nov-2020

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                  5,250,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                   5,250,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                              15,374,202.15                                             0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof        Clay Wescott                   Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Gambia Integrated Financial Management Information
   System (IFMIS) project as set out on page 4 of the Credit Agreement and page 13 of the PAD was to increase
   the Government of The Gambia’s capacity in public resource management. The PAD (page 13) elaborates
   two expected outcomes: increased capacity for budget execution and reporting, and increased capacity for
   operating and maintaining the IFMIS.


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



   The PDO was subsequently restated as follows: (i) improve public resource management through the
   expansion of the IFMIS system, and (ii) strengthen capacity of the government to effectively use the system in
   a sustainable manner (Restructuring Paper, 2019).

   The ICRR will use this formulation to assess project achievement.

   The ICRR will not undertake a split evaluation, as the restated PDO spells out the intentions that underlay the
   original objective.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project originally had five components:

   Component 1: IFMIS Rollout, Interfaces and System Training (estimated cost at appraisal US$4.0
   million; actual cost US$9.5 million). The component aimed at increasing government capacity to operate
   and maintain the IFMIS. It comprised five sub-components: (i) IFMIS hardware; (ii) IFMIS systems and
   applications software; (iii) consultancy services for IFMIS installation, configuration, and implementation; (iv)
   IFMIS systems training and certification; and (v) IFMIS skills transfer.

   Component 2: New IFMIS activities (estimated cost at appraisal US$1.0 million; actual cost US$0.02
   million). The component was to lay the groundwork for the introduction of new IFMIS applications. It
   consisted of three sub-components: (i) business process review workshops and sensitization materials; (ii)
   IFMIS concurrent licenses for EPICOR financials and Active Planner (a software application); and (iii)
   Consultancy services for the validation of human resources and payroll records.

   Component 3: Communications and Change Management (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.1 million;
   actual cost US$0.04 million). The component was to create greater awareness among government officials
   and the public at large about the IFMIS. The communications and change management strategy included
   the production of sensitization materials and their use on targeted audiences in workshops and seminars,
   as well as the distribution of circulars, posters, newsletters etc.

    Component 4: Accounting and IT Capacity Building for Sustainability (estimated cost at appraisal
   US$0.3 million; actual cost US$0.42 million). The component was to increase local capacity in IT and
   accounting services. It had three sub-components: (i) overseas training for government officials in
   professional accounting and IT courses; (ii) local training in the same subjects; and (iii) professional
   accounting and IT books and related equipment.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 12
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



  Component 5: Project Implementation Support (estimated cost at appraisal US$0.40 million; actual cost
  US$0.85 million). The component provided financing for expenditures related to the IFMIS project
  coordination unit (PCU)

  SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION

  The project went through five restructurings including two Additional Financings. While the ICR’s Data
  Sheet includes a chronological listing of restructurings, the ICR details restructurings by theme, an
  approach that is also applied here.

  Revised PDO. The PDO was revised as a Level 2 change (it was not submitted to the Executive Directors
  for approval), introduced to counteract the vagueness of the original formulation.

  Revised outcome indicators. Outcome indicators were revised in four of the restructurings. Revisions were
  undertaken to make original indicators more measurable; clarify targets or units of measure; or revise
  targets to better reflects project progress. New indicators were introduced with the two Additional
  Financings reflecting expanded IFMIS coverage and new project activities. Annex 7 of the ICR provides a
  list of changes in indicators (which are also discussed in Section 9).

  Revised components. While the five original components were maintained, their scope was adjusted with
  the introduction of the Additional Financings: Component 1 was expanded from US$4.0 million to US$9.5
  million; and new modules were added to the original IFMIS (budget, project and contract management,
  human resources, and payroll), and an overall system/platform upgrading was done.

  New components. Three new components were introduced, one, Component 6, supported statistical
  capacity building and was introduced under Additional Financing 1; and two - Components 7 and 8,
  preparation of a national energy emergency study and SOE reform, respectively, were introduced under
  Additional Financing 2.

  Project implementation period. With the five restructurings, project implementation was extended from two
  and a half years to ten and a half years, from June 2010 to November 2020.

  Summary. The restructurings not only expanded the IFMIS but also introduced activities that were
  independent of the IFMIS (Components 7 and 8) and were undertaken in response to emerging government
  priorities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, total project cost was estimated at US$5.69 million. Actual project cost at closing
  was US$15.37 million, including two Additional Financings at US$5.0 million each, and reflecting
  adjustments to the exchange rate.

  Financing. The project was financed with an initial IDA Credit of US$5.25 million and two Additional IDA
  Credits of US$5.0 million each, and a Trust Fund grant of US$0.4 million. US$15.4 million were disbursed.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 1, 2010, with an original closing date of December 31,
  2012. The closing date was extended three times, and the project closed on November 30, 2020.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 12
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The original and revised PDO was aligned with country priorities, the Bank’s Country Engagement Note
               (CEN) for FY18 to FY21, and a Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), published in May 2021. The PDO is
               included as one of the enabling elements of the government’s own development strategy, and it is
               consistent with the priorities in the Second Joint IDA-African Development Bank Joint Strategy for The
               Gambia for FY13 to FY16. The SCD highlights the importance of IFMIS to sound PFM through improved
               budget preparation and execution, accounting, payroll, reporting, financial controls, and auditing. While the
               introduction of actions on SOEs and energy, included as new government priorities, aligned with “improving
               public resource management”, they fall outside the PDO focus on expanding the IFMIS and strengthening
               government capacity to use the system.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improving public resource management by expanding the IFMIS system

                             Rationale
                             The objective was to be achieved by adding new modules to the IFMIS; and by expanding the IFMIS across
                             all ministries, departments, and public agencies. Success was to be determined by (i) IFMIS coverage of
                             central government expenditures; (ii) timely publication of budget execution reports; and (iii) timely availability
                             of GDP data.

                             (The project also financed elements of public resource management that went beyond the IFMIS: better HR
                             management, laying the foundations for a stronger energy sector by financing a sectoral roadmap, and
                             achieving better control of SOEs through special audits as a means of reducing fiscal risk. As these fall
                             outside the PDO, they are not taken into consideration when assessing project efficacy.)

                             Outcomes

                             As a result of the project, IFMIS now includes all central government expenditures against a target of 90
                             percent; all budget execution reports are included on the website of the Ministry of Finance in line with the


                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 12
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



target; and the budget execution rate (excluding donor funding) is 91 percent, against a target of 90
percent. GDP data is made publicly available annually, against a target of quarterly availability.

The ICR (p.7) indicates that because of these measures, the IFMIS has improved efficiency in processing
payments, in accounting, and in reporting: payment backlogs have been cleared, 2020 accounts are being
prepared, and 2019 accounts are being audited. Interface with the Central Bank has enabled Electronic
Funds Transfer, increasing the predictability of cash flows and transactions efficiency as the country moves
from physical approval of transactions to electronic transfers.

The ICR flags several weaknesses in IFMIS operations: system interface and data migration are still
incomplete; reporting on public spending remains unreliable as some commitments remain outside the IFMIS,
for instance subsidized agencies and project coordinating units. System use is also constrained by data
gaps, insufficient granularity, and occasional misalignment with other government reporting.

 Summary. The roll-out of the IFMIS was achieved, and new modules were introduced that increased its
efficiency as a means of processing payments, accounting, and reporting. At the same time, the IFMIS
displays operational deficiencies that are likely to reduce its usefulness if not tackled. The HR improvements
led to significant savings. Outside the PDO framework, energy and SOE initiatives may reduce fiscal risk and
improve performance over time, but there are few indications of whether these reforms are achieving, or
moving towards, intended changes, absent indicative milestones.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthening the capacity of the government to effectively use the IFMIS in a sustainable manner

Rationale
The objective was to be achieved by building capacity in key organizations that would allow them to apply the
IFMIS system for better policy making and fiscal management. Success was to be measured by timely
availability of fiscal data for policy making.

The project built capacity in the Budget Directorate in budget data analysis. This included training to enhance
the Directorate's capabilities in IFMIS network, database, and support functions; and at establishing a core
team to oversee the integrated human resources management information system and payroll
modules. Sensitization and behavior change activities have been undertaken to raise awareness about the
IFMIS among a broader segment of public officials as well as the public at large.

Staff from The Gambia Bureau of Statistics was trained in the use of IFMIS for collecting, processing, and
analyzing key data inputs, including the development of a strategic plan to develop a new civil registration and
vital statistical system. This was accompanied by key statistical inputs, including an economic census and
business establishment survey, an integrated household survey, and GDP and CPI rebasing.



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



                            Despite the capacity building initiatives, the ICR cautions that the effective use of the IFMIS cannot be
                            established based on project results. Gaps in recording of expenditures remain, as do concerns about
                            economic classification, both which may be indications of deficiencies in staff training. Consequently, regular
                            issuance of GDP data (which was intended as a proxy measure of improved statistical capacity and systems)
                            had not been achieved by project closing. Other measures also remain uncertain, such as changes in arrears
                            to government suppliers, and government contracts managed through the IFMIS, and hence they had been
                            dropped as indicators. On the positive side, the IMF in its Extended Credit Facility report indicates that
                            expenditure control and treasury cash management have recently improved, and major expenditure overruns
                            and accumulation of arrears have been avoided. But it also signals an urgent need to improve the quality of
                            fiscal data. Using the IFMIS to report on state budget funding by civil society, albeit of uncertain quality, has
                            increased transparency and accountability of government (ICR, p. 10).

                            The ICR does note, correctly, that it is difficult to substantiate sustainability of system use. There remain
                            gaps in its use; system modules, interfaces and data migration are incomplete; and data lacks
                            robustness. All these concerns will take time to address and are a function of how IFMIS quality improves.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Of the two objectives, the first one was partly achieved and the second one barely so, based on available
                            information. The first objective – improving public resource management by expanding the IFMIS system
                            strengthened processing and reporting of information in the system, but several weaknesses remained that
                            influenced the quality of information flows. They remain to be resolved. The second objective –
                            strengthening capacity to sustainably use the system – did undertake capacity building initiatives, but
                            information on effectiveness is lacking and sustainability as defined in Section 2a cannot be
                            confirmed. Considering the uncertainty regarding sustainability of the IFMIS, the overall efficacy rating is
                            negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Neither the PAD nor the ICR undertook an economic analysis of the project, noting difficulty in quantification of
   benefits and pointing to qualitative efficiency gains in improved governance. The ICR did point to savings on
   ghost worker wages estimated at US$11 million over the life of the project by strengthening the personnel
   database and payroll; higher efficiency in public spending as measured by fiscal savings of some 4.9 percent of
   GDP; unquantified savings from energy sector reforms; SOE reform, notably a progressive clearance of arrears,

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



estimated by the IMF at 0.3 percent of GDP in terms of arrears to domestic suppliers. While these were
favorable outcomes, their attribution to the project is questionable. Efficiency was also undermined by an
implementation period of ten years instead of two and one half, increasing the cost from US$5.25 million to
US$15.39 million. The project team told IEG that the original timing estimate reflected the fact that there was
already an existing IFMIS system developed with the support of a previous Bank project that would be expanded
to additional government sites. The project team at design was counting on being able to rely on the PCU of the
previous project for implementation. During project preparation, the team did not foresee the future need to
expand the system to include web-based functionality which was the main purpose of the first additional
financing.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?          Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated substantial: the focus on building the IFMIS to improve public resource
management corresponded to government and Bank priorities. Efficacy was rated negligible: one objective
was partly achieved, with significant weaknesses remaining that influenced the quality of information flows; and
the other raised questions of sustainability of project outcomes. Efficiency was rated modest: despite
greater efficiencies in public spending, they were achieved over a ten-year period compared to an expected two
years.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR points to several challenges in rating the risk to development outcome as Substantial, reflecting the
large number of activities or reforms that remain incomplete and will require additional resources: These
include the need to finalize incomplete modules and interfaces for IFMIS, and address remaining

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



uncertainties about data quality and integrity, requiring buy-in by relevant government officials. Despite an
emphasis on capacity building under the project, the ICR team still points to risk in this area, as trained staff
becomes attractive on the private market.

On the other hand, despite the end of support from this operation, the IFMIS has been expanded in 2021 to
all local government councils and is being rolled out to all self-accounting projects, to embassies, and to two
agencies, the Office of the Ombudsman and the Human Rights Commission (IMF 2021. Gambia Second
Review under the Extended Credit Facility. This expansion is expected to continue with support from follow-
up projects such as a governance project under preparation that builds on the IFMIS project, and a Fiscal
Management Development Project (P166695) that aims at better management of fiscal resources and SOEs
Despite these positive indications, the risk to the development outcome remains substantial




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant, building an information system for sound public expenditure
  management that could provide greater stability to a small open economy. It was consistent with the
  Bank’s country strategy as articulated in several documents although country capacity was clearly
  overestimated, and it drew on the experience of a preceding Bank project in the same area - a Capacity
  Building and Economic Management project, including maintaining the PCU from that project. and key
  lessons were incorporated into the design of this project to bolster existing weaknesses that threatened
  the sustainability of the system: it was critically dependent on a relatively weak IFMIS operator (the
  Directorate of Treasury); on weak budget execution; and the need for stronger inter-ministerial
  coordination as a key to ownership of the IFMIS.

  While the project drew on the experience of a previous one (Capacity Building for Economic
  Management, P057995) quality of entry had many weaknesses. The project was designed as a two-year
  project in a very low-capacity environment when similar projects in higher capacity countries have a
  lifespan of five to six years. While external factors contributed (regime change and unforeseen necessity
  to upgrade to web-based platform), the original design seriously underestimated cost and complexity of
  reforms and the difficult operating environment. The project logic was originally straightforward but then
  confused through the introduction of a number of at best peripherally related objectives (SOEs, energy,
  human resources). The original PDO formulation was vague and did not well reflect the sought-after
  outcomes on IFMIS.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Formal supervision missions were undertaken twice yearly, supported by technical assistance throughout
 the time of project implementation. The missions assessed project progress and interacted with national

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



 stakeholders and development partners. The five restructurings, including two AFs, indicate a challenging
 implementation environment and might have called for a redesign or cancellation of the project, particularly
 as new tasks were added to it. Instead, supervision ratings were mostly satisfactory, especially during the
 first five years, which is surprising given its overall performance.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design was weak. It was based on a PDO broadly aimed at improving public resource management,
 later redefined as expanding IFMIS and increasing government capacity to use the system. In a third
 iteration of the PDO, new government priorities were introduced. None of these changes were
 formalized. Original key indicators were all revised during implementation, some twice. No outcome
 indicators were introduced to measure the impact of actions on the government’s new priorities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project maintained accessible records on the IFMIS roll-out and implementation of the other PFM
  reforms. Quarterly and annual performance reports were produced. The annual report was circulated to
  major stakeholders and included on the Ministry of Finance’s homepage.

  The PCU collected data and prepared reports on progress of key indicators. These guided supervision
  missions and in-the-field technical assistance and adjustments to the project. M&E was mostly rated
  satisfactory despite repeated slippages in implementation, which were countered by continued
  strengthening of the PCU.

  Original key indicators were all revised during implementation.

  The team added new indicators to measure wider IFMIS coverage and support to SOEs, but there was
  no new indicator measuring support to the energy sector.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was used to inform project management and decisionmakers of project progress and aspects of
  the project that needed strengthening during implementation. One shortcoming is that intermediate




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



  indicators that had been achieved were dropped during the third restructuring; they should have been
  retained to get a full picture of project achievement.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The environmental assessment category was rated as “C” and no safeguard policies were triggered. During
   implementation, no environmental or social issues were identified despite de facto significant broadening of
   project scope.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement and Financial Management were rated “Satisfactory” from ISR 1 to ISR 16 (June 2018) when
   both ratings were downgraded to “Moderately Satisfactory”. The Financial Management rating was
   downgraded due to the weak internal control environment, the poor quality of the record keeping
   mechanism and the lack of oversight of the postings and supporting documents in respect of all
   expenditures. The procurement rating was downgraded due to non-conformity around strengthening the
   procurement section of the Project Operations Manual. Fiduciary risk was rated as “Low” from inception to
   ISR 6 (October 2012), when it was upgraded to “Substantial” due to high levels of corruption in The
   Gambia. However, the risk rating was reverted to “Low” in ISR 9 (December 2014) based on applied
   mitigation measures. The project mitigated the risks of fraud and corruption by ensuring that procurement
   under the project was carried out according to World Bank guidelines, as well as by making sure that the
   project would only use the IFMIS accounting system. The fiduciary risk was again upgraded to “Moderate”
   in ISR 12 (March 2016) based on procurement delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted



d. Other
   None noted



11. Ratings


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                             ICR                IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                    Moderately         Moderately
Outcome
                                    Unsatisfactory     Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   Weak assessment of
                                                                                   implementation challenges at
                                    Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Unsatisfactory              start-up, resulting in a ten-year
                                    Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   project with at best modest
                                                                                   outcomes.
Quality of M&E                      Modest             Modest

Quality of ICR                      ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were drawn from the ICR:

A well-defined PDO can facilitate tracking project progress towards its objectives. In this
project, the PDO was initially too broad. the PDO should have been formally amended to reflect the
significant expansion in scope.

Political commitment and ownership of the borrower matter. An explicit target IFMIS completion
date could be announced early in project implementation and monitored closely at the highest level.

The context for implementing reforms in a challenging environment need to be well
understood. PFM reforms cannot be achieved focusing only on technical solutions but need to be
accompanied by behavioral and policy change.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of evidence and the analysis presented in the ICR was satisfactory, albeit that a more systematic
focus on outputs and outcomes could have facilitated the arguments in the text. While the PDO formulations
were challenging, the ICR did provide necessary clarity to allow assessment.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 12
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Integrated Fin. Mg't. Infor. System (P117275)




                                                                             Page 12 of 12
