     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Distribution Development (P154805)



                                                                                     Report Number : ICRR0022473

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P154805                                      Power Distribution Development

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                    Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86100                                  30-Apr-2020                                            499,979,828.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Apr-2016                                 30-Apr-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                         Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                                   0.00

 Revised Commitment                             500,000,000.00                                                   0.00

 Actual                                         499,979,828.00                                                   0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Dileep M. Wagle              Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi                 IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   The objective of the Program-for-Results operation (PforR), as stated in the Loan Agreement (p.7), was “to
   increase access to electricity services and to improve the efficiency and reliability of their delivery in selected
   areas of Indonesia”.
   The Program objective, as stated in the PAD (p.12), was identical to the above.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Power Distribution Development (P154805)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  ---


c. Components
  The program aimed to finance a geographical time slice of the distribution component of the power
  expansion plan (RUPTL) developed by the power utility, PLN, for 2015-24. As such, the Program covered
  only the Sumatra region, for the period 2015-19, supporting activities designed to achieve PLN’s program
  goals in the following five results areas.

  Results Area 1: Improved Access to Electricity (indicative loan allocation at appraisal: US$200.56
  million)
  The program supported the expansion of the distribution network, with (a) the construction/rehabilitation/
  upgrading of 19,487 circuit-km of MV distribution lines and 23,594 circuit-km of LV distribution lines; and
  (b) installation of transformer units with a total capacity of 2,895 MVA. These network improvements would
  allow PLN to connect some 3.2 million additional customers over the period.

  Results Area 2: Improved Quality of Service (indicative loan allocation at appraisal: US$60.00 million)

  Activities to improve quality of service involved system reinforcement and upgrading, and customer outage
  management. Program activities included upgrading of distribution control centers to SCADA (Supervisory
  Control and Data Acquisition) functionality and completion of Geographic Databases in each Wilayah –
  which would improve the accuracy of measuring system reliability using SAIDI (System Average
  Interruption Duration Index) and SAFI (System Average Interruption Frequency Index) – internationally
  recognized standards for measuring system reliability. Reduced MV feeder technical interruptions, and
  decreases in frequency and duration of outages and in voltage fluctuations would indicate an improvement
  in the quality of service.
  Results Area 3: Improved Distribution Efficiency (indicative loan allocation at appraisal: US$65.56
  million).
  The program supported rehabilitation and upgrading of existing distribution lines and substations, and
  installation of additional substations and improved metering devices, which would lead to an improvement
  of distribution losses (which had been increasing in 2013 and the first half of 2015). The expected addition
  to the system of 80 substations (under PLN’s transmission program and not part of the PforR) was
  expected to reduce system losses. The Program complemented these efforts by upgrading distribution
  lines and substations, improving the LV/MV ratio to the network by increasing the number of distribution
  transformers, and by supporting improved network planning.

  Results Area 4: Increased power consumption (indicative loan allocation at appraisal: US$105.55)

  Increased household connections were expected to contribute to improved productivity and income growth
  among the population (notwithstanding a possible initial decline in per capita consumption, as poorer


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Distribution Development (P154805)



   consumers were connected). All activities implemented under the Program to increase access, quality of
   services, and to improve efficiency and institutional capacity would also contribute to increased power
   consumption by relieving constraints that kept average annual growth rates at a maximum of about 8
   percent – though activities outside the Program relating to generation and transmission components of the
   RUPTL could also potentially play a role.

   Results Area 5: Improved Institutional Capacity (indicative loan allocation at appraisal: US$68.33
   million – of which US$16 million for Prior Results and US$52.33 for results during implementation)

   The Program’s capacity building objectives were to improve distribution system planning and budgeting
   and operational management.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

    Project Cost: The estimated cost of the Program was US$1,450 million, with the Borrower (PLN) and
    the Asian Development Bank (ADB) contributing to the financing. The actual amount disbursed at
    project completion was US$1,549.98 million.
    Financing: The project’s cost was financed through a World Bank loan of US$500 million,
    supplemented by US$420 million in parallel financing by the ADB and US$530 million contribution from
    the Borrower. By project completion, while the World Bank’s financing was fully disbursed, the ADB
    had contributed a slightly lower amount of US$400 million and the Borrower a substantially higher
    amount of US$650 million, such that total disbursements came to US$1549.98 million.
    Borrower Contribution: As above.
    Dates: The project was approved in April 2016, becoming effective in November 2016. The closing
    date was April 30, 2020. This date was not extended, and the project closed on schedule.
    Restructurings: The project went through a Level 2 restructuring, in April 2019. The restructuring was
    in response to a request from PLN to reallocate US$50 million of funds from Results Area 5 to Results
    Areas 1 and 3, where more rapid implementation progress was anticipated. The PDO remained
    unchanged, though the Results Framework had to be adjusted to align better with the Program’s
    outcomes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Country and Sector Context:


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Power Distribution Development (P154805)



The power sector in Indonesia was dominated by the state-owned power utility, PT Perusahaan Listrik
Negara (PLN). In 2015 PLN owned nearly 40 GW of the 55.5 GW installed power generation capacity in
the country, the balance being owned by independent power producers (IPPs) and rental plants. PLN was
the single operator of the country’s power transmission and distribution network – consisting of 42,091 km
of transmission lines, 345,406 km of medium voltage (MV) distribution lines and 583,546 km of low voltage
distribution lines.
Sumatra island is the second biggest island in Indonesia, representing 25 percent of the country’s total
area. At the time of appraisal, of the island’s population of about 54 million people around 9 million (21
percent) had no access to electricity. At the same time, Sumatra was one of the fastest developing areas in
the country, second only to Java-Bali, contributing 22.2 percent of national GDP and accounting for 14.5
percent of electricity consumption with more than 10,000 household customers. To keep pace with
economic growth and meet electricity demand, PLN developed a power system expansion plan called the
RUPTL (Rencana Usaha Penyediaan Tenaga Listrik) for 2014-15. The plan included generation capacity,
transmission lines, substation capacity and distribution lines. Some 55.5 MW of additional generating
capacity was expected during 2014-15, with an estimated cost of US$70.6 billion, nationally. Focusing
distribution investments in Sumatra was likely to offer the best prospect for rapid progress towards
achieving RUPTL’s national electrification ratio target of 99.4 percent by 2024. It was anticipated that about
3.2 million residential customers could be added to the grid, to the 10.97 million existing customers at
appraisal, resulting in a raising of the electrification ratio from 80 percent to around 97 percent.
To support the government’s vision the World Bank had been actively engaged in development of the
energy sector through a combination if investment lending, policy dialogue and technical support. At
appraisal, there were four ongoing investment finance (IPF) operations for a total of some US$1.49 billion,
financing the expansion of capacity of renewable energy generation and expansion of substations. The
Sustainable and Inclusive Development Energy Development Policy Loan (DPL), approved in 2015, was
leveraging policy reforms to improve the regulatory framework for private sector participation in both power
and gas. The Bank was at the same time providing Advisory Services & Analytics (ASA) on its core
engagement area of strengthening sector governance and sustainability, supporting low-carbon
development, expanding access to modern energy services and enabling gas sector formulation and
investment planning.
Alignment with Strategy:
The Program for Results (PforR) was designed to support PLN in the development of Sumatra’s power
infrastructure, to increase access to electricity for household consumers while improving efficiency and
reliability of supply. The program was the first PforR for Indonesia, in particular with PLN (as well as being
the first PforR lending instrument in the Energy & Extractives Global Practice in the World Bank). The PforR
was closely aligned with the World Bank’s support to Indonesia’s power sector over the previous two
decades and incorporated lessons learned from this engagement. It was also in line with efforts by the
Asian Development Bank (ADB), which had been an active partner of the Government of Indonesia in
supporting the energy sector, and which had introduced a Results-Based Loan (RBL) of US$600 million to
PLN for its transmission and distribution program in the Sumatra region for the 2015-19 period.
The PforR program was closely aligned with the Bank Group’s most recent CPF (FY20-16-20), which
assigned priority to infrastructure, including energy. Specifically, the PDO contributed directly to CPF
Engagement Area 2: Sustainable Energy and Universal Access, which included the following priorities: (a)
energy infrastructure, improving operational efficiencies and reliability of services (b) renewable energy and


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Power Distribution Development (P154805)



       low carbon development, (c) access to modern energy services through grid extensions, possible off-grid
       solutions and modern cooking solutions, and (d) sector governance, competitiveness and efficiency. The
       PDO also remained relevant to the findings of the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Indonesia,
       which is the basis for the next CPF under preparation. The SCD highlights the uneven distribution and
       unreliability of service of Indonesia’s electricity access, which are challenges that would be addressed by
       the Program. Finally, the Program helped the Government and PLN implement its national strategies and
       energy planning, and is still relevant with the current RUPTL 2019-28.



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     “To increase access to electricity services”

    Rationale
    Theory of Change:
    The project was designed to increase access to electricity services in selected areas of Indonesia, whilst
    improving the efficiency and reliability of their delivery. A fairly direct causal link can be drawn between the
    project’s activities and the expected outcomes. Under Results Area 1, activities focused on expansion of the
    distribution network and addition of new distribution transformers, to enable connection to additional
    customers and thereby to lead to increased access to electricity services. Under Results Area 2, activities
    supporting reinforcement/upgrading of the electricity system and customer outage management were
    intended to reduce frequency and duration of outages, which indicate an improvement in reliability of
    electricity services. Under Results Area 3, activities to expand/rehabilitate/upgrade the distribution lines and
    substations, increase the number of distribution transformers and support improved network planning were
    introduced with a view to reducing network distribution network losses and improve the efficiency of
    electricity of delivery service. Under Results Area 5, capacity building activities were undertaken to improve
    distribution system planning and budgeting and operational management. These activities supported
    contributed to all other results areas. All these activities together would lead to increased power
    consumption and electricity sales for household customers which would be measured by the activity under
    Results Area 4.
    Key output indicators for these activities were incorporated under the various DLIs, and were relevant,
    attributable and adequate to cover measurement of the objectives.
    Outputs/Outcomes:

    Results Area 1 was measured through DLI#1 and #2. All related programmed actions in the Power Action
    Plan (PAP) were satisfactorily achieved, namely:



                                                                                                         Page 5 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Power Distribution Development (P154805)




    (a) The number of new residential (Household) customers connected was 14,980,000 at project closing,
    exceeding the target of 14,410,000 (DLI #1). As the baseline had been 11,180,000, this implied a net
    increase of 3,800,000 residential customers, compared to the 3,200,000 customers expected during
    appraisal. These additional customers contributed to the increased electrification ratio in Sumatra, from 80.0
    percent in 2014 to 96.2 percent by 2019, which was higher than the target set out in RUPTL 2015. This
    increase was fully attributable to the Program, being the result of the expansion distribution networks and
    additional capacity of distribution transformers under the Program.

    (b) The length of MV distribution lines added under the project was 114,929 km at closing – similarly in
    excess of the target of 106,228km (DLI #2), i.e. 108.1 percent of the target.

    In addition, the Annual Work Plan was approved in November 2019, and the percentage of planned capital
    expenditures completed was 88 percent at closing, against a target of 85 percent. The volume of power
    sales to residential customers achieved was 19,201 GWh, against the target of 18,438 GWh.
    Based on the above, the achievement of this objective is rated High.



    Rating
   High
  PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 2
    Objective
     “Improve the efficiency of electricity services delivery”

    Rationale
    Outputs/Outcomes:

    The outcome indicator for this objective was reduction in electricity losses in the project area; distribution
    losses being a key measure of a utility’s operational efficiency. The Program contributed to these loss
    reduction efforts by improving network planning, through addition of transformer units and increase in
    distribution transformer capacity.
    The Program was highly successful in achieving targets set. Electricity losses per year were brought down
    from 11.92 percent per year to 8.47 percent, against a target of 10.0 percent: an achievement level of 179.7
    percent. Output targets were also fully achieved: the number of distribution transformer units added
    reaching 111,036 by closing, against a target of 98,338. Transformer distribution capacity increased to
    119.4 percent of the target: i.e. to 11,060,000, against a target of 9,880,000. Based on this, it would appear
    that the objective of improved efficiency of electricity services was fully achieved.
    As such, achievement of this objective is rated High.



                                                                                                        Page 6 of 14
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Power Distribution Development (P154805)




              Rating
       High
      PHREVDELTBL

PHEFFICACYTBL


              Objective 3
              Objective
                   “Improve the reliability of electricity services delivery”

              Rationale
              Outputs/Outcomes

              The PDO indicator for this this objective was the System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI), in
              minutes per year, and the System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) – both internationally
              accepted measures of power supply reliability. With the upgrading of distribution control centers to SCADA
              (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) functionality and completion of Geographic Databases in each
              Wilayah during the Program period, targets for both Indexes were fully achieved. Actual system interruptions
              were reduced from a base of 1,989 minutes per customer per year to 1,164 minutes, significantly better than
              the target of 1,650 minutes. The number of interruptions were reduced from a base of 17.81 per customer
              per year to 11.28, similarly significantly better than the target of 15.5 interruptions.
              All related program actions in the PAP were satisfactorily achieved. The intermediate indicator “Number of
              MV feeder technical interruptions per 100 km”, which was also selected at DLI #3, more than met its target
              by reducing MV feeder technical interruptions per 100 km from 21.22 to 16.02. This result, coupled with
              reductions in frequency and duration of outages and voltage fluctuations, was a clear indication that quality
              of services had improved.
              Based on this, achievement of this objective is rated High.



              Rating
       High
      PHREVDELTBL


 PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




 Rationale




 Overall Efficacy Rating
 ---

      5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                Page 7 of 14
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            Power Distribution Development (P154805)




     ---



Efficiency Rating
---


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                         Rate
                                                          Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                         Available?
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Based on the High rating for relevance of objectives (as well as of DLIs), and the High rating for overall efficacy,
overall program outcome is rated Highly Satisfactory. All Program objectives were met and exceeded their
targets.


a.         Outcome Rating
           Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk that the development outcomes would not be sustained is Modest. The Program has demonstrated
and yielded good results for PLN, the energy sector as a whole, and the Government. These results are
expected to be sustained beyond the life of the Program.

The risk that PLN will not be able to adequately maintain an operation and maintenance (O&M) program is fairly
low. Extensive training has been provided to train PLN’s staff to properly operate and use the systems. The
ICR points out (p.36) that a review of historical allocations for O&M revealed that PLN expenditures were in line
with best industry practices, at 3-5 percent of capital expenditures.
That said, one area of risk, over a longer-term horizon, arises from the fact that tariff levels are not yet in line
with cost-recovery levels. As such, PLN requires a subsidy from the Government to close the financing gap and
have enough resources available for O&M. The Bank team has been working with the Government and PLN

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Power Distribution Development (P154805)



through an extensive advisory and analytics (ASA) program, to address and try to mitigate this risk. This
includes advisory support for improved electricity sector governance, options for PLN’s new forward-looking
revenue model, and preparation of a white/vision paper on PLN’s financial stabilization. Nevertheless, as long
as tariffs are not set at cost-recovery levels, the risk – though low - to PLN’s financial position remains real.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of this operation benefited from the World Bank’s previous experience in the power sector in
  Indonesia and other countries in the region. Based on this, the Bank team came up with a set of
  development objectives that were relevant for Indonesia and a program that was realistically conceived as
  a means of providing support to PLN in specific areas of its broader strategy (ICR, p.35). Project
  management arrangements, fiduciary procedures, M&E systems, etc., were based on standard practices
  that had proven effective in numerous Bank-funded projects worldwide.
  Lessons learned from previous generation and T&D operations that were incorporated in the design of the
  operation included the need for decentralized implementation of distribution investments, including
  planning and design, contract management and payment. The main distribution unit (MDU) items, which
  comprised the bulk of the expenditures under the Program, were fairly standardized and procurement
  could be handled through framework contracts with registered manufacturers. At the time, there were
  three ongoing Bank-funded projects being implemented by PLN in Indonesia, including the Indonesia
  Power Transmission Development Projects (I and II), all of which were experiencing slow progress and low
  disbursement rates. The ICR reports (p.29) that the current project was designed as a PforR as an
  alternative lending instrument, which allowed the relationship with PLN to continue without being
  jeopardized by the possible threat of partial cancellation of those ongoing operations. The results areas
  and key activities of the PforR operation were conceived so as to provide a clear operational logic, and
  were well aligned with PLN’s organizational structure. In a subsequent input, the project team clarified that
  since institutional capacity in project management was identified as a constraint, the scope of the PforR
  operation was kept narrow - limited to distribution activities that the PLN regional offices were well capable
  of managing, and to a narrow geographical area, Sumatra island.
  The Bank team adequately assessed the project’s overall risk as substantial at appraisal, with a special
  concern regarding fiduciary risk, since key stakeholders were not entirely familiar with the PforR
  instrument. Risk mitigation measures were designed and include as part of the PforR itself: these included
  a dedicated Program Action Plan (PAP) to identify technical, environmental and fiduciary improvement
  measures to be supported under the Program. (It should be noted that the PAP was successfully
  implemented and all risks were reduced to Low by Program closing).


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Distribution Development (P154805)



b. Quality of supervision
  The Program appears to have been adequately supervised, with eight supervision missions recorded during
  the implementation period, 2016 to 2020. The Bank also participated in bi-yearly review missions by the
  independent verification agency (IVA). The ICR reports (p.36) that Aide Memoires and ISRs were prepared
  in a candid manner, on a timely basis, and that the team played a proactive role finding solutions to
  implementation challenges, in partnership with the ADB. Subsequent information provided by the team
  indicates that in order to facilitate and simplify verification, the design of the DLIs was harmonized in
  coordination with the ADB. Supervision missions were conducted jointly with ADB throughout the
  implementation of the project. When some discrepancies were identified between the results framework in
  the PAD and the DLIs included in the Financing Agreement at the Mid Term Review, the Bank team worked
  with the client to restructure the project, to improve the identified shortcomings. According to the ICR, the
  team also worked closely with PLN, providing their staff with guidance and advice, which contributed to the
  successful implementation of the Program. The team confirmed that several task team leads were based in
  Indonesia during the implementation period, which facilitated coordination with the client, other relevant
  donors and the IVA.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The design of the DLIs involved both specific measures leading to measurable results, as well as policy reforms
  with institutional impacts over the longer term. DLIs included PDO indicators and intermediate/output indicators
  covering both institutional strengthening/capacity building activities and program implementation
  milestones. DLI verification protocols were clearly defined during appraisal to provide a smooth and robust
  verification system (ICR, 32), capturing the qualitative and quantitative achievements under both Bank and ADB
  loans. An IVA was hired by PLN to verify the results through audits, procedural verification and physical
  inspection, as appropriate. The IVA used these protocols to prepare a Program Results Verification Report that
  was submitted to the World Bank by PLN.



b. M&E Implementation
  PLN, as implementing agency, had responsibility for managing the overall Program's results M&E. Within
  PLN, the SPKK (PLN’s internal monitoring unit) collected and consolidated data from the Wilayahs, and
  helped the Project Management Unit (PMU) to prepare a quarterly performance monitoring report.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Distribution Development (P154805)



  The indicators and DLIs were updated at restructuring to reflect Program outcomes more accurately by (a)
  incorporating a more comprehensive way of rebasing SAIDI and SAIFI; (b) taking into account better-than-
  expected results during the first half of Program implementation and reallocating proceeds to allow PLN to go
  beyond the original end-of-program targets; and (c) taking into account considerably lower-than-anticipated
  growth in electricity. An inconsistency in target figures between the PAD and the Legal Agreement was also
  fixed at restructuring.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data collected for M&E were used by the implementing agency to monitor the status of the project and
  manage its progress. Data on performance and results progress were used to inform project management of
  areas where emerging issues might require attention and adjust their implementation plans so as to achieve
  Program objectives. Indicators were closely aligned with PLN Sumatra’s corporate KPIs, resulting in the
  M&E results and reporting being used more strategically.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The Program was intended to finance only power distribution activities in rural and urban areas of
  Sumatra. As such, it intended to screen out any high risk activities as defined in the Ministry of Environment
  Regulation (PERMEN) No. 05/2012 on activities requiring full environmental assessment or Category A as
  per World Bank Safeguards Policies. The extension of power distribution lines itself was not covered under
  the above regulation due to its low potential impacts. It was also not expected that the Program would
  impact communities of indigenous peoples. The Program was to take place in rural and urban areas
  already electrified; the activities to be financed not involving any land acquisition. The capacity building
  support provided to PLN under the Program included environmental and social screening, and was
  successfully applied by PLN to screen its proposed activities. Among all activities reported and reviewed by
  the World Bank, no impacts were found in terms of physical or economic displacement, nor any impacts on
  indigenous peoples (ICR, p.34).
  Some implementation challenges were noted in implementation of the PAP, regarding the management of
  used transformer oil that might contain polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB). PLN made efforts to find a solution,
  bringing all key stakeholders to a forum to try and find the best available technology for PCB management.
  The social risk compliance rating was satisfactory throughout program implementation. PLN had carried out
  all environmental and social screening processes according to the agreed screening format. PLN
  headquarters and all regional units in Sumatra coordinated regularly, both in screening process and in
  monitoring of its implementation. PLN prepared quarterly reports on progress of the Program, including
  environmental and social aspects. No significant social impacts were found, and PLN also implemented a


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Distribution Development (P154805)



  well-managed grievance redress system which addressed all complaints at Wilayah level typically within 24
  hours.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM): The ICR reports (p.35) that the project’s financial management (FM) – including
  accounting, budgeting, internal control, funds flow, financial reporting and auditing - was acceptable to the
  World Bank. PLN regularly submitted interim financial reports that were acceptable to the Bank, and audit
  reports on a timely basis with clean (unqualified) opinions. One of the DLIs (#8: “Integrate budgeting with ERP
  in all Program Wilayahs”) aimed to improve the budgeting system in PLN. Achievement of this DLI was
  delayed somewhat as PLN had a companywide target to run all its offices in Indonesia, rather than in Sumatra
  alone; however, it was achieved in 2018 and the amount disbursed in 2019.
  Procurement: Procurement compliance was considered to be Satisfactory (ICR, p.35). During
  implementation, PLN made improvements by (a) complying with World Bank Anti-Corruption guidelines to
  ensure that contract awards did not go to firms/individuals who were on the Bank’s list of debarred/temporarily
  suspended list, (b) upgrading the e-procurement system so that PLN could publish detailed notification of
  awards through the system, (c) publishing PLN’s blacklisted firms list on its website, (d) conducting local
  suppliers’ capacity assessment for MDU items, and (e) ensuring that corrective actions from the last
  procurement audit conducted by PLN’s internal auditor were taken care of.



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                       Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory        ---
                                                                                 Rating based on amount of
Bank Performance              Highly Satisfactory     Satisfactory               information provided in the
                                                                                 ICR
Quality of M&E                Substantial             Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                ---



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Power Distribution Development (P154805)



12. Lessons

This was the first PforR program in Indonesia. IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. A clearly defined scope and program boundary are important to the achievement of the program’s
outcomes. When a PforR supports a portion of a larger government program by selecting a sub-program, it is
important for program design to clearly define its period of support and outline the boundaries and geographical
focus. The ability of the current Program to define areas of intervention and activities that could realistically be
achieved – given the implementation capacity of the client - was key to its success. Clearly defined Program
boundaries and results areas, and identification of key activities linked to disbursement incentives, established
a clear operational logic, which was an important factor guiding Program implementation.
2. Key prerequisites for the success of a PforR operation are strong leadership and alignment of
Program design with the client’s internal organization. Strong leadership would ensure a streamlined
decision-making process on strategic aspects during Program design and on any issues arising during
implementation. If Program components can be designed so as to be aligned with the client’s organizational
structure, this could additionally benefit from a faster decision-making process throughout program
implementation.
3. An important feature of the PforR instrument is that it incentivizes removal of critical roadblocks to
improving Program effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability. DLIs were carefully selected to address
implementation challenges and institutional capacity constraints, with required improvement measures included
in the PAP. By linking public investments with outcomes and results involving institutional reforms, the Program
made it easier for the World Bank to get involved in sensitive and politicized areas budget planning and
personnel management than would have been possible under traditional IPF operations.
4. The success of the Program called for the close engagement of the Bank team and close monitoring,
which necessitated greater supervision. Close monitoring and technical expertise were required to verify the
achievement of DLIs and PAPs, as well as for proper verification protocols. During implementation, most
supervision of the Program was country office-based, which significantly facilitated coordination with the client,
other donors and the IVA, and allowed the team to provide timely feedback to PLN through the Program
period. This allowed fiduciary aspects to be closely monitored, training to be provided to strengthen capacity of
PLN staff, and safeguards supervision to be ramped up when needed. Close and proactive engagement by the
team through the Program’s restructuring ensured the achievement of outcomes and maximized the
disbursement from each DLI.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Power Distribution Development (P154805)



The ICR is clearly written, concise and consistent with guidelines. It provides good details of the program’s
results areas, DLIs and its various activities. Its analysis and lessons are evidence-based and internally
consistent. The analysis of program performance is results oriented, based on the foundation of a well-
articulated theory of change, and contains a clear narrative. Adequate detail is provided on the context and
relevance of the program and the implementation issues it faced, as well as on the Bank’s approach to design
and oversight.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
