     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022645

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P144531                                     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-17649                                    31-Mar-2020                                           5,081,082.64

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Aug-2014                                 30-Sep-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             5,100,000.00                                     5,100,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              5,081,082.64                                     5,081,082.64

 Actual                                          5,081,082.64                                     5,081,082.64




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa                Vibecke Dixon                 Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s Project Development Objective (PDO) and its Global Environmental Objective (GEO) was to
   demonstrate climate smart and sustainable staple crop production in Huaiyuan County of Anhui Province and
   Yexian County of Henan Province (PAD, para 6). The formulation of the PDO in the Grant Agreement
   (Schedule 1, page 5) was identical to that in the PAD.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) Demonstration (Estimate: US$ 23.96million with GEF
   funding at US$ 3.96 million and government financing US$ 20.00 million; Actual: US$ 27.02 million with
   GEF funding at US$ 3.96 million and government financing US$ 23.06 million) intended to (a) demonstrate
   greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction and efficient irrigation techniques, including: (i)
   demonstrating high fertilizer use efficiency by providing advice on dose, formulation, and placement of
   fertilizers in soil; (ii) promoting high-efficiency sprayers and professional pest management services; and (iii)
   promoting irrigation practices that improve water and energy savings in rice and wheat and lower GHG
   emission in rice production; (b) demonstrate carbon sequestration techniques, covering: (i) retention of
   crop residues, focused on rice straw management in Huaiyuan and improved stalk shredding with large
   machinery in Yexian; and (ii) tree planting around project area croplands to increase soil organic carbon and
   integrate trees into cropping systems; (c) implementing new production technique pilots, including: (i)
   applications of new inputs, biochar produced from wheat straw and corn straw as soil amendment on a
   small scale in Huaiyuan and Yexian, respectively; (ii) application of new fertilizers and methane inhibitors for
   rice production in Huaiyuan; and (iii) improved retention of corn stalks and no-till wheat planting techniques
   in Yexian; (d) technical support for CSA demonstration, including: (i) supporting a national expert group;
   (ii) providing technical services and training; and (iii) establishing and operating farmer field schools; and (e)
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E), covering: (i) CSA M&E; (ii) social impact monitoring; (iii) environmental
   safeguard monitoring; and (iv) management of project data and information based on a geographic
   information system. This component financed project subsidies to the project farmers and the competitively
   selected service providers for adopting the fertilizer reduction technologies and the mechanized straw
   returning to field and conservation tillage carbon sequestration technology.

   Component 2. Policy Development and Knowledge Management (Estimate: US$ 3.90 million with GEF
   funding at US$ 0.90 million and government financing US$ 3.00 million; Actual: US$ 4.21 million with GEF
   funding at US$ 0.9 million and government financing US$ 3.31 million) intended to support the following. (a)
   Development of National CSA Policies, Strategies and Guidelines, covering: (i) providing policy advice
   on the national CSA policy and strategy; (ii) integrating CSA concepts into the food security strategy; (iii)
   two CSA guidelines for staple crop production; and (iv) a methodology for quantifying GHG mitigation
   associated with the implementing CSA technologies and practices in staple crop production in China. (b)
   Provincial and National Dissemination of Project Knowledge, covering: development of a project
   website, dissemination of project newsletters and promotional materials, provincial-level knowledge sharing
   with farmers and extension service technicians from non-project townships surrounding the project areas,
   and national-level knowledge dissemination through the network of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
   Affairs (MARA). (c) Promotion of International CSA Cooperation, covering: a support to MARA
   participation in related international CSA and GEF climate mitigation events.

   Component 3. Project Management (Estimate: US$ 2.24 million with GEF funding at US$ 0.24 million and
   government financing US$ 2.00 million; Actual: US$2.26 million with GEF funding at US$ 0.24 million and
   government financing US$ 2.02 million) supported project implementing agencies to manage, supervise and
   monitor project implementation.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$30.10 million (PAD, para 12). At project
   closing, the actual cost was US$33,481,083 (ICR, page 2).

   Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed by US$5.10 million grant from the Global
   Environment Facility (GEF) and US$25.00 million from the Government (PAD, para 12). At project closing,
   the project was financed by US$5,081,083 grant from the GEF and US$28.40 million from the Government
   (ICR, page 2).

   Dates: The project was approved on August 29, 2014, and became effective on December 1, 2014. The
   Mid-Term Review was completed on May 28, 2018. The project was closed on September 30, 2020, which
   was six months after the original closing date of March 31, 2020.

   Restructuring: The project had a restructuring in April 2019 to extend the project duration and to reallocate
   funds between disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. China’s agriculture sector was supporting 22% of the world’s population with
only 9% of the world’s arable land at appraisal (PAD, para 2). To achieve food security, China developed
intensive crop production systems that rely on high consumption and inefficient use of fertilizers, pesticides,
and irrigation water inputs, which resulted in significant greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Heavy reliance
on synthetic fertilizers also stressed its limited arable land. This situation was aggravated by unsustainable
crop production practices which often included excessive tillage, straw burning, and low rates of organic
residue return to soil, monocropping or limited crop rotation, and flood irrigation. These practices not only
led to the high GHG emissions from crop production but also reduced resilience of the country’s crop
production systems to the expected climate change. The two project counties, Huaiyuan and Yexian, were
selected from the country’s main staple crop production region. Three main staple crops were raised under
two major crop production systems: the rice-wheat system in Huaiyuan and the wheat-corn system in
Yexian. During the project preparation, the baseline investigation in the target areas confirmed that the
baseline GHG emissions were from nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from fertilization, methane and N2O
emissions from rice paddy, N2O and methane releases from burning of crop residues, and carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions from crop production related fuel combustion (PAD, page 15). According to official reports,
the number of households living below the national poverty line (extreme poverty) in 2013 were 994 in
Huaiyuan project villages and 1,485 in Yexian project villages (PAD, page 14).

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective was well aligned with China’s
national priorities as articulated in the 12th Five-Year Plan (FYP) for National Economic and Social
Development (2011-2015), in specific, the 12th FYP’s target to raise the efficient use co-efficient of water
used in agricultural irrigation to 0.53 (PAD, page 37). The project design also directly contributed to
implementing China’s Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement. China strived to

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 15
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



integrate climate smart development actions into its green growth strategy. In doing so, the Government
developed the National Program on Climate Change (2007), the White Paper on China’s Policies and
Actions for Addressing Climate Change (2011), and the Work Plan for Greenhouse Gas Emissions Control
during the Period of the 12th FYP for National Economic and Social Development (2011). Consistent with
these frameworks, the Government’s Action Program on Climate Change for Agriculture (2008)
emphasized sustainable crop production systems to enhance crop yields and farmers’ incomes while
reducing GHG emissions, and promoting resilience to climate change induced variability in crop production
systems. At project closing, the project objective was in line with the 13th FYP (2016-2020). In addition,
throughout the project duration from 2014 to 2020, the project objective was aligned with the emphasis of
agriculture in a series of "No. 1 Central Document," which was the first policy document jointly released
every year by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the State Council for the most
important policy theme.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective was in line with the Country
Partnership Strategy FY2013-2016, in specific, Strategic Theme 1: Supporting Greener Growth and
Outcome 1.4: Promoting sustainable agriculture practices. At project closing, the project objective was
aligned with the Country Partnership Framework FY2020-2025, in specific, Objective 2.3: Demonstrating
Sustainable Agriculture Practices and Improving Food System Quality and Safety. The CPF (page 49)
noted that the current WBG support recognizes the need to address food safety and agriproduct quality,
environmental sustainability, and climate change in an integrated and complementary way.

Prior Sector Experience. The Bank supported China’s program to pilot low GHG emission and soil carbon
sequestration technology, such as precision fertilization and crop residue retention in the field. The Ministry
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA, Ministry of Agriculture before the government re-organization in
2018) identified a number of factors limiting the uptake of climate smart crop production technologies: (a)
limited public support to the screening and assessment of agricultural technologies; (b) inadequate
demonstration on the ground; (c) limited awareness of farmers and local governments; (d) lack of policy
incentives; and (e) low capacity of extension services to disseminate advisories to famers (PAD, para 4). To
address these challenges and promote continuous identification and adoption of context-specific climate
smart crop production technologies, MARA requested the Bank’s support to prepare and implement this
project financed by the Global Environment Facility. This project was implemented in parallel to the IBRD-
financed Integrated Modern Agriculture Development Project (P125496, US$200 million, 2013-2020), which
aimed to develop sustainable and climate resilient agricultural production systems in selected areas of
Gansu, Hunan, Jiangxi, and Liaoning provinces; Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous region; and Chonqging
municipality.

The PDO was appropriately pitched for addressing development challenges to utilize climate smart crop
production technologies. The five limitation factors that were identified prior to the project were adequately
addressed by project activities, as described in Section 4 below.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To demonstrate climate smart and sustainable staple crop production in Huaiyuan County of Anhui Province
               and Yexian County of Henan Province

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC): The project aimed to address the following development challenges limiting the
               uptake of climate smart crop production technologies: (a) limited public support to the screening and
               assessment of agricultural technologies; (b) inadequate demonstration on the ground; (c) limited awareness
               of farmers and local governments; (d) lack of policy incentives; and (e) low capacity of extension services to
               disseminate advisories to famers, as described in Section 3. The project objective’s TOC envisioned that
               project activities such as promoting appropriate dose, formulation, and placement of fertilizers in soil,
               promoting high-efficiency sprayers and professional pest management services, promoting efficient irrigation
               practices in rice production, and testing application of new fertilizers and methane inhibitors for rice
               production would result in outputs such as adoptions of GHG emission reduction and efficient irrigation
               practices in crop production areas, reductions in inputs of fertilizers, pesticides, and water, increases in
               average net staple crop production income. In addition, the TOC envisioned that project activities such as
               retention of crop residues, tree planting around project area croplands, testing no-till wheat planting
               techniques, and piloting biochar production from wheat straw and corn straw as soil amendment would result
               in outputs such as adoptions of carbon sequestration practices in crop production areas. Moreover, the TOC
               envisioned that project activities such as supporting development of national CSA policies, strategy, and
               guidelines, disseminating project knowledge at provincial and national level, promoting international CSA
               cooperation, supporting a national expert group, and establishing farmer field schools would result in outputs
               such as developments of a series of policy documents and operationalizations of farmer field schools. The
               outputs on demonstration of GHG emission reduction and efficient irrigation techniques would result in
               outcomes such as reduced GHG emissions and increased average crop yields. The outputs on
               demonstration of carbon sequestration techniques would result in outcomes such as increased carbon
               sequestration. The outputs on policy development and project knowledge dissemination would result in
               outcomes such as scaled up mitigation actions in China’s staple crop production through CSA technologies
               and practices. Critical assumptions included that there would be uptake by farmers and continued
               government support to achieve the outcomes. In the long-term, the outcomes were envisioned to contribute to
               the achievements of the sustainable agricultural development to ensure food security, the Nationally
               Determined Contribution target by 2030, and the carbon neutrality before 2060.

               Outputs:

                     6,700 hectares (ha) of crop production areas adopted project promoted practices, surpassing the
                        target of 4,000 ha (167% of the original target). The target was overachieved because the project area
                        was enlarged by an increase in the actual counterpart financing, which exceeded the approved budget
                        by 14% (ICR, para 52).
                       Reduction in fertilizer inputs was 572 tons, exceeding the target of 500 tons.
                       Reduction in pesticide inputs was 121 kg, exceeding the target of 100 kg.
                       Reduction in water inputs was 1,450,000 m3, exceeding the target of 1,000,000 m3.
                       Areas serviced by professional service providers with new CSA techniques were 3,350 ha, exceeding
                        the target of 3,000 ha.

                                                                                                                Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)




      30 farmer field schools were under proper operation, meeting the target of 30 farmer field schools.
      Increase in average net staple crop production income was 14.2%, exceeding the target of 12%. The
       farmers’ net incomes were calculated by subtracting expenses from revenues. The achievement of
       the target of the Intermediate Results indicator showed that the target farmers’ productivity increased
       as envisioned.
      Clients who adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project were 28,474 clients,
       exceeding the target of 25,000 clients. Female clients who adopted an improved agricultural
       technology promoted by the project were 12,050 female clients, meeting the target of 12,000 female
       clients.
      5 policy documents were developed, meeting the target of 5 policy documents. Specifically, the project
       conducted the studies for policy advice and developed technical guidelines and methodology as
       follows: (a) a study on national CSA policy and strategy (including the financial subsidy policy for
       farmers) to examine how existing agricultural policies could be adjusted and optimized to support CSA
       adoption and knowledge dissemination; (b) a study to examine how to integrate CSA concept into
       China’s food security strategy; (c) two CSA technical guidelines for the wheat-corn production system
       and the wheat-rice production system; (d) a baseline and monitoring methodology for quantification of
       GHG mitigation associated with implementing CSA technologies and practices in staple crop
       production. The two CSA technical guidelines and the GHG mitigation quantification methodology
       associated with CSA implementation were scheduled to be approved by the MARA by the end of 2021
       for nationwide adoption. In the next few years, the project’s contribution was expected to be
       observable in more CSA policies and plans (ICR, para 57). Client days of training provided
       (person*day) were 25,016 client days, meeting the target of 25,000 client days. On the other hand,
       client days of training provided to female (person*day) were 11,050 female client days, not meeting
       the target of 14,000 female client days.

In addition to the outputs in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs. None
of them had formal targets.

      Project knowledge was disseminated at national and provincial levels. In the two project provinces,
       dissemination activities were organized to educate farmers and extension service technicians from
       non-project townships surrounding the project areas. Good practices generated by the project were
       disseminated nationally through the MARA network.
      An international forum that was jointly organized by MARA and the World Bank in September 2020, in
       order to promote international CSA cooperation.

Outcomes:

      Reduced GHG emission (CO2 equivalent) was 29,782 metric tons, exceeding the target of 21,000
       metric tons. Higher cumulative GHG emissions reductions were achieved in Anhui since methane
       (CH4) emissions declined due to improved water management (financed by the government
       counterpart funding in the rice fields) and decreased nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions predominantly
       through improved use of inputs in wheat production. In Yexian, net GHG emissions reductions were
       achieved by decreasing N2O emissions through improved use of inputs in wheat production.
      Increase in carbon sequestration (CO2 equivalent) was 99,565 metric tons, achieving more than twice
       of the target of 44,000 metric tons. The achievement was mainly due to the higher than expected crop
       residue retention combined with improved soil water content and soil structure (ICR, page 27).


                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)




                                  Increase in average crop yield was 8.02%, meeting the target of 8%. Crop productivity was monitored
                                   through surveys of project farm households through the change in average crop yield. The sampling
                                   approach and procedures to measure the actual achievement followed those in the baseline survey.
                                   The achievement of this PDO outcome indicator’s target showed that adopting the CSA technologies
                                   supported by the project led to the increase in average crop yields.

                            Referring to the TOC above, the achievements of the PDO outcomes showed that reducing the GHG
                            emissions and increasing the carbon sequestration would be achieved while increasing the crop yields when
                            the CSA technologies were adopted to staple crop production. The project addressed the development
                            challenges limiting the uptake of climate smart crop production technologies, that were: (a) limited public
                            support to the screening and assessment of agricultural technologies; (b) inadequate demonstration on the
                            ground; (c) limited awareness of farmers and local governments; (d) lack of policy incentives; and (e) low
                            capacity of extension services to disseminate advisories to famers. In a few years after the project closing,
                            more evidence was expected to be available regarding to what extent the studies developed under this
                            project were actually reflected in the national policies to enhance the GHG mitigation actions. Overall, the
                            achievement of objective is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            All the PDO outcomes were achieved by achieving the Intermediate Results as intended. The overall
                            efficacy thus is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis: At appraisal, the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of the project was estimated at
   19% with the carbon shadow price of US$6/ton and the economic discount rate of 12% (PAD, para 18). At
   project closing, the EIRR for Yexian County was estimated at a low of 31% (carbon shadow price at US$ 40/ton)
   and high of 35% (carbon shadow price at US$ 80/ton with annual growth rate at 2.25 percent) respectively, and
   for Huaiyuan County, a low of 44 percent and high of 45 percent (ICR, para 47). The assumptions for the EIRR
   calculation at project closing included: the project life of 20 years; the social discount rate at 12 percent; and no
   adjustment between financial and economic prices per recent Bank project analysis. The EIRRs at project
   closing were noticeably higher than that at appraisal due to the increase in the carbon shadow prices as per the
   World Bank’s guidance note from US$6/ton at appraisal to US$40/ton for a low case scenario and US$80/ton for

                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



a high case scenario at project closing. When the carbon shadow price of US$6/ton was used, the EIRR of the
whole project at project closing was 18%, which was comparable to the EIRR at appraisal.

Regarding methodologies, both ex-ante and ex-post EIRRs were calculated by using cost-benefit analysis and
comparing “with” and “without” situations. The incremental economic costs included: (a) investment for adopting
new technologies; (b) operational costs for agricultural production; and (c) project management and capacity-
building costs. The major benefits included in the analysis were: (a) improved agricultural production; (b) savings
from reduced agricultural input costs, including fertilizer, agrochemicals, diesel, and irrigation water; and (c)
environmental benefits from GHG emissions reduction.

Financial Analysis: At appraisal, without subsidies, the financial internal rate of returns (FIRRs) of the pest
management and irrigation infrastructure activities were estimated to be above the discount rate of 12% (PAD,
para 19). With the proposed project subsidies, the fertilization investments were estimated to generate FIRRs far
above the discount rate. Even with the subsidies, the conservation agriculture investments were not able to
generate a FIRR above the discount rate because such investments would lead to positive externality such as
carbon sequestration that could not be internalized by project farmers. At project closing, without subsidies, the
financial internal rate of returns (FIRRs) of the pest management and irrigation infrastructure activities were
above the discount rate of 12% (ICR, para 49). With the project subsidies, the FIRRs of the fertilization and
conservation agriculture activities were above the discount rate (Ibid).

Regarding methodologies, both ex-ante and ex-post FIRRs were calculated by comparing “with” and “without”
situations of various project interventions. The incremental project costs and benefits were calculated based on
the expected and actual changes in (a) crop yields; (b) agricultural inputs; and (c) investment costs.

In sum, the ex-post EIRR was comparable to the ex-ante EIRR and the ex-post FIRRs were above the discount
rate. Overall, the efficiency is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              18.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)




Relevance is high as the objective was in line with the government and Bank assistance strategies and the prior
sector experience. Efficacy is substantial as the PDO outcomes were achieved as intended. Efficiency is
substantial, considering the ex-post EIRR and FIRRs. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The section on risk to development outcome in the ICR (para 90) described the transition arrangements for
regular operation of supported activities after project closing and the knowledge sharing activities to reflect
the project’s lessons to similar interventions. No specific description was provided by the ICR regarding
whether any risk to development outcome was identified at project closing, and if so, what were each risk’s
category, likelihood of occurrence, and potential impact to the project’s outcomes, as well as what measures
were taken to mitigate each risk. Based on the descriptions in the ICR, this ICR Review categorizes and
summarizes potential risks to the project’s outcomes in the following.

Financial Risk: There was an uncertainty on financial viability of the project promoted practices after project
closing, especially those that were not financially profitable without subsidies. To mitigate the potential risk,
the central and provincial governments would continue making well-targeted subsidies for interventions that
were not profitable to farmers, such as straw-returning mechanization, green manure, and pollution control to
support implementation of climate smart agriculture (CSA) activities. The government subsidies also covered
the uses of organic fertilizer, green fertilizer from rotation and fallow cultivation, and formula fertilizer. A
special fund for agro-ecological protection and resource utilization was established in 2019. There would be
a potential for reducing the subsidies in the medium term, given that some CSA technologies (e.g.
conservation tillage, use of organic manure) would take some time to generate full benefits and farmers
would gain more experience with using CSA technologies.

Government Ownership Risk: There was an uncertainty on government commitment to sustain and scale-
up the CSA practices. To mitigate the potential risk, the project ensured that the CSA strategies and
technologies were mainstreamed into policies, programs, and action plans at the national level, including the
government’s obligations to Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions in the agriculture sector.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The strategic relevance and approach, the M&E arrangements, and risk assessments were adequate.
  Technical, financial, environmental, and fiduciary aspects were well considered. The implementation
  management structure was designed properly with responsibilities clearly stated for the project
  management offices at the central, provincial, and county levels. A Project Implementation Manual was
  prepared by the MARA before project approval to guide project implementation. These supported the

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



  PMO and the two county PMUs that had no prior experience with Bank operation. Bank’s inputs were
  appropriate and reasonable, as the preparation process was efficient in terms of preparation costs and
  time. Overall, the quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided adequate staff and resources for project implementation support with a focus on
 development impact. A project restructuring was conducted in a timely manner to extend the project to
 cover the full crop production season and to pilot new CSA technologies, which required adequate time for
 collecting and assessing the results. The Bank team also provided sufficient technical and implementation
 support and conducted trainings to enhance the institutional capacities in fiduciary, environmental and
 social safeguards management. In particular, recruiting an internationally recognized soil scientist before
 the MTR mission provided best advice to the PMOs and the monitoring team to ensure the soundness of
 M&E work for GHG emission reduction and soil carbon sequestration. Bank missions were conducted
 approximately bi-annually and recorded in mission Aide Memoires, Management Letters, and
 Implementation Status and Results Reports. During the late months of implementation under COVID-19
 travel restrictions, virtual supervision missions and consultations were conducted to address the potential
 delay of the key project activities. The task team was composed of an adequate mix of skills and
 experiences of professionals. The TTL turnover (three TTLs during project implementation) did not
 substantially affect the project implementation due to the support from senior professional Bank staff.
 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective was clearly specified. The Theory of Change was well embedded in the design of Results
 Framework, and the PDO outcome indicators encompassed all relevant outcomes of the PDO statement.
 Most of the Intermediate Results (IR) indicators were adequate to capture the contribution of the
 operation’s activities and outputs toward achieving PDO-level outcomes. The methodologies used for GHG
 emissions reduction quantification were based on internationally and nationally recognized methodologies
 and appropriate at appraisal. Moreover, establishments of the baselines were completed during project
 preparation, following the methodologies and guidance approved under the United Nations Framework
 Convention on Climate Change. Before appraisal, the baseline values were stratified based on the

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



 cropping system, the farm type, and the soil type, in order to inform evaluation of the cost effectiveness of
 various CSA technical options and to lay a solid foundation for M&E implementation. On the other hand,
 the IR indicator on the number of policy documents developed was not fully specific whether the “policy
 documents” referred to the studies and the policy advice to the national CSA policies or the national CSA
 policies themselves.



b. M&E Implementation
  All the indicators included in the Results Framework were provided with the baseline data where
  applicable. All the indicators were measured and reported, though the ambiguity in the design of the IR
  indicator on policy documents negatively affected measuring the project’s achievements on CSA policy
  development, as described in Section 4. The M&E data were collected and analyzed by an independent
  third-party agency. The agency responsible for M&E ensured attention to effective M&E implementation.
  The methodologies of the GHG quantification were revised during the project implementation. In the first
  two years, the GHG emissions, soil organic carbon, and forest carbon sequestration were directly
  measured. The monitoring team undertook stratified sampling for two years to tackle the spatial variability
  and obtain accurate results (2015-2017). The DeNitrification-DeComposition (DNDC) model was verified
  and calibrated by two years of observation data (four cropping seasons), showing a general convergence
  of modeling results with field observations. Thereafter, the team used a modeling approach to calculate
  emissions, which was cost-effective by reducing field measurement and labor requirements. Recent
  literature suggested the DNDC model was sensitive to rainfall, soil organic carbon and temperature which
  can result in overestimation of N2O peaks during the warm wet season. Therefore, the modeling could
  have further benefited from a subset of direct validation analysis after the first two years.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data analyses were used to inform project management and develop technical standards. The
  critical data and analyses were provided for implementation progress evaluation, project restructuring
  and implementation completion and result report. The M&E data was used to provide evidence of
  achievement of outcomes, such as GHG emissions reduction, carbon sink, and crop yield increase. The
  M&E data and methodologies were envisioned to inform the subsequent interventions, as recommended
  by the government.

  The Results Framework and the indicators were adequately designed to reflect the Theory of Change
  envisioned at appraisal with a minor shortcoming. The technical methodologies to measure GHG
  emissions and carbon sequestration for some indicators were designed in line with the sector standards
  at appraisal and updated to reduce data collection costs during the implementation. The collected M&E
  data were used to inform the project management and the governmental stakeholders. Overall, the M&E
  quality is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B and triggered three safeguards: Involuntary Resettlement (OP
   4.12), Environmental Assessment (OP4.01), and Pest Management (OP4.09). The project complied with all
   safeguards policies and safeguards performance was satisfactory, as elaborated below.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12): This safeguard policy was triggered as the project’s counterpart
   funding financed the construction and rehabilitation of on-farm crops production infrastructure such as farm
   roads or irrigation canals that involved small-scaled land acquisition activities. During the project’s
   preparation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) prepared a Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) for the entire project with: (a) detailed procedures on preparation, review and approval of
   potential land acquisition activities; (b) institutional and financial arrangements for carrying out such
   activities; and (c) the monitoring plan for supervising the implementation of such activities. The RPF was
   agreed between the Bank and the MARA and disclosed in 2014. The agreed RPF under this project was
   satisfactorily implemented by the PMOs.

   Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): The project was classified as Category B – partial assessment;
   because, the construction and rehabilitation of small scale on-farm agricultural infrastructures under
   Component 1 generated some environmental impacts, such as noise, air, wastewater, and solid waste.
   Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) were prepared for such investment in accordance with the Bank
   environmental safeguard requirements. ECOPs implementation was deemed generally satisfactory based
   on the review and monitoring and mission field visits by the PMOs and the Bank’s task teams.

   Pest Management (OP4.09): The project promoted Integrated Pest Management practices and supported
   the review and development of technical codes and standards related to applying agricultural inputs
   (including pesticides) in CSA practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared for rice, wheat, and
   corn production at the project sites and its implementation was generally satisfactory throughout the project.
   The impacts were environmentally positive as the project reduced the use of pesticides and fertilizers.

   Public Consultation and Disclosure: In accordance with the policies and regulations of both the Bank and
   the national government, public consultations were conducted with project farmers and other stakeholders
   through meetings and on-site surveys and interviews during the project preparation. The opinions and
   concerns of the people consulted were considered in the safeguards’ documents and the project design.
   The project information was disclosed at project villages and government websites. The ECOPs and PMP
   were disclosed to the public in accordance with the Bank’s information disclosure policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM): At appraisal, the FM capacity assessment identified the following key risks:
   (a) the financial staff of the PMO at the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) and two Project
   Management Units in counties were new to the Bank’s operations; and (b) the internal control procedures
   designed for Component 1 might not be followed strictly by the involved entities. The risk mitigation
   measures included: (a) financial management training was provided to the project financial staff; (b) an FM
   Manual was prepared as part of the Project Implementation Manual to state clearly the responsibility of

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



   each involved entity and standardize project implementation procedures; and (c) close monitoring and
   supervision from the Bank team and the PMO were conducted. Originally the Ministry of Finance managed
   the GEF grant and oversaw the Designated Account (DA), until the DA was moved to the MARA as a
   result of government institutional reform. During implementation, the changes of financial staff at both
   national and county levels and the complex disbursement review process made disbursement inefficient in
   the first two to three years during project implementation, resulting in late submission of the interim
   financial reports. The Bank team provided implementation support and on-the-job training to relevant
   financial staff at PMOs to ensure that an acceptable financial management system was in place. The
   required annual audit reports were submitted timely, and the external auditors issued unqualified audit
   opinions.

   Procurement: The MARA PMO, in line with the legal covenants and the Bank’s procurement guidelines,
   carried out procurement activities with designated staff attended procurement training provided by the
   Bank team during project preparation, and additional trainings during project implementation. During
   implementation, the MARA PMO arranged continuous capacity-building events on procurement and
   contract management for staff members of the PMO and two county PMUs. The procurement plan for
   project implementation was agreed upon during project negotiations and was regularly updated thereafter.
   The Bank team closely oversaw procurement activities carried out by the client to ensure compliance with
   Bank procurement policies and procedures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impact was mentioned in the ICR.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects on climate
smart staple crop development, and are presented here with some editing.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)



1. A sound project monitoring and evaluation system with a solid baseline survey can
support efficient project implementation. Under this project, the M&E system design had a clear
Results Framework and adequate indicators, with a technically sound baseline survey done at
project preparation on the cropping system, farm type, and soil type, laying a solid foundation for
measuring, demonstrating and reporting on results, performances, and the cost-effectiveness of
various CSA technical options. Further, M&E data were collected and analyzed by a professional
third-party agency responsible for each province, ensuring the independence of the M&E process
and data quality.

2. The CSA interventions of a public good nature can benefit from support by a government
payment for ecosystem service (PES) or similar program. The compensations provided to the
farmers under the project were well founded and were effective means to achieving valuable climate
benefits. As demonstrated in the economic analysis (ICR, Annex 4), in terms of the cost benefit ratio,
the subsidies for farmers could generate far more climate benefits. The public good delivery by
farmers should be fully recognized and compensated fairly, as the beneficial externalities generated
by a farmer cannot be internalized. As such, it would be desirable if compensation for CSA
technologies could be covered in the PES program. Moreover, the project showed that different
technical interventions generated divergent financial returns for farmers and economic returns for
society as a whole. Given this, the magnitude and level of CSA compensations can be based on
specific implementation results to enable efficient and effective use of public financing.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence.
It is candid and generally aligned to the project development objective. The report is concise, follows the
guidelines, and is focused on results. The quality of evidence and analysis are mostly aligned to the messages
outlined in the ICR. The ICR (Figure 1, page 7) outlines the project’s theory of change that helps the reader to
understand how the ratings have been reached, though the description could have been more detailed to clarify
logical paths to link each activity, output, outcome, and intended impact. The ICR’s lessons are clear and based
on evidence outlined in the ICR. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)




                                                                              Page 15 of 15
