     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022574

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P131228                                  DABS Planning And Capacity Support

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Afghanistan                              Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A2026                                 31-Jul-2020                                          4,408,774.45

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Feb-2016                              31-Jul-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           6,000,000.00                                   6,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            4,408,774.45                                   4,408,774.45

 Actual                                        4,408,774.45                                   4,408,774.45




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Ranga Rajan                Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives


   The Project Development Objective (PAD, page 13) as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4)
   and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 13) was:




                                                                                               Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



   " To improve Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS) capacity in distribution, investment planning,
   implementation, operation and maintenance ".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   There were two components (PAD, pages 14 - 15).

   1. DABS staff capacity building. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.95 million. According to the
   information provided by the team, the actual cost was US$2.39 million.

   This component aimed to strengthen Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS)'s institutional capacity to
   plan and implement investments in distribution systems, and to operate and maintain the investments.
   Activities in this component: (i) developing a core training curriculum and general and task-specific training
   to managers and staff: (ii) general and task-specific training to managers and staff on distribution operation
   planning and implementation: (iii) integrating the Afghanistan Energy Information Center into the asset
   management department of DABS: and (iv) empowering women participation in the sector.

   2. Training center development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.05 million. According to the
   information provided by the team, the actual cost was US$2.05 million.

   This component aimed at establishing a training center for DABS. Activities in this component: (i) design,
   construction and furnishing of the center: and (ii) purchasing office equipment for the center.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


   Project cost. The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$6.00 million. The actual cost was US$4.40
   million.

   Project financing. The project was financed by the Afghanistan Grant Trust Fund (ARTF) of US$6.00
   million. The amount disbursed was US$4.40 million. US$ 1.00 million of the Grant that was unlikely to be
   used before closure was reallocated towards the World Bank COVID-19 response activities in Afghanistan.

   There was parallel financing for supporting infrastructure investments for DABS from the Asian
   Development Bank (ADB). capacity building of the DABS commercial department from the United States
   Department Agency for International Development (USAID), and capacity building of DABS for operation


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



   and maintenance of KfW-funded hydropower projects from the German development finance institution,
   Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW).

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal. There was no recipient
   contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project approved on February 10, 2016, became effective on March 7, 2016, and closed as
   scheduled on July 31, 2020.

   Other changes. The ICR (page 9) notes that in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, US$1.0 million of
   funds that was not likely to be used for this project, was reallocated towards the Bank's COVID response in
   Afghanistan. Some activities that were unlikely to be completed by the closing date (supply of training aid
   equipment and furniture for the center, and some training activities) were transferred to the ongoing Bank-
   financed Naghlu Hydropower Rehabilitation project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Afghanistan is one of the least-developed countries in the world, and to date
remains in a stage of fragility and conflict. As with other sectors in the country, the energy sector has been
affected by the ongoing conflict, with the generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure being either
damaged or otherwise left in disrepair. DABS - the state-owned power utility - lacked management capacity
which contributed to poor customer service and billing and collection. Crucial to improving service delivery
was to provide the energy sector professionals with knowledge to provide cost effective technically sound
solutions.

Government strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Government strategy, articulated in
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS) for 2008 - 2013. This strategy endorsed by
the Bank and other donors, identified the energy sector as a top economic development priority, and
singled out electricity as the "motor that powers Afghanistan's growth".

Bank strategy. The Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for 2015-2016, prepared by the World Bank for
Afghanistan, identified improving delivery of power services as one of the three priority areas. The PDOs
are well-aligned with the Bank's most current County Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2020. The
second pillar of the CPF specifically highlighted the need for "increasing power generation capacity
and access to electricity" for supporting inclusive growth (CPF pages 23 -24).

Prior Bank experience. The Bank has financed several power sector projects in Afghanistan in the past,
including the Emergency Power Rehabilitation Project (EPRP), the Kabul-ayabak Mazar-e-sharif distribution
project, and the Afghanistan Power System Development Project (APSDP). The Bank is also currently
financing the ongoing Naghlu hydropower plant project and the Central Asia Electricity Transmission and
Trade Project (CASA) between the Central Asian countries of Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic and Pakistan
and Afghanistan. This project aimed to meet an important need of the sector by reinforcing DABS's capacity
in planning and operations & maintenance of the distribution system.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



               Given that the PDO focused on meeting the needs identified during the gap assessment, and the PDO
               continues to be relevant to the current Bank strategy for Afghanistan, the relevance of the PDO is rated
               as Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve DABS capacity in distribution, investment planning, implementation, operation and maintenance .

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical.
                             Developing a training curriculum, training DABS staff and an internship scheme for women, were aimed at
                             increasing DABS capacity in planning, implementing, operations and maintenance (O&M) of distribution
                             operations. Establishing a training center was aimed at improving the quality and quantity of training from the
                             new teaching tools. Preparation of electricity distribution investment projects by trainees led by recruited
                             experts, was aimed at developing annual O&M plans incorporating new standards and procedures based on
                             international best practices. Assuming that there is domestic capacity to build and equip the
                             center, these activities were likely to aid in the long-term development outcome of strengthening DABS
                             distribution capacity, and thereby improving service delivery of electricity services. The indicators for
                             monitoring the efficacy of training were however inadequate, and the expectations from the project were quite
                             modest.

                             Outputs (ICR, pages 27 -29).

                             The following activities were completed as targeted.

                                        The training curriculum for DABS staff was developed. New standards and procedures for planning
                                         and O&M were adopted.
                                        The training center was established with state-of-the-art equipment and software, with ample meeting
                                         and teaching spaces, a library, a laboratory and housing for staff brought in from other regions.
                                        1,460 DABS staff were trained, exceeding the target of 965. 14% of the staff trained were women,
                                         exceeding the target of eight percent. The ICR (page 21) reports that was a discrepancy in the DABS
                                         report and the Implementation Status Results (ISR) report of June 22, 2020. While the DABS reported
                                         that 1,200 operational staff were trained, the ISR report suggested that over 1,400 staff were trained.
                                        Twelve internship opportunities were provided for female engineering students in DABS. The ICR
                                         (page 11) notes that of the twelve female interns, two were subsequently hired by DABS, and three
                                         others were recruited by Tetatech, a consulting firm in Kabul.

                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)




                                  Feasibility studies for three network expansion projects were produced by DABS staff under initial
                                   expert guidance. These projects are to be funded by international donors.
                                  The project supported technical assistance for completing a financial analysis of DABS, that identified
                                   several key issues that would need to be addressed to improve the operational sustainability of the
                                   utility. Resulting from this, DABS signed a partnership agreement with the Ministry of Finance (MoF)
                                   and had undertaken some 43 reforms (with two more yet to be completed), in the areas of tariff-setting
                                   mechanism reform, investment planning to address commercial and technical losses, and revenue
                                   and billing collection improvement strategies.
                                  Given the difficulties associated with training DABS staff outside of Kabul, the project used a "training
                                   of the trainers model", whereby the external consultant would provide specialized training to DABS
                                   staff who would then go to other regions to train local staff. Five trainers were trained.

                            Outcomes.

                            The outputs completed under this project were expected to: (i) increase the number of DABS staff with
                            improved skills in investment planning, implementation, and O&M: and (ii) preparation of annual O&M plans
                            for six major load centers using new standards and procedures based on good international practices
                            adjusted for local conditions.

                                  68% of the DABS operational staff were trained in the new training facility in the areas of investment
                                   planning, implementation and O&M, exceeding the target of 50%. There is a discrepancy in the ICR.
                                   While the ICR (page 10) mentions that 68% of the DABS operational staff were trained, the Results
                                   Matrix of the ICR (page 26) notes that 71% were trained.
                                  Six annual O&M plans for major load centers using new standards and procedures based on good
                                   international practice were completed as targeted.

                            While there is value in knowing the proportion of DABS staff that benefitted from capacity-building, a more
                            appropriate indicator would have been to demonstrate whether the trained staff attained the requisite
                            standards (such as through formal certification of the staff trained under the project). Although the bar was set
                            quite low for this type of project, given the fragile conditions in the country context, efficacy of the PDO is
                            assessed as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy was assessed as substantial, given that the outcomes were realized in a fragile
                            economy. However, the results framework did not have any indicators for verifying whether the requisite
                            standards for training were met either through formal certification requirements or at least through periodic
                            surveys.


                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency


Economic analysis. There was no traditional economic analysis conducted, as this was a technical assistance
project (PAD, page 20). The PAD notes that there was anecdotal evidence that due to poo0r planning and
inadequate maintenance, the distribution systems were breaking down before the end of their lifetime, and that
the cost of not improving the capacity of DABS to better operate and maintain it was worth hundreds of millions
of dollars, more than the amount of investment under this project.

Cost effectiveness considerations. About 1,200 DABS staff were trained under this project. The per capita
cost of training them was low as compared to the cost of sending them abroad for training (assuming that the
quality of in-house training was comparable to training abroad). The ICR (page 11) moreover notes that the
information on the cost of in-house training vis-à-vis training abroad, was based on anecdotal evidence , as
there was no comparative cost assessment. The training center was completed on schedule, and within the
allotted budget. The center had a surface area of 5,600 m2 (about 60,00 square feet), or roughly US$535 per
square meter. This compared favorably with the cost of US$844 per square meter for apartments in Kabul. The
ICR (page 11) notes that assessment of the cost effectiveness of the training center was difficult, given the
limited data on construction costs in Afghanistan, and few examples of comparable facilities. The ICR notes that
the project generated several outputs which should benefit the company and the country in terms of current and
future cost savings. These outputs included: (i) feasibility studies for three network projects, all of which are to
be funded by international donors: (ii) O&M plans for six major load centers: and (iii) a training program which
would allow DABS in the future to train staff without the need for a detailed program design. As indicated in
section 2e, about US$1.0 of the grant for this project which was unlikely to be used within the scheduled closing
date, was appropriately diverted for funding the Bank's response to the COVID-pandemic.

Administrative and Operational Issues. Despite initiation of early procurement activities, there were
procurement delays for activities (such as the construction of the training center), which accounted for 70% of
the earmarked funds for the entire project. This was primarily due to market conditions. Procurement notices
had to be advertised three times due to the lack of market response to competitive selection. This issue was
resolved through an exception to allow for a single- source procurement. The delays were exacerbated during
implementation due to the restrictions put in place in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, over which the
project had no control. Despite these delays, the training center and most of the technical assistance activities
were completed within the originally scheduled closing date.

In sum, efficiency is rated as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategy for Afghanistan is assessed as substantial. The
planned activities were completed within the originally scheduled closing date. Efficiency is rated as
substantial. Efficacy of the single PDO - "To improve DABS's capacity in distribution, investment planning,
implementation, operation and maintenance " - is substantial, as the outcomes were mostly realized. However,
the evidence provided in the ICR about whether the staff trained under this project had the requisite standards
when the project closed is rather weak, and Monitoring and Evaluation was rated as modest. Given this
important shortcoming, overall outcome is assessed as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. The number of DABS staff trained under this project, who could go out outside Kabul into
provinces would help in training other DABS staff in the provinces at lower cost (as opposed to training them
abroad). More DABS staff could be trained on-site, with less of an impact on their daily routine through the
new dedicated center established under the auspices of this project. These factors would help in improving
DABS' operations and maintenance.

However, given that DABS strategy is to expand its service delivery means that capacity building of DABS
still needs to continue. This suggests that donor support will still be required in the near future, to ensure that
the training programs become mainstreamed in the company's own corporate resource planning, in order to
reduce the reliance on donor funding. However, DABS capacity to absorb donor funds to procure services is
still limited. The ICR (page 22) notes that at present capacity, DABS could only absorb a certain amount of
funds per year. This suggests that DABS' efforts to improve service delivery across the country could be
undermined due by the lack of procurement capacity in the country.


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



The sustainability of the outcomes of this project will depend on whether DABS continue to show the
willingness, ability and resources to continue to use the training and tools provided under the auspices of this
project. In light of the above, the institutional risk to development outcome is assessed as substantial.

Country risk. There is substantial risk to development, given the fragile conditions, and security
considerations are still an issue in the country context.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


  The preparation of this project drew on the experiences from prior Bank-financed sector projects (The
  Emergency Power Rehabilitation Project (EPRP), the Kabul-ayabak Mazar-e-sharif distribution project,
  and the Afghanistan Power System Development Project (APSDP). Lessons incorporated at design,
  included: (i) a simple design and limiting areas of intervention to electricity distribution systems, given the
  capacity constraints in a post-conflict environment: (ii) initiating early procurement activities (as delayed
  disbursements due to procurement delays were a common challenge for many energy projects in Bank's
  portfolio): (iii) location of the core team in the field to ensure continuous implementation support: (iv) a
  longer time framework (five years) for a stand-alone capacity building project, given the
  country circumstances. (A buffer of 20% budget allocation was also factored in as contingency). The
  implementation arrangements at appraisal were appropriate. DABS was overall in charge
  of implementation. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was established in DABS with international
  consultants for day-to-day implementation of the project.

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial political and governance risks,
  macroeconomic risks, sector strategies and policies and fiduciary risks, including procurement. Even with
  mitigation measures, overall project risk was rated as substantial at appraisal, primarily due to the
  security situation in Afghanistan, and the limited number of consultants and contractors willing to work in
  projects in sensitive areas (PAD, page 19). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for
  safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

  The rationale to create a dedicated stand-alone for a comparatively small capacity project aimed at filling
  in specific gaps in distribution planning and maintenance, rather than associating it with a larger
  investment project, was driven by the following reasons: (i) Given the difficult conditions in Afghanistan, it
  was felt important to have a dedicated Task Team Leader (TTL) and Program Manager of the Project
  Implementation Unit (PIU) to resolve issues (whereas in a larger project less attention might have been
  paid to the capacity-building component): and (iii) the project design was expected to have positive
  impacts on other projects in the portfolio as a whole, not only with capacity reinforcement issues, but also
  by strengthening the PIU's procurement experience which they could apply to future projects (ICR, page
  20).

  There were shortcomings in the results framework, with the indicators chosen not adequate for
  measuring project performance. There were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9).


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


 Formal supervision missions were held twice a year (ICR, page 16). These were supplemented by regular
 biweekly status meetings. This helped in staying on top of things during implementation. In addition, the
 DABS management supervised project implementation during a monthly meeting on the portfolio of Bank-
 supported projects, during energy sector coordination meetings with other donors, and monthly meeting
 with contractors. There was continuity of leadership, with one Task Team Leader (TTL) during the project
 lifetime, and little change in the project team (ICR, page 16). The core of the supervision team was either
 based on-site in Kabul or Dubai. The combination of these factors helped in maintaining regular in person
 discussions and resolving issues during implementation (such as addressing procurement delays through a
 single-source procurement). The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held on schedule and the recommendations
 of the MTR helped in overcoming the snags to the procurement process. As indicated in section 2e, notes
 that in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, US$1.0 million of funds that was not likely to be used for this
 project, was reallocated towards the Bank's COVID response in Afghanistan. The support provided by the
 team aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in sections 9 and 10).

 The ICR provides no details on ow progress was actually monitored during supervision, given the country's
 conflict status and serious security issues.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design


 The M&E design was kept simple to reduce the administrative burden of the implementing agency, given
 their limited capacity. Of the two key outcome indicators, one indicator - the number of annual O&M plans
 for load centers prepared by the people trained in this project under the guidance of recruited specialists -
 was appropriate and easy to measure. However, the key outcome indicator associated with the number of
 people who were trained was inadequate to monitor the intended outcomes. A more appropriate indicator



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



 would have been to demonstrate the extent to which the trained staff attained the requisite standards for
 performance (such as through a certification process).

 Given the difficulty in training DABS staff outside of Kabul, the project design aimed at employing "training
 of the trainers" model, whereby external consultant would provide specialized training to DABS staff, who
 would then go to other regions to train staff. Given this, it would have been more appropriate to measure
 the impact of training provided to the DABS staff through certification of standards or at least monitored
 through periodic surveys.



b. M&E Implementation


  DABS was in charge of collecting the data for monitoring performance. During implementation, there
  were some discrepancies in figures between the figures in the Implementation Status Results Reports
  (ISRs) and the Borrowers ICR. For instance, the Bank had been informed that 1,460 of DABS staff
  were trained. However when asked to evidence this figure, the value was initially scaled down to 900,
  and latter corrected to 1,200.



c. M&E Utilization


  The M&E data was used for identifying progress issues and informing project management. The ICR
  (page 18) notes that the PIU provided regular progress reports to the Bank supervision team during
  implementation. These reports along with the anecdotal evidence obtained during interviews aided in
  keeping the project on track.

  In sum, given the shortcomings in M&E design and M&E implementation, overall M&E is assessed
  as modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


   The project was classified as a category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank Safeguard
   policies: Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): and
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



  Environmental Safeguards. The PAD (paragraph 62) notes that the adverse environmental impacts of the
  project activities were expected to be limited, temporary and localized impacts (such as removal of waste
  discharge, dust and noise pollution and increased traffic during construction of the training center). . An
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed to
  address the environmental impacts at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 59).

  There was compliance with environmental safeguards. The ICR (pages 18 -19) notes that a Grievance
  Redress Committee had been established, with brochures and posters prepared for awareness raising. The
  ICR notes that there were some issues with compliance with ESMP, but these were resolved during
  implementation. According to the information provided by the team, no major environmental issues were
  reported during the construction of the center.

  Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 45) notes that land acquisition was not foreseen at
  appraisal, as the training center was to be constructed in an existing compound owned by DABS in the
  outskirts of Kabul. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed as part of the ESMF and
  publicly-disclosed at appraisal for project activities where it was not feasible to avoid land acquisition, asset
  loss or involuntary resettlement.

  There was compliance with the safeguards on involuntary resettlement. According to the information
  provided by the team, there were no major social issues during the construction of the center.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


  Financial management. A financial management assessment of DABS conducted at appraisal, concluded
  that the financial arrangements were adequate. While DABS had not implemented a Bank-funded project
  before, it had worked on an ADB-funded project with similar requirements and practices as under Bank-
  funded projects. With mitigation measures, financial risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page
  50).

  The ICR (page 19) reports that there were no major financial management issues. However there were
  issues with regard to record management for contractual payments and cash payment, delays in clearing
  of travel advance provided to some trainees and delays with the internal audit of the project. According to
  the information provided by the team, there were no financial covenants. The team clarified that the last
  available financial audit was for 2018. The audit was qualified but with lesser observations than previous
  years. The team clarified that the audited reports for the remaining years are currently under preparation.

  Procurement management. An assessment of the procurement capacity of DABS was conducted at
  appraisal. DABS staff did not have direct experience of managing large and complex projects and relied on
  donor-provided consultants to execute and supervise such projects. This project was to adopt the same
  approach of relying on donor-provided consultants for addressing procurement issues. (PAD, paragraph
  56). A detailed procurement plan was prepared for the project as part of the procurement arrangement at
  appraisal (PAD, paragraph 55).



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



   The ICR (page 19) notes that procurement was in compliance with Bank rules. As discussed in section 5,
   there were procurement delays due to the delays due to the lack of market response to competitive
   selection. This issue was resolved through adoption of a single-source selection method. The ICR notes
   that the contract management was implemented effectively (the reason why procurement was consistently
   rated as Satisfactory). This was however misleading, given that there were delays in procurement of
   training equipment which led to moderately unsatisfactory ratings for procurement until the final year of the
   project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Overall outcome was moderately
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory    satisfactory , given some
                                                                                  shortcomings in efficacy.
                                                                                  There were shortcomings at
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  Quality-at-Entry.
                                                                                  There were shortcomings in
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Modest                     M&E design and M&E
                                                                                  implementation.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Modest


12. Lessons



The ICR draws the following main lesson from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Regular coordination between the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), upper management
and the World Bank, allows for quicker solutions to problems. In this project, there were
procurement issues with respect to the activity of constructing the training center. In order to deliver
training in line with project objectives and DABS' strategic vision, the needed training equipment
(similar to equipment used in the field), was very specific. The procurement notices were advertised
three times, due to the lack of market response. Faced with this bottleneck, an exception was made
following discussions between the PIU, upper management and the World Bank to adopt a single-
source procurement method. The lesson from this project is that regular supervision meetings,


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)



ideally with a strong in-field presence, can help in quickly identifying problem areas and coming up
with solutions. This is especially important for projects in fragile environments.

The ICR review draws the following main lessons from this project.

1. Starting procurement planning and implementation activities early can help in reducing
procurement delays. This is especially likely to be the case in fragile environments with supply
shortages of qualified contractors.

2. In capacity building projects it is necessary to use appropriate outcome indicators. In this
project, capacity building activities aimed at developing specific training courses and curricula. In
projects of this nature, it would be useful to measure the efficacy of training, ideally through a formal
certification of the people trained under the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



The ICR candidly discusses the issues associated with procurement delays due to the weak implementation
capacity, although procurement was initiated well before the project became effective. Given the country
conditions and that the project mainly had technical assistance components, the ICR does a reasonably good
job of discussing cost-effectiveness considerations. The theory of change provided in the ICR presents a good
picture of the links between project activities, outputs and outcomes and explicitly states the assumptions under
which the intended outcomes are likely to be realized.

However there are several shortcomings. The figures for the actual cost of project components provided in
Annex three are inaccurate, based on the information provided subsequently by the team. The ICR (page 19)
states that there were no major financial issues during implementation. The information provided by the team
states that the financial audits during implementation were qualified. There are several discrepancies in the
text. For one, there is discrepancy in the ICR on the figures provided in the ICR and in the Data sheet on
project costs. For another, there is a discrepancy in the text and in the Results Matrix (Annex one) on the
number of operations staff of DABS trained under this project. The ICR's approach to measuring efficacy has
some inadequacies, especially in the context of monitoring outcomes. The ICR provides little information on
how the project activities were monitored, in light of security considerations in the country context.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)




                                                                            Page 14 of 14
