     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022599

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132979                                    Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                      Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16395                                   30-Jun-2018                                         9,944,727.81

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Nov-2014                                30-Nov-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           11,835,000.00                                  11,835,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            11,107,400.00                                   9,944,727.81

 Actual                                         9,944,727.81                                   9,944,727.81




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Global Partnership on Output-based Aid Grant Agreement (p.7) dated September 5, 2014
   and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.5), the project objective was “to increase the number of people
   in low income areas with access to improved water supply and sanitation services.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Feb-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   According to the grant agreement (p.7) the Project consisted of two components:

   A. Project Implementation Support. (Appraisal cost: US2.34 million; actual cost: US$2.00 million)

   This component included the following activities: (i) the preparation and supervision of subprojects;(ii)
   support to the Water Services Trust Fund (WSTF, project implementation entity) to hire a project manager;
   (iii) workshops and a publicity campaign; and (iv) audits, monitoring and evaluation activities including the
   hiring of an independent verification agent (IVA).

   B. Provision of Subsidy to Water Service Providers (WSPs). (Appraisal cost: US15.80 million; actual
   cost: US$23.78 million)

   Under this component, grants were to be provided to WSPs for the implementation of subprojects upon the
   delivery of pre-specified outputs. The following types of projects were eligible for financing under the project:
   (i) network extensions to connect new customers to water and networked sanitation services; (ii)
   construction and rehabilitation of public water points; (iii) augmentation of water source and treatment and
   distribution of water; (iv) sewerage treatment and distribution; and (v) construction and rehabilitation of
   public toilets. The WSPs were to secure commercial loans from banks on market terms for the financing of
   these subprojects and be paid an output-based subsidy of up to 60 percent of each subproject cost with a
   cap of US$115 per beneficiary. Ten percent of the projected subsidy was to be paid to the WSP after the
   signing of the commercial loan, 65 percent after the completion of the subproject and independent
   verification of the pre-agreed output targets by the IVA, and remaining 25 percent after the demonstration of
   service delivery evidenced by three months of continuous billing and receipt of payments for services from
   customers.

   Revised Components

   There were no changes to the components during project implementation. However, ten subprojects that
   were supported by the project did not include the construction of public restrooms. Therefore, those
   activities and the related indicator were cancelled at the first restructuring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$18.14 million. In November 2020, the
project closed with a total cost of US$24.61 million. (The total cost of the subprojects was US$14.67 million.
The cost of the technical assistance activities and the output-based subsidies were US$9.94.)

Financing: At appraisal, the Global Partnership on Output-based Aid grant was estimated at US$11.84
million, consisting of US$2.34 million for project implementation support and US$9.50 million for capital
investments. At the second restructuring in October 2019, US$0.73 million was cancelled and the grant
amount decreased to US$11.11 million. At the same restructuring, the project funds were reallocated as
follows: US$2.55 million for project implementation support and US$8.56 million for capital investments. The
project disbursed US$9.94 million: US$2.00 million for project implementation support and US$7.94 million
for capital investments. The project could not disburse US$1.17 million because of the following reasons: (i)
a reduction in accrued interests on loans; (ii) the cancellation of subsidy to a WSP that used its own funds to
finance its subproject because of a delay in receiving the commercial loan; (iii) the exchange rate gain of the
US dollar against the Kenyan shillings; and (iv) implementation of fewer activities than projected, such as
field trips and trainings. At project closing, all project funds were accounted for.

Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$6.30 million. At
project closing, the borrower’s contribution stood at US$14.67 million, which consisted of US$12.16 million
of commercial loans, US$1.49 of capitalized interest during construction and US$1.02 million of WSPs own
funds.

Restructurings: There were three project restructurings:

      First Restructuring (Level 2 – February 16, 2018): The project closing date was extended by 18
       months from June 30, 2018 to December 31, 2019 to allow time for the completion of subprojects to
       be financed under the project. The time extension was required because of the delays in securing
       commercial loan commitments from banks to pre-finance the subprojects and the delays at the
       Ministry of Water and Irrigation in processing project funds from the National Treasury to the
       WSTF’s project account (Restructuring Paper, Report No: RES30088, p.5). The preliminary target
       values of indicators set at appraisal were revised to reflect the specific target values agreed by the
       WSTF and the WSPs after the preparation of the subprojects. The indicator related to public toilets
       was deleted due to no proposal from WSPs to construct public toilets.
      Second Restructuring (Level 2 – October 29, 2019): The project closing date was extended by
       five months from December 31, 2019 to May 31, 2020 to allow time for the completion of household
       connections and verification of output targets for subsidy payments. The project implementation was
       adversely affected by heavy rains in 2018, contractor delays in mobilizing resources and slow
       implementation of the resettlement action plans to compensate project affected people due to land
       acquisition and loss of assets (Restructuring Paper, Report No: RES36233, p.6). Because of the
       cancellation of two subprojects, US$0.73 million of project funds were cancelled and the target value
       for number of people benefiting from water connections was lowered from 94,5000 to 81,000. A new
       indicator was added to the results framework to monitor the project impact on mobilizing finance for
       development with a target value of US$12 million. Lastly, the subsidy disbursement schedule was
       revised to disburse funds to WSPs earlier in the construction stage and accelerate the disbursement
       rate. According to the revised scheme, the WSPs were to be paid 10 per cent of the subsidy upon
       securing the loan, 45 per cent upon verification by the IVA of completion of major works, and 45 per
       cent upon verification of the completion of household water and sanitation connections. The
       sustainability requirement to demonstrate service delivery as evidenced by three months of


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



          continuous billing and receipt of payments for service under the project was deleted as a condition to
          receive 25 per cent of the subsidy amount.
         Third Restructuring (Level 2 – May 14, 2020): The project closing date was extended by six
          months from May 31, 2020 to November 30, 2020 to allow time for the completion of household
          connections and verification of output targets for subsidy payments. These activities were further
          delayed because of the onset of Covid-19 pandemic and the suspension of works in the largest
          subproject (Embu, US$4.5 million) between January and March 2020 following two incidents that
          resulted in two fatalities and one injury (Restructuring Paper, Report No:RES41417, pp.4-5).

   Dates: The project was approved on November 13, 2014 after the signing of the Grant Agreement on
   September 5, 2014. The project became effective on December 3, 2014. The Mid-Term Review was
   conducted in February 2017. The original closing date was June 30, 2018. It was extended by two years
   and five months, and the project closed on November 30, 2020. The reasons for closing date extensions
   have been outlined in the project restructuring entries above.

   Disbursement Percentages: The following disbursement percentages will be used in deriving the weights
   to be applied to the assessment of original and revised objectives in Outcome rating. The disbursed
   amounts are taken from the “Restructuring and/or Additional Financing” table on page 2 of the ICR.

   Table 1

   Project Objective Period                      Disbursed Amount            Disbursement Percentage
   Original Period                                US$3.27 million                   29.43 %
   First Revision Period after February 2018      US$0.90 million                    8.10 %
   Second Revision Period after October 2019      US$6.94 million                   62.47 %
   Total                                          US$11.11 million                 100.00 %

3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context. The Government of Kenya aims at
achieving universal access to improved water and sanitation services by 2030 under the country’s national
development plan of Kenya Vision 2030. According to the latest water and sanitation services sector report*
of Kenya’s Water Services Regulatory Authority (WASREB), water coverage in regulated areas increased
from 53 percent in 2014 to 59 per cent in 2019 before dropping to 57 per cent in 2020 because of high
population growth rate. At 31 liters per day, the average per capita water consumption per day is much
below the 50-100 liters consumption estimated by the World Health Organization that would meet basic
needs and prevent health concerns. In 2014, 15 per cent of the people in the regulated areas were
connected to the sewage network. This ratio increased to 17 per cent in 2019 but dropped to 15 per cent in
2015. On the other hand, when non-network sanitation is included, the sanitation coverage steadily
increased from 80 per cent in 2016—the earliest year the data were available—to 88 per cent in 2020. The
objectives were adequately pitched for the development status in Kenya, and despite the innovative nature
of the project design—commercial funds to be used for water and sanitation investments supported by
output-based subsidies—and the lack of sufficient capacity at the 91 water service providers, it was



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



reasonable to expect the achievement of the objective because of the technical assistance support
incorporated into the project design and the government’s commitment to the project.

The project objectives were aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for Kenya, FY14-FY18. (The CPS was extended beyond Fiscal Year 2018 under the
performance review learning and the World Bank Group COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper. The
country partnership framework that will cover fiscal years 2021 and 2026 is under preparation.) The project
sought to address the development problem of insufficient water and sanitation services in low-income
areas by facilitating commercial loans to finance water and sanitation infrastructure investments through
output-based subsidies and technical assistance. The first project objective to increase access to water
corresponds to Outcome 5, Improved Social Service Delivery for Vulnerable Groups, Particularly Women of
the CPS that aims to provide an additional 500,000 women with access to improved water sources (CPS,
p.31). The second project objective to increase access to sanitation services corresponds to Outcome 8,
Better Provision of Health and Sanitation Services by Counties of the CPS that aims at increasing the ratio
of counties with improved sanitation services to 25 percent (CPS, p.34). Since poor access to water and
sanitation services disproportionately impacts women and girls because of time loss in fetching water and
health burdens, the project objectives were also aligned with the gender focus of the World Bank strategy
(CPS, p.11).

The World Bank had sufficient country and sector experience in Kenya. The World Bank supported the
development of the water sector through the Kenya Microfinance for Community Managed Water Project
(P104075) between 2007 and 2013, which utilized output-based grants to increase water access in rural
and peri-urban areas (PAD, p.14). The World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Service Improvement Project
(P096367) was implemented between 2008 and 2019 and focused on increasing access to water and
sanitation services by financing infrastructure investments. The Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund for
Low Income Areas Project—the subject of this review—was built on the experiences of these two projects
and benefited from the World Bank-executed technical assistance activity, i.e., the Kenya Urban
Commercial Financing for Water and Sanitation (P144507). The project’s approach was innovative in the
sense that it only subsidized water and sanitation investments in low-income areas, excluding Nairobi, that
were financed by commercial loans requiring water service providers to prepare bankable investment
projects.

However, while the project objectives remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary
response to a development gap in Kenya, a significant shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the objective’s
formulation around what outcomes would be achieved through increasing access to water and sanitation
services. The causal chain between funding and expected results was clear, albeit with most targets at
output level, as the objective was closer to the output level, rather than the outcome level.

Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial.

* Impact, A Performance Report of Kenya’s Water Services Sector – 2019/20, Issue No: 13/2021.
https://wasreb.go.ke/impact-report-issue-no-13/


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase the number of people in low income areas with access to improved water supply service.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change for Objective 1

               The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., technical assistance and output-based
               grants, were to be used to support the water service providers in the preparation and implementation of
               bankable water investment subprojects and provide grants based on outputs to subsidize these subprojects.
               These activities would be expected to directly lead to the achievement of project outputs of increased
               numbers of household connections to the water network and public water points in low-income areas and
               improved upstream infrastructure to ensure water availability in project areas. In turn, these outputs would be
               expected to result in the outcome of more people in the targeted low-income areas having access to
               improved water. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the
               outcomes achieved could be attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the expected outcomes were
               closer to output level in the results chain. The project’s immediate impact on human development was
               captured by the theory of change as a long-term outcome, such as improved health and time saved for
               fetching water that could be used for money earning activities. Furthermore, the project’s theory of change
               indicates that “improved sustainability of water supply” would be a long-term outcome of the project’s
               intervention because the commercial financing requirement would be expected to ensure that only the
               subprojects that would be operated sustainably and generate revenue would be financed by commercial
               banks. Consequently, by facilitating commercial loans from banks for water infrastructure investments, the
               project’s intervention could be expected to have a transformational impact on enabling an environment for
               private finance to support water sector as indicated in the theory of change (ICR, p.8).

               Outputs

               The project supported the preparation and implementation of seven water subprojects by six water service
               providers (WSPs)—Kisumu, Murang’a South (two subprojects), Murang’a Town, Mathira, Naivasha and Nol
               Turesh. The project’s results framework captured the aggregate numbers of the following outputs:

                     A total of 15,167 new households were connected to the water network. The original target at
                      appraisal was 19,000.
                     40 public water points and yard taps were constructed. The original target was 140.

               Outcomes

               In the results framework, one indicator was defined for increase in the number of people with access to
               improved water.



                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




      Number of people in low-income urban areas provided with access to improved water sources
       under the project: In the project area, an additional 84,408 people gained access to water through
       household connections and public water points installed under the project. The original target set at
       appraisal was 135,000 people.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase the number of people in low-
income areas with access to improved water supply service is rated Modest because of low achievement.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the number of people in low income areas with access to improved water supply service (with
amended indicators).

Revised Rationale
For the theory of change, please see Objective 1 above.

Outputs

At the first restructuring, target values of some of the indicators were revised down. The achievements of the
outputs against the revised targets are as follows:

      A total of 15,167 new households were connected to the water network. The target was revised down
       to 17,104 at the first restructuring following the finalization of the subproject pipeline and the
       verification of the expected output targets by the independent verification agent.
      40 public water points and yard taps were constructed. Because of the same reason given in the
       previous entry, the target value was revised down to 42.

Outcomes

The achievement of the only outcome indicator against the revised target was as follows:

      Number of people in low-income urban areas provided with access to improved water sources
       under the project: In the project area, an additional 84,408 people gained access to water through
       household connections and public water points installed under the project. Following the finalization of
       the subproject pipeline, the target value was revised down to 94,500 at the first restructuring.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase the number of people in low-
income areas with access to improved water supply service is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
                                                                                                    Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To increase the number of people in low income areas with access to improved water supply service (with
further amended indicators).

Revised Rationale
For the theory of change, please see Objective 1 above.

Outputs

At the second restructuring, target values of some of the indicators were further revised down. The
achievements of the outputs against revised targets are as follows:

      A total of 15,167 new households were connected to the water network. The target was revised down
       to 14,500 at the second restructuring because of the cancellation of Thika WSP and Bomet WSP
       subprojects.
      40 public water points and yard taps were constructed. Because of the same reason given in the
       previous entry, the target value was revised down to 40.

Additionally, the ICR reports the following outputs. These outputs were not captured by the results framework:

      Kisumu WSP: 1,519 new households were connected to the water network against the target of
         1,500. The project activities included pipeline extension, too.
        Murang’a South WSP: 5,341 new households were connected to the water network under two
         subprojects against the target of 4,000. The project activities also resulted in a 6.2 kilometers (km)
         pipeline extension and construction of 14 public water points and seven yard taps in the town of Kenol
         Kabati under phase one and 3.7 km pipeline extension and the construction of two sedimentation
         tanks in the town of Sabasaba under phase two.
        Murang’a Town WSP: 1,285 new households were connected to the water network against the target
         of 1,266. The project activities also included the construction of a 14 km distribution line, one public
         water point, and one water storage tank.
        Mathira WSP: 1,417 new households were connected to the water network against the target of
         1,400. The project activities also included the rehabilitation of a water tank and the replacement of 44
         km of asbestos cement pipes and dilapidated galvanized iron pipes distribution network.
        Naivasha WSP: 1,596 new households were connected to the water network against the target of
         1,500. The project activities also included the construction of a 54 km pipeline extension, one water
         storage tank, and ten public water points. Under this project, a pump house was rehabilitated, and four
         pumps were installed.
        Nol Turesh WSP: 4,009 new households were connected to the water network against the target of
         4,000, and eight public water points and two water storage tanks were constructed.

Outcomes



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



The achievement of the only outcome indicator against the revised target was as follows:

        Number of people in low-income urban areas provided with access to improved water sources
         under the project: In the project area, an additional 84,408 people gained access to water through
         household connections and public water points installed under the project. After the cancellation of
         Thika WSP and Bomet WSP subprojects, the target value was revised down to 81,000 at the second
         restructuring. It was assumed that 5 people would gain access to water from a household connection,
         286 people from a public water point and 40 people from a yard tap. However, the project’s estimate
         of 5 people per household is different than the WASREB’s estimate of 3.9 people per household
         (WASREB Impact 2019/20 report, p.45). It was also assumed that half of the beneficiaries would be
         women—42,204. Therefore, the project contributed to the achievement of target of increasing the
         number of women with access to improved water by 500,000 specified in the Country Partnership
         Strategy FY14-FY18.

The above indicator was closer to the output level and did not capture the development impact of the project’s
intervention. Based on the reports prepared by the independent verification agent (IVA) for each subproject
and WASREB’s annual reports, the ICR reports the following outcomes that were not captured by the results
framework:

        The project is expected to have a positive impact on the household budgets by lowering the cost of
         water. The average cost of water in the serviced areas is US$0.85 per cubic meter compared to
         US$1.12 per cubic meter from private vendors. According to the IVA reports, the cost of water from
         private vendors in the Nol Turesh service area could be as high as US$10.0 per cubic meter (ICR,
         p.13).
        According to IVA reports, waterborne disease incidences, mainly diarrhea, decreased in the project
         areas (ICR, p.44). The decrease in the percentage of beneficiaries reporting the occurrence of
         diarrhea before and after the projects are as follows: (i) Naivasha, from 41.5 per cent to 35.2 per cent;
         (ii) Murang’a South from 36.5 per cent to 11.7 per cent; (iii) Murang’a from 17 per cent to 15 per cent;
         (iv) Kisumu from 22.5 per cent to 6 per cent; (v) Mathira from 36 per cent to 15.2 per cent; and (vi) Nol
         Turesh from 2 per cent to 0.02 per cent. The reduction in waterborne disease occurrences is expected
         to result in lower medical costs and increased productivity; hence, higher income for households.
        According to the WASREB’s Impact 2014/15 report, households in Kenya without a water connection
         spent an average 150 hours annually for fetching water (ICR, pp.44-45). Given that most of the WSPs
         supported by the project supply water above 20 hours per day—except Nol Turesh where average
         duration of water supply per day is seven hours and in Murang’a South 13, which is slightly higher
         than the target service standard of 12 hours per day (WASREB Impact 2019-20 Report, p.41)—it
         could be assumed that majority of the beneficiaries do not need to spend time for fetching water
         anymore and could use that time for productive purposes. However, project’s impact on eliminating
         the time required for fetching water was not captured in the surveys conducted by the IVA.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase the number of people in low-
income areas with access to improved water supply service is rated High.



Revised Rating
High

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the number of people in low income areas with access to sanitation service.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The project’s theory of change for Objective 2 indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., technical assistance and
output-based grants, were to be used to support the water service providers in the preparation and
implementation of bankable sanitation investment subprojects and provide grants based on outputs to
subsidize these subprojects. These activities would be expected to directly lead to the achievement of project
outputs of increased numbers of household connections to the sewage network in low-income areas and
improved upstream infrastructure to ensure wastewater treatment in project areas. In turn, these outputs
would be expected to result in the outcome of more people in the targeted low-income areas having access to
sanitation service. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and the
outcomes achieved could be attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the expected outcomes, similar
to those of Objective 1, were closer to output level in the results chain. The project’s immediate impact on
human development was captured by the theory of change as a long-term outcome, such as improved health.
Furthermore, the project’s theory of change indicates that “improved sustainability of sanitation infrastructure”
would be a long-term outcome of the project’s intervention because the commercial financing requirement
would be expected to ensure that only the subprojects that would be operated sustainably and generate
revenue would be financed by commercial banks. Consequently, by facilitating commercial loans from local
lenders for sanitation infrastructure investments, the project’s intervention could be expected to have a
transformational impact on enabling an environment for private finance to support the sanitation sector as
indicated in the theory of change (ICR, p.8).

Outputs

The project supported the preparation and implementation of two sanitation subprojects by Embu and Nyeri
WSPs. The project’s results framework captured the aggregate number of the following output:

      A total of 8,071 new households were connected to the sewage network. The original target at
       appraisal was 1,000, which was revised up to 7,906 at the first restructuring following the finalization
       of the subproject pipeline and the verification of the expected output targets by the independent
       verification agent. In the Embu WSP service area, 5,108 new households were connected to the
       sewage network against the target of 5,000 and in the Nyeri WSP service area 2,963 new households
       against the target of 2,906.
      Originally the project was expected to finance the construction of 30 public toilets. But this indicator
       was deleted at the first restructuring because of no proposal from WSPs to construct public toilets.
       The increase in the significant number of household connections

The following outputs are reported in the ICR or in the Borrower’s ICR without target values:

      Embu WSP: The project financed the construction of 32 km of sewer lines and six sewer treatment
       ponds. These investments increased the wastewater treatment capacity of the utility from 800 cubic
       meters per day to 2,000 cubic meters.

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




        Nyeri WSP: The project financed the construction of 23 km of sewer lines and one sewer pumping
         station. This resulted in the optimization of the 6,000 cubic meter per day capacity wastewater
         treatment plan by increasing the amount of wastewater treated daily from 3,000 cubic meters to 4,500
         cubic meters.

Outcomes

In the results framework, one indicator measured the increase in the number of people with access to
improved sanitation service.

        Number of people in low-income urban areas provided with access to improved sanitation
         facilities under the project: In the project area, an additional 40,355 people gained access to
         improved sanitation through household connections installed under the project. The original target set
         at appraisal was 15,000 people. Following the finalization of the subproject pipeline, the target value
         was revised up to 39,500 at the first restructuring. It was assumed that 5 people would gain access to
         improved sanitation from a household connection. However, the project’s estimate of 5 people per
         household is different than the WASREB’s estimate of 3.9 people per household (WASREB Impact
         2019/20 report, p.45).

As was the case in the measurement of the outcome for Objective 1, the above indicator was closer to the
output level and did not capture the development impact of the project’s intervention. Based on the reports
prepared by the independent verification agent for each subproject, the ICR reports the following outcomes
that were not captured by the results framework:

        In the Embu WSP project area, the occurrence of diarrhea incidence decreased from 36 per cent
         before the project to 3 per cent after the project.
        In the Nyeri WSP project area, the occurrence of diarrhea incidence decreased from 27 per cent
         before the project to 15 per cent after the project.
        The reduction in waterborne disease occurrences because of the project’s intervention is expected to
         result in lower medical costs and increased productivity; hence, higher income for households.
        Access to sewage network also resulted in a decrease in sanitation expenses. The before and after
         project surveys conducted in Nyeri showed that on average households spent US$8.7 less per month
         for sanitation because of the elimination of maintaining non-networked sanitation facilities, such as pits
         (ICR, p.45). Data for Embu were not available.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase the number of people in low-
income areas with access to sanitation service is rated High*.

* Because the target value of the outcome indicator was revised upward at the first restructuring while project
commitments remained the same, a split rating for this objective was not applied, and the achievement of this
objective is assessed based on the revised outcome target.



Rating
High


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was modestly successful in achieving the target set for increasing the number of people with
                            access to improved water supply. On the other hand, the project was highly successful in achieving the target
                            set for increasing the number of people with access to sanitation services. Overall, the project’s efficacy in
                            achieving the project objectives against the original outcome targets is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The project was substantially successful in achieving the revised targets set at the first restructuring for
                            increasing the number of people with access to improved water supply and highly successful for sanitation
                            services. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives against the revised outcome
                            targets is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            The project was highly successful in achieving the revised targets set at the second restructuring for
                            increasing the number of people with access to improved water supply and sanitation services. Hence, the
                            project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives against the revised outcome targets is rated High.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis



                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



Because the pipeline of subprojects to be financed under the project was to be finalized after the start of project
implementation, a “with project” and “without project” economic analysis was conducted at appraisal based on
four sample subprojects with pre-feasibility studies. Of these four subprojects—Ruiru Juja, Meru, Murang’a
Town and Mathira—the last two were later financed by the project. The assumptions used in the cost-benefit
analysis were relevant. The benefits expected from the project’s intervention were health benefits from averted
cases, decreased health expenditures, productivity gains because of improved health, avoided maintenance
costs of non-networked sanitation facilities, productive use of time previously spent for fetching water, and
income increase because of reduced cost of water (PAD, pp.66-67). Some other benefits were not included in
the analysis because of difficulty in collecting data, such as increased school attendance due to better health.
Project costs consisted of investment costs including interest during construction, annual operation and
maintenance costs for the 25-year economic life of subprojects, interest cost for the term of financing, and
administrative and technical assistance costs. The overall economic rate of return (ERR) calculated for the four
sample subprojects at appraisal was 34 percent, and the net present value (NPV) was US$7.4 million at a
discount rate of 10 percent. Subproject specific ERRs and NPVs were not reported in the project appraisal
document.

At project closing, the economic analysis was repeated based on the assumptions defined at appraisal. Project
specific reliable values from the surveys conducted by the independent verification agent (IVA) and data from
Kenya Demographic Health Surveys were used for ex-post economic analysis. The overall ERR calculated at
project closing was 19.8 per cent and the NPV was US$13.9 million at a discount rate of 5 per cent that was
lower than the discount rate of 10 per cent used at appraisal. The project team (email dated September 23,
2021) noted that "while the final ERR at 19 percent is indeed significantly lower than that at appraisal, the
average ERR of water supply and sanitation projects financed by the World Bank worldwide between 1980 and
2004 was 9 percent" and informed that the 5 percent discount rate was proposed by the World Bank in the
Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects, which was published two years
after the project was approved. At project closing, subproject level ERRs were also calculated. Four of these
subprojects had ERRs lower than 10 per cent: Embu 9 per cent, second phase of Murang’a South 8 per cent,
Kisumu 8 per cent and Mathira 4 per cent. The combined cost of these four subprojects constituted 60 percent
of the overall investment cost. Remaining five subprojects had substantially higher ERRs: Nyeri 18 per cent,
Naivasha 21 per cent, Nol Turesh 21 per cent, Murang’a Town 27 per cent and first phase of Murang’a South 28
per cent.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, the financial analysis was based on financial returns accruing to the sample four water service
providers. The assumptions used for financial analysis were defined conservatively, such as interest rate of 17
per cent, inflation rate of 7 per cent, and bill collection rate of 90 per cent. However, the assumption for
construction period, i.e., two years, was overly optimistic. The Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) estimated
for the project at appraisal was 22 per cent, but without the subsidy provided by the project up to 60 per cent of
the subproject cost, the project was not expected to generate positive returns.

Using the same methodology and actual figures, a financial analysis was conducted at project closing. The FIRR
at project closing was calculated at 12.3 percent that was higher than the weighted average cost of capital of 9.6
per cent but significantly lower than the 22 per cent FIRR calculated at appraisal. The ICR states that “This
could be explained by the fact that the four utilities considered at appraisal stage did not proceed with the
program or scaled down their investments for various reasons. Meru Water Company and Ruiru-Juja
subprojects, which demonstrated the highest potential, dropped from the project, while Murang’a Town Water
Company cancelled some of the financing agreements due to political interference” (ICR, p.46). Similar to the

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



pattern in the subproject ERRs, the financial analysis conducted at subproject level resulted in a wide range of
FIRRs: Mathira minus 2 per cent, Kisumu 4 per cent, second phase of Murang’a South 8 per cent, Embu 10 per
cent, Nol Turesh 11 per cent, Nyeri 14 per cent, first phase of Murang’a South 16 per cent, Murang’a Town 20
per cent and Naivasha 22 per cent (ICR, pp.46-47). The difference in subproject FIRRs can be attributable to
concentration of population in different service areas and per capita investment cost. The project team
commented that "in the water sector generally most utilities benefiting from World Bank loans have negative
returns and struggle to cover operating costs, so this project is quite a positive outlier" in achieving financial
returns (email dated September 23, 2021).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Shortcomings in procurement and disbursement adversely affected project efficiency. The utilities did not have
the capacity to draft terms of reference for the hiring of consultants for capacity building. This shortcoming was
not addressed during project preparation and resulted in overall implementation delays “as [sub]projects could
not secure financing until the technical assistance for developing financial proposals was in place” (ICR, p.21).
Consequently, construction of subprojects was delayed resulting in a low disbursement rate because, according
to the original disbursement schedule, 65 per cent of subsidies would be paid to the utilities upon the verification
of the achievement of household connections and 25 per cent against demonstrated service delivery for three
months. These inefficiencies in project implementation led to a total of 23 months of project closing date
extension under two restructurings and changes in the disbursement schedule. Delays in processing of project
funds by the Ministry of Water by two to three months slowed down project implementation and increased the
interest costs the utilities incurred on commercial bank loans (ICR, p.21). The lack of capacity at the National
Land Commission (NLC) responsible for land acquisition for public use resulted in payment delays to project
affected persons (PAPs) in Embu, Nyeri, and Mathira. Following the appointment of the NLC Chairman and
commissioners only in November 2019, payments to PAPs could be processed and project activities were
completed. The devolution of power to local governments within the framework of the constitutional change in
2010 required the introduction of a new water law that was passed by the parliament in 2016. Because of this
change, each county had to issue a letter of support to the subprojects in their jurisdictions so that the utilities
could borrow under the new law. The disagreements between the Kiambu County administration and the Thika
WSP and the failure of the county administration to process a grant to the Bomet Water Company under this
new structure led to the cancellation of the subprojects of these two WSPs. Lastly, there were two fatalities
during the implementation of the Embu WSP subproject one in September 2019 and another in January 2020
because of shortcomings in the implementation of operational health and safety measures (ICR, p.25). In
addition to these irreversible human losses, these incidents resulted in a suspension of project activities that
were further delayed by the onset of COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020.



Overall, although there were shortcomings in procurement, disbursement, flow of funds, and the implementation
of safeguards policies that resulted in project implementation delays, and the economic rates of return of four
subprojects corresponding to 60 per cent of the total investment cost was below 10 per cent, the project was
completed without a cost over-run, and compared to the average ERR of 9 percent for water supply and
sanitation projects financed by the World Bank worldwide, the overall ERR of 19 percent estimated at project
closing was significantly high. Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated
Substantial, but barely so.


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        100.00
Appraisal                                                    34.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        100.00
ICR Estimate                                                 19.80
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of project objectives to country context and the World Bank Strategy for Kenya was substantial.
The project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives against the original and the revised outcome targets
after the first restructuring is rated Substantial. The project's efficacy in achieving objectives against the revised
targets after the second restructuring is rated High. The project’s efficiency in achieving project objectives was
substantial, but barely so, because of shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency of the project. A
split rating was applied as shown in Table 2 below. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Satisfactory.

Table 2

　                                       Original objectives        First Revision       Second Revision
Relevance of Objectives                                                 Substantial
Efficacy                                     Substantial             Substantial           High
Efficiency                                                               Substantial
Outcome Rating                              Satisfactory             Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value (a)                         5                         5                    5
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                  3.27                      0.90                 6.94
Disbursement (%) (b)                          29.43%                     8.10%               62.47%
Weight Value (a)x(b)                           1.4715                    0.405               3.1235
Total weights                                                                5.00
Overall Outcome Rating                                                 Satisfactory (5)
a. Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial: The financial viability of the water service providers (WSPs) constitutes a moderate risk for the
sustainability of water supply and sanitation services. Excluding Nol Turesh and Embu, where revenue

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



collections rates are 77 per cent and 83 percent, respectively, other water service providers supported under
the project have revenue collection rates equal or higher than the target rate of 85 per cent set by WASREB.
All eight utilities have operation and maintenance (O&M) coverage rates of 100 per cent or above with an
average rate of 114 per cent. These rates are high compared to other countries with similar economic
development level, but lower than the target set by WASREB, i.e., between 130 and 150 per cent, to achieve
full O&M coverage including debt payments and cost of small investments. However, the high ratio of non-
revenue water (NRW) constitutes a concern for financial sustainability. The average NRW ratio in eight
WSPS is 41 per cent. This target set by WASREB is 20 per cent. If measures are not taken, high ratio of
NRW may force the WSPs to invest more in new water production facility that could adversely affect their
financial situation.

Technical: Technical risk to development outcome is low. Subprojects were implemented using proven
water supply and sanitation technologies. The eight WSPs have sufficient technical capacity to operate and
maintain the newly built infrastructure. Unless the financial situation of the WSPs deteriorate, it is a
reasonable expectation that the WSPs will adequately operate and maintain the systems.

Government ownership: The Government of Kenya is highly committed to achieve universal access to
piped water and sanitation services. After the devolution of power to the counties following the adoption of
new Kenyan constitution in 2010, there were some political conflicts between the county administrations and
the boards of the WSPs. Such conflicts are not widespread, and the counties are also committed to
maintaining the achievement in water and sanitation coverage and further increasing it. The risk to the
sustainability of project’s achievements because of weak government commitment is low.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goals of improvement of public health and reduction of poverty by expanding water
  and sanitation services in the low-income areas in accordance with the targets set in the national Kenya
  Vision 2030 program was of high strategic priority. The project’s approach was straightforward, i.e.,
  construction of water supply and sanitation networks and installation of household connections, and
  public water points and toilets. The subsidies provided by the project were to help the WSPs to pay up to
  60 per cent of the loans back to commercial banks while keeping the tariff affordable by poor households.
  The economic analysis at appraisal were sound and based on appropriate assumptions. The investment
  activities to be supported by the project were sufficient to achieve the project objectives to increase the
  number of people with access to water supply and sanitation services. The project was also to provide
  technical support to the WSPs for the preparation of bankable subprojects to be financed by commercial
  banks. But the WSPs had insufficient capacity to prepare terms of references for the selection of
  consultants who were to provide technical support to the WSPs. This capacity issue was not addressed
  at appraisal and led to substantial delays during project implementation. The expectation that the
  construction of each subproject would take two years was overly ambitious. The subsidy payment
  scheme—10 per cent at the time of the signing of the commercial, 65 per cent after the completion of the
  civil works and 25 per cent after the demonstration of service delivery for three months—that was
  designed based on the assumption that the subprojects would be completed within two years was not
  realistic and proved to be a major obstacle for disbursing project funds during implementation. The
  monitoring and evaluation design was sufficient to measure the project’s results, which were closer to the

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



  output level in the results chain (see section 9. M&E Design, Implementation and Utilization below). The
  results framework did not capture the human development impact of the project’s intervention although
  such information was to be available through the surveys to be conducted by the independent verification
  agent (IVA) for each subproject. The risks were adequately assessed, and mitigation measures were
  identified, except the social and environmental risk. As the subproject pipeline was not finalized at
  appraisal, only an Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework and a Resettlement Policy
  Framework were prepared at appraisal. The lack of institutional capacity to implement the World Bank’s
  safeguards policies was not adequately identified at appraisal (see section 10.a Safeguards below). The
  project benefited from the lessons learned from prior projects implemented in the water sector in Kenya,
  such as utilization of commercial loans for financing capital investments in water infrastructure and
  targeting creditworthy WSPs so that commercial loans could be secured.

  Because of moderate shortcomings in identification, preparation, and appraisal of the project, the quality-
  at-entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was continuity at the project team. One of the last two task team leaders (TTL) of the project was
 with the project from appraisal to project closure as co-TTL or TTL. Supervision missions were regularly
 held every six months until the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020 after which the project team virtually
 supervised project implementation by communicating with subproject teams and weekly calls with WTSF.
 The candor and quality of performance reporting in the Implementation Status and Result Reports and Aide
 Memoires were high. Because the expected project results were closer to the output level in the results
 chain, the project team’s focus was on the achievement of the outputs rather than the human development
 impact of the project’s intervention; surveys conducted by the independent verification agent provided such
 development data, which were briefly reported in some aide memoirs as positive social impacts. The
 project team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project was adequate. Project team
 closely followed the implementation of safeguards policies and required the project implementation entity
 and WSPs to take necessary measures to ensure compliance. Although there was steady improvement in
 the implementation of safeguards policies during project implementation, issues with payments to project-
 affected persons continued through to project closing because of lack of key staff at the National Land
 Commission (see section 10.a Safeguards below). Following the passage of a new Water Act in 2016, the
 project team proactively commissioned a legal opinion that helped create a framework for continued
 borrowing by the WSPs, which were placed under the newly formed counties in line with the devolution of
 powers defined in the new constitution (ICR, p.22).

 The quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were clearly specified and the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid
 and direct, but the expected outcomes of increased number of people with access to water supply and
 sanitation services were closer to the output level in the results chain. The development impact of the
 project was not captured by the results framework at appraisal, such as improved health and increased
 household income. The results framework did not include any indicator measuring the sustainability of
 water and sanitation services. The intermediate results indicators were to capture the number of new
 household connections to the water and sanitation networks and the number of public water points and
 toilets constructed under the project. These measurements constituted the basis for the number of people
 with access to these services. As the objectives were closer to the output level, the indicators measuring
 the increase in access to water supply and sanitation services adequately encompassed the outcomes of
 the project objective statement. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-
 bound. Targets for the indicators were defined based on four sample subprojects to be revised after the
 finalization of the subproject pipeline during project implementation. The surveys to be conducted by an
 independent verification agent (IVA) before the start of each subproject to measure baselines, after the
 completion of household connections, and the verification of service delivery for three months for
 processing the subsidy payments were to support the M&E of the project. These surveys were expected to
 provide more granular data including the development impact of the project. Institutionally, the M&E design
 and arrangements were adequately embedded.



b. M&E Implementation
  After the finalization of the subproject pipeline, the target values of the indicators were revised to reflect
  the outputs expected as a result of the project’s intervention. The indicator measuring the number of
  public toilets constructed under the project was deleted because no subproject included the construction
  of such toilets. New indicators were added to the results framework, such as “local private capital
  mobilized,” but this indicator was not relevant to assess the achievement of the project objectives, but
  useful to measure the effectiveness of the project in mobilizing finance for development. The IVA carried
  out the collection of baseline figures before the start of each subproject and verified the completion of
  project activities and household connections according to the revised disbursement schedule. Surveys
  conducted by the IVA included information about human development indicators, such as incidences of
  waterborne diseases and income increase from lower cost of water and lower household expenditure on
  sanitation, but these indicators were not added to the results framework. The indicators in the results
  framework were measured by the IVA using secondary data and verification in the field. As these
  indicators measured the number of new household connections to the water and sanitation networks and
  the number of public water points, their measurement was straightforward, and the data collected were
  reliable. However, when calculating the number of beneficiaries, it was assumed that there were on
  average five people in each household whereas the WASREB Impact 2019-20 report’s assumption is 3.9
  people per household.


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were properly communicated to project stakeholders of WTSF, WASREB, Ministry of
  Water, the commercial banks, and the World Bank. M&E activities resulted in two restructurings, while
  the third one was necessitated by the onset of COVID-19 pandemic and suspension of some project
  activities because of two fatalities. The M&E data were used to provide evidence of achievement of
  project results, but as these were closer to the output level, the focus was more on the outputs rather
  than the human development impact of the project’s intervention, although IVA surveys provided an
  adequate channel to capture these development impacts. The M&E findings are expected to influence
  the formation of a fund to be used to facilitate commercial financing for water and sanitation investments.



  Overall, as the project objectives were closer to the output level, the M&E system as designed and
  implemented was sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and test the links in the results
  chain; therefore, the M&E quality is rated Substantial, but there were shortcomings in capturing the
  human development impact of the project’s intervention and the sustainability of the services.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an environment Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   triggered the Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policy.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The environmental impact of project activities was expected to
   be site specific, limited, and reversible. To screen subprojects and establish mitigation measures to address
   potential environmental impacts of the project, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (EMSF) was prepared and disclosed in Kenya by the Water Service Trust Fund (WSTF) and on the World
   Bank’s InfoShop on November 13, 2013. Subproject specific Environmental and Social Impact
   Assessments (ESIAs) were prepared after the finalization of subproject pipeline during project
   implementation, but some ESIAs did not initially specify how Environmental and Social Management Plans
   (ESMPS) were to be implemented (Aide Memoire February 2016, p.9). There were some shortcomings in
   the implementation of the environmental safeguard policy that were addressed in due course, such as
   fencing of the waste treatment ponds during construction and insufficient availability of personal protective
   equipment to workers. An environment, health and safety advisor was appointed to supervise the
   implementation of the safeguard policy, but two fatalities and one injury occurred at the Embu project site in
   September 2019 and January 2020. Following these incidents, the World Bank and the WSTF agreed on an
   action plan to improve the operational health and safety of project sites. Upon the completion of the
   measures listed in the action plan, the project activities resumed at Embu project site in March 2020. There


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



  were also delays in restoring project-affected sites after works were completed. (Aide Memoire June 2019,
  p.4).

  Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this policy because of the possibility of land
  acquisition for the construction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure, such as elevated water tanks
  and treatment facilities. Although no permanent resettlement was expected because of the project activities,
  compensation was expected to be paid to persons affected by the installation of underground water and
  sewer pipes passing through their land. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed in
  Kenya by the Water Service Trust Fund (WSTF) and on the World Bank’s InfoShop on November 13, 2013.
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared for six subprojects that required compensation to 433
  persons affected by the project (PAPs). The lack of capacity at the National Land Commission (NLC) that
  was legally mandated to acquire private land for public use led to substantial delays in processing payments
  to the PAPs. These delays adversely affected project implementation since project activities could not start
  prior to the completion of the payments. Upon the appointment of the NLC chairman and commissioners in
  November 2019, processing of payments to PAPs improved. At project closing, payments to 399 PAPs
  were completed, but 11 were still pending. Funds for those 11 PAPs were deposited to an escrow account
  at a commercial bank. The remaining 23 PAPs could not be traced. Funds for those PAPs were deposited
  with the NLC for future payments if they are claimed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The Water Services Trust Fund (WSTF), the project implementation entity, was appraised to have
  sufficient financial management capacity to manage the grant. Its financial unit was headed by a qualified
  manager. While the funds were expected to flow simply through a designated account at the Treasury to
  the project account of WSTF at a commercial bank, there were significant delays in the flow of funds
  because of the Ministry of Water’s slow processing of each application. These delays slowed down the
  implementation of project activities and resulted in increased interest costs that the utilities incurred on
  commercial loans (ICR, p.21). The project’s interim financial reports were satisfactory to the Bank, but
  there were occasional delays in their submittal. According to the grant agreement (p.12), the recipient was
  to have the project’s financial statements audited upon the request of the World Bank, as such audits were
  not required for output-based aid projects (ICR, p.25). An audit report of the project’s financial statements
  was submitted to the Bank with delay in August 2019 covering the periods ending on June 30, 2016, 2017,
  and 2018. A second audit report covering the period ending June 30, 2019 was submitted in December
  2020 with one year delay and the last audit report covering the period ending on June 30, 2020 was
  submitted in December 2020 before the submission deadline. All three audit reports were unqualified, but
  the first report raised the possibility of ineligible expenditures due to insufficient information from the utilities
  and the WSTF (Aide Memoire, February 2020, p.3) or lack of supporting documents for such expenditures.
  The second and third audit reports highlighted the following weaknesses in the financial management: (i)
  incorrect presentation and disclosure of financial statements; (ii) failure in disclosing pending bills; and (iii)
  misclassification of expenses; (iv) noncompliance with the new value-added tax of 14 per cent declared
  during the COVID pandemic; (v) failure in following the subsidiary agreement in processing payments to
  three water service providers; and (vi) failure to record a payment of project management gratuity in the
  general ledger although it was posted in the cashbook. The WSTF’s action plan to address these
  shortcomings was found acceptable by the World Bank. However, a potential misuse of project funds

                                                                                                         Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



  because of irregular award of a contract was also noted in the final audit report (see the section on
  Procurement below). At project closing, all project funds were accounted for.

  Procurement

  Procurement was conducted according to the World Bank guidelines and mostly followed competitive
  bidding. However, as noted in the Efficiency section above, procurement was substantially delayed at the
  start of the project because of lack of capacity at the utilities to draft terms of references for the hiring of
  consultants. The delay in the preparation of subprojects’ feasibility studies because of the issues in
  scheduling, coordinating, and supervising the activities carried out by individual consultants also resulted in
  delayed procurement. A review of the transfer of subsidies at Kisumu WSP revealed an irregular award of
  contract. The awarded bidder did not satisfy the following requirements in its bid: (i) a document showing
  line of credit from any bank to demonstrate access to sufficient liquid assets to complete the construction;
  (ii) insufficient information about the bidder’s representative and key personnel; and (iii) failure to
  demonstrate possession of construction equipment specified in the tender documents. Lastly, the
  addendum issued by WSTF in May 2019 that extended the contract for the independent verification agent
  (IVA) for twelve months did not comply with the terms of the contract; it was issued after the expiration of
  the contract and the IVA was not notified of such an extension according to the provisions of the contract.

  Disbursement

  Because of the delays in procurement and the payment of 90 per cent of the subsidies after the completion
  of subprojects, the disbursement was very slow. After the revision of the disbursement schedule,
  disbursement improved. At project closing, the project disbursed 73 percent of the funds. At the end of the
  disbursement grace period, which was four months after project closing, the disbursement rate increased
  to 90 per cent. However, in February 2021, the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission of Kenya opened
  an investigation because of the allegations of misappropriation of funds for the subproject implemented by
  Nol Turesh. At the time of the writing of this review, the investigation was ongoing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  Mobilizing Finance for Development

  The project was successful in mobilizing financing for water and sanitation infrastructure investments in low-
  income urban areas. The project supported the water service providers (WSPs) in the preparation of ten
  projects, and eight of them secured commercial loans from three local banks on market terms amounting to
  US$12.16 million. The project supported WSPs in working with commercial banks, while addressing the
  unfamiliarity of banks’ staff in water sector and appraising water projects. The project had a transformational
  effect that at project closing there was a pipeline of US$15 million water and sanitation subprojects that
  could be financed by commercial loans and increased appetite of local banks to finance such cash
  generating sustainable projects.


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                There were moderate
                                                                                shortcomings in identification,
                                                                                preparation, and appraisal of the
                                                                                project; therefore, the quality at
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    entry is rated Moderately
                                                                                Satisfactory. The quality of bank
                                                                                supervision is rated Satisfactory.
                                                                                Overall, the bank performance is
                                                                                rated Moderately Satisfactory.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the ICR incorporating material in section 5. Lessons
and Recommendations of the ICR.

Provision of technical assistance support and output-based grants to water utilities can be a
sustainable model for mobilizing private finance for water supply and sanitation
infrastructure investments to increase access. Through technical assistance, the project
supported financially stronger and well-managed water service providers (WSPs) to prepare
bankable water supply and sanitation subprojects to be financed by commercial banks. The banks
determined financial and operational viability of each subproject to provide commercial financing.
Although the output-based grants were not tied to the commercial loans, most of the WSPs used
grants to pay off a part of the loans to decrease the financing costs and provide affordable services
to customers by eliminating the need to raise tariffs. Availability of commercial financing for water
supply and sanitation infrastructure investments also eases the debt burden on the central
government and makes the use of limited government funds possible for increasing access in the
service areas of financially weaker water utilities that could not secure commercial financing. Given
the continued interest of commercial banks to continue lending in this model, a project pipeline of
US$15 million was already identified at project closing that would be eligible for commercial
financing.

Rigid results-based financing criteria can adversely affect disbursement and project
efficiency. Originally, the disbursement of 65 per cent of the output-based grants was conditional
upon the achievement of the household connections and 25 per cent upon the demonstration of
service delivery for three months. However, to connect households to water supply and sanitation
services, the WSPs invested in significant upstream water supply and sanitation infrastructure during
which the WSPs could not benefit from the grants to pay off a part of the commercial loans reducing

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)



some of the financing costs. This resulted in a very low disbursement rate until the last
implementation year of the project, increased the financial burden on the WSPs because of accrued
interest and lowered project’s efficiency.

An early identification of consultants to be hired under the project to support water utilities in
the preparation of subprojects can prevent lengthy delays in project implementation.
Consultants to be hired under the project were to provide technical assistance support to the WSPs
in the preparation of bankable subprojects. However, the WSPs did not have the capacity to draft
the terms of reference for hiring these consultants. Consultant procurement process took longer than
expected and consequently led to delays in securing financing for subprojects, completing
subprojects, and disbursing project funds. The WSPs could have also benefited from such pre-
qualified consultants in reaching out to commercial banks early in project implementation and
address the unfamiliarity of the banks’ staff with the water sector.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a detailed overview of the project. The report is internally consistent; there is a
logical linking and integration of various parts of the reports. While it is mostly consistent with the World Bank
guidance, the sections on the implementation of environmental safeguard policy and the quality of bank
supervision could have benefited from a more detailed discussion. While the report sufficiently emphasizes how
activities inform results, it is focused on what occurred as a consequence of the project that were mostly at the
output level. On the other hand, there is a genuine effort to provide information about the human development
impact of the project’s intervention based on the data collected by the independent verification agency surveys.
The evidence is credible and appropriately referenced. The ICR including its annexes presents a sufficient base
to support the achievements in increasing the number of people with access to water and sanitation services.
The economic and financial analyses are very well conducted and provides more information about the human
development outcome of the project than the main text. However, the narrative in the efficiency section does
not support a substantial rating; the shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency are not
adequately explained. The lessons are based on evidence and analysis and mostly respond to the specific
experiences and findings of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Kenya Water and Sanitation OBA Fund (P132979)




                                                                             Page 24 of 24
