     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022623

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P150827                                     Public Sector Strengthening Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea-Bissau                               Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55950,IDA-D0310                         31-Dec-2018                                           4,863,378.72

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2015                                 30-Nov-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                 5,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                                  5,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                              4,863,378.72                                           0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hjalte S. A. Sederlof       Clay Wescott                   Sengphet Lattanavong          IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Guinea-Bissau Public Sector Strengthening Project as set
   out on page 4 of the Financing Agreement was to assist the Recipient to re-establish basic systems for public
   financial management. The PAD (page 5) had the same formulation for the objective.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



   The PAD and the ICR also provide more specificity to the objective. In restoring basic systems of public
   financial management (PFM), the focus is on two areas of immediate concern: public revenue management
   and expenditure control. These are also the two main components of the project (see Section 2d below).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Performance, Control and Transparency of Public Revenues (estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$2.40 million; actual cost US$2.50 million). The component provided technical assistance to:
   (i) strengthen tax collection and tax administration through improved audits and controls; (ii) strengthen the
   customs administration by streamlining customs procedures; and (iii) strengthen the Treasury Single
   Account (STA) to improve macroeconomic modeling, revenue forecasting and cash management, and
   produce statistics and public economic and financial data.

   Component 2: Expenditure Control, Procurement, Accounting and Reporting (estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$1.10 million; actual cost US$1.10 million). The component provided technical assistance to:
   (i) restore the Integrated Financial Management System; (ii) strengthen procurement and public investment
   management systems; and (iii) support the purchase and installation of power generation and computer
   hardware and software aimed at restoring basic public financial management functions.

   Component 3: Public Financial Management Reform Coordination and Project Management
   (estimated cost at appraisal: US$1.50 million; actual cost US$1.40 million). The component supported: (i) a
   Reform Coordination Unit (RCU) to ensure overall coordination of PFM reforms, including donor
   coordination; (ii) implementation of the first two project components; and (iii) compliance with the Bank’s
   fiduciary guidelines.

   Significant Changes During Implementation

   The project went through three Level 2 restructurings:

   During a first restructuring, in June 2018, two of the three original key indicators were dropped: one, on
   reducing extra-budgetary expenditures, was rendered redundant by a Ministerial circular that banned extra-
   budgetary expenditures; and a second one, on consolidating cash balances, was not supported by any
   project activity. The third original indicator – timely reporting of budget execution – was retained. One
   output indicator, measuring the increase in tax and customs revenues because of project activities, was
   upgraded on the reasonable argument that it represented an outcome rather than an output.

   At the same time, seven (of eight) output indicators were dropped for a variety of reasons, including not
   being sufficiently aligned with ongoing project activities. Seven new output indicators were introduced with

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



   targets for which the project could be held accountable. Six of them measure progress on tax and customs
   activities, and one measured improvements in debt management. Annex 7 of the ICR provides a detailed
   list of the changes in indicators.

   Component 2 was revised with the elimination of procurement and investment management systems’
   strengthening after three years of project implementation with virtually no progress – procurement training
   did not get underway as the project encountered difficulties in recruiting procurement expertise, and the
   need for strengthening procurement (as well as) investment management was seen as slight by the
   government, the former due to changing priorities, and the latter as it was primarily driven by development
   partners. (The activities were reintroduced into a new project under preparation.)

   Finally, the Closing Date for the project was extended by 12 months, from December 31, 2018, to
   December 31, 2019.

   A second Level 2 restructuring was approved in December 2019 extending the Closing Date from
   December 31, 2019, to November 30, 2020, to allow completion of a Customs staff training program that
   had been postponed due to presidential elections in 2019.

   A third Level 2 restructuring was approved in March 2020 to reallocate Credit funds to other ongoing
   training activities and other commitments.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project costs. At appraisal, total project cost was estimated at US$5.00 million. Actual project cost at
   closing was US$5.00.

   Financing. The project was financed with an IDA Credit of US$2.75 million and an IDA Grant of US$2.25
   million. US$4.86 million were disbursed. The difference between project cost and financing reflects
   exchange rate adjustments.

   Borrower contribution. There was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 24, 2015 and became effective on June 22, 2015. The original
   Closing Date, December 31, 2018, was extended twice, first to December 31, 2019, then to November 30,
   2020, at which time it closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was aligned with the Bank’s country strategy at appraisal and continues to be so today. Re-
establishment of basic systems of public financial management was necessary in the wake of a period of
military government (2012-2014) that had seen deteriorating governance, poor public sector performance
and weak public financial management. The need to re-establish systems was reflected in the new
government’s action plan, built on PFM and procurement reforms advocated by the West African Economic

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



               and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and a Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment
               undertaken in 2013 with joint World Bank - European Union support. The government's 2015-2020
               Strategic and Operational Plan also gives priority to improving public financial management, and this was
               also a part of the Bank’s Interim Strategy Note of FY15 – FY17. The most recent Country Partnership
               Strategy for FY18 – FY21 continues to emphasize governance as one of its focus areas, also noting the
               central role that this project had in building capacity in public financial management. The project, while
               relevant and in line with government and Bank-supported strategy, may have been too ambitious for the
               country context. Its broad coverage was not well-aligned with political and institutional uncertainties; a
               more selective approach might have worked better in the country situation and better sustained results.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Re-establishing basic systems for public financial management

                             Rationale
                             The objective was to be achieved by: (i) improving performance, control, and transparency of public
                             revenues; and (ii) strengthening expenditure control, procurement, accounting, and reporting in public
                             financial management.



                             Outputs to strengthen resource mobilization:



                             Tax laws were adapted to bring them in line with WAEMU standards. By project closing, two of five draft laws
                             had been adopted by the National Assembly– a general tax code and a penalties regime for tax
                             offenses. The three other laws – on excise and sales taxes, and an assize law are still awaiting adoption.



                             Improved controls and audits in tax and customs administrations registered the following results:




                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)




      The number of taxpayers increased from 10,300 in 2017 (when indicators were revised) to 26,700 at
       project completion in 2020 against a target of 20,000.



      Tax and customs audits increased from 43 in 2015 to 150 in 2020 against a target of 280 audits. Tax
       and customs inspections increased from 4 in 2015 to 22 in 2020 against a target of 10 inspections.



Customs control procedures were reviewed and adjusted for greater efficiency at Bissau Port and two interior
customs posts:

      Procedures for importing and exporting goods were streamlined, reducing the number of steps from
       26 in 2017 to 9 in 2020, against a target of 6 steps.



      A database was established with reference prices for high volume imports/exports.



      Dwell-time for imported and exported goods declined from 90 days in 2017 to 6 days in 2020 against a
       target of 45 days.



      Improvements in the automated system for customs data increased customs declarations submitted
       through the system from 60 percent to 98 percent against a target of 100 percent.



      Training in improved customs procedures was provided for 160 General Directorate of Taxes staff,
       drawing on a training plan prepared with support from the IMF.



Outputs to strengthen expenditure management



Accounting and reporting improved with the introduction of an annual national budget preparation schedule
and periodic budget execution statements, initially issued quarterly, then monthly beginning in 2018.




                                                                                               Page 5 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



                            A new debt management software system was installed reducing delays in external debt payments from 7
                            months to 4 months, compared to a target of 1 month.



                            To support a gradual move towards multi-year budgeting, sectoral medium-term expenditure frameworks
                            were introduced in five line ministries.



                            Institutional strengthening



                            Key features for operationalizing the PFM system were introduced: the basic information and computer
                            technology was restored, and interconnections were established between key agencies. Work procedures
                            were defined and offices were refurbished. The status of the government’s financial management information
                            system was assessed and recommendations made to enhance its performance, and capacity building was
                            provided to managers and staff.



                            Outcomes



                            Tax and customs revenue increased by 15 percent from a baseline of CFA Francs (XOF) 62 billion in 2015 to
                            XOF 74 billion at end-2019 compared to a target of XOF 71 billion.



                            Reporting on budget execution declined from every 48 months to every 8 months compared to a target of
                            every 6 months.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project substantially achieved or exceeded five of its eight output targets, and partly achieved the remaining thre
                            outcome targets (reporting of budget execution) and modestly exceeded the other outcome target (revenue generati

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



  operations). In the case of revenue generation, the result may be only partly attributed to the project as the revenue
  influenced by a growing economy (growth over the 2017-2019 period averaged 4.4 percent). With one outcome falli
  attributed to the operation, IEG gives efficacy a modest rating.




  Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
  Modest                                                   Low achievement


5. Efficiency
5. Efficiency
Neither the PAD nor the ICR undertook an economic analysis of the project, noting difficulties in quantifying and
attributing the benefits of PFM interventions here and elsewhere. In the absence of such analysis, the IEG instead
focused on factors that may have influenced implementation cost. The project period was extended by two years,
reflecting several factors: limited institutional capacity including a volatile political environment with frequent
government changes, and its reflection in a high turnover among managers and staff in the Reform Coordination
Unit (RCU), established for project management; in turn leading to implementation delays and, ultimately, higher-
than-expected administrative costs; the adverse effects of COVID-19. The ICR (page 12) also points to
inadequate Bank supervision effort in monitoring implementation (details in Section 8b).

The ICR rated Efficiency negligible, i.e., project resources were not deployed cost-effectively. IEG argues that
project resources were used as planned, but might have achieved better value for money with a better
understanding of the political and economic environment in which the project was being implemented and with
greater attention to the results framework where the M&E design choices could have been more considered; the
ICR (page 13) points to weak links between indicators and a broadly defined PDO.



The ICR rated Efficiency negligible, i.e. project resources were not deployed cost-effectively. IEG argues that
project resources were used as planned, but might have achieved better value for money with a better
understanding of the political and economic environment in which the project was being implemented and with
greater attention to technical aspects, including the results framework where the M&E design choices could
have been more considered; the ICR (page 13) points to weak links between indicators and a broadly defined
PDO.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance was rated substantial based on its alignment with the Bank-supported CPS, as well as with country
needs, notably the need to manage limited resources, and the government’s action plan for PFM. At he same
time, the rating is tempered by the overly ambitious objectives, considering the country environment (see also
Section 8a, Quality at Entry). Efficacy was rated modest – while the project substantially achieved five of its
eight output targets and partly achieved the remaining three, it fell short on one of the two outcome
targets. Efficiency was rated modest, providing modest value for money.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The current government has reiterated its commitment to improving PFM. A second Bank project is being
prepared, drawing on the experience under this project and focused on improving strategic planning, fiscal
management, and public administration. That said, Guinea-Bissau has a checkered history where
challenges to institution building can be significant, as was the experience in implementing this project. That
brings a significant level of uncertainty to both project implementation and sustainability of results.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project responded to needs to address key bottlenecks in public resource management and to
  restoring public financial management capacity. The design benefited from available analytics such as
  PEFA, the regional WAEMU PFM and a study on procurement reforms. It focused on areas that could

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



  generate quick returns in terms of restoring public trust in government processes, notably in the
  management of public revenues and in public expenditure control, and where it was likely that basic PFM
  foundations could be established and were likely to function. It considered lessons of PFM reform in
  fragile states such as the need to ensure reform ambitions were within the technical capacity of staff.

  However, with political and institutional uncertainties, implementation challenges, and risks to the
  sustainability of results, a more selective approach would have been more prudent. Project preparation
  was affected by limited institutional capacity, and the operationalization of key entities (the RCU, the
  governmental steering committee, the project operating manual) experienced considerable delays,
  influencing the pace of implementation of the project. Frequent changes in the composition of technical
  counterparts at the public agency level also contributed to delays in project implementation. Project
  design and later implementation was also handicapped by a monitoring and evaluation design that was
  not initially well aligned with the project’s objectives and later needed extensive restructuring.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The volatility that had marked project preparation also made itself felt during implementation: several
 relevant ministerial replacements occurred, and RCU staffing remained volatile through much of the
 project, with many positions being unfilled for long periods of time. This affected the pace of
 implementation, affecting the timeliness of restructurings. On the Bank side, there was also staffing
 volatility – four TTLs over the course of the project, and while the ICR indicates that this did not have
 negative consequences for the project, it is nonetheless worth noting several lapses in supervision: only 9
 ISRs were prepared in almost six years of implementation for a project that faced at least moderate
 challenges. ISR ratings varied between moderately satisfactory and moderately unsatisfactory (with an
 exception for the first ISR which was rated satisfactory). According to the ICR (page 12), while ISRs were
 detailed and informative, their candor, quality and consistency varied, and in some instances they were
 only partly completed. The inconsistencies in ISRs is illustrated by the following: Component 3, project
 management was assessed as Moderately Unsatisfactory for a short time and then upgraded to
 Moderately Satisfactory at which it was maintained despite continuing staffing challenges that were having
 a negative impact on overall project execution, described in Aide Memoires and ISR reports. The
 supervision team did address a difficult project design issue successfully – adjusting the results framework
 to more closely represent project activities and providing it with a monitorable set of relevant indicators. At
 the same time, inadequate attention was paid to the imbalance between limited country capacity to
 implement, and an ambitious project design.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Project implementation was to be monitored by the RCU, appropriately staffed and supported by technical
 assistance. Data collection and treatment was based primarily on the PEFA framework, with the RCU
 collecting the data by means of focal points located in each entity benefiting from the project. They
 monitored implementation based on a set of indicators and provided regular progress reports. Annual joint
 reviews were to complement the regular monitoring and evaluation system. A government level Steering
 Committee was to provide strategic direction to the reform but met only once.



 The project’s results framework was designed based on the government’s PFM challenges as identified by
 a 2014 PEFA assessment and a regional WAEMU. However, the results chain and indicators did not
 initially capture well the links between the project and its objective, and the indicators mainly captured
 inputs such as technical assistance and the development of office infrastructure, including information and
 computer technology. These did not easily translate into meaningful results, and in some instances the
 indicators were difficult to quantify. This was largely amended during the first restructuring, albeit with
 ambitious targets.



 The situation was rendered more challenging by the PDO, which left the interpretation of “basic PFM
 systems” open and increased the uncertainty about what the indicators were supposed to measure. The
 revised indicators are better in line with project activities and objectives, although one of the two outcome
 indicators – on increases in tax and customs revenues – cannot be uniquely attributed to the PDO.



b. M&E Implementation
  Discontinuities in RCU operations following changes in leadership and delays in hiring consultants
  hindered the appointment of focal points. Consequently, data was collected by the project coordinator or
  through each central agency, leading to uncertainties about the consistency and quality of reporting. In
  turn, this came to require additional quality control. Neither annual reviews nor an inactive Steering
  Committee were able to contribute to stronger M&E implementation – they were intended to complement
  the M&E system and define bottlenecks. While the annual reviews proceeded as planned, the Steering
  Committee took time establish, and after its first meeting in May 2017 never met again.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project supervision missions, ISR reports, annual reviews and the project mid-term review identified
  issues and made recommendations on corrective action. They raised the need for restructurings and
  extending the project period; and recommended revising the projects results framework.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The environmental assessment category was rated as “C” and no safeguard policies were triggered. During
   implementation, no environmental or social issues were identified.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. Financial management was mostly rated moderately satisfactory. It was
   downgraded twice, once in 2016 for six months and once in 2018 for less than a year. Reasons included
   delays in acquiring and using the financial management system; delayed accounting and financial
   reporting, low quality of reports, and delay in hiring an external auditor, which in turn created delays in
   2017 financial statements audit.



   Fiduciary risks were rated substantial until March 2020, when they became moderate. Annual financial
   statements for 2017 to 2019 were qualified due to non-compliance with procedures. The issue was
   resolved when necessary documentation was provided.



   Procurement. Procurement capacity was low and measures to alleviate this – hiring of procurement staff,
   including an outside consultant – ran into delays which in turn slowed down project
   implementation. Despite continuing difficulties with compliance, procurement was initially rated satisfactory
   and subsequently re-assessed to moderately satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None noted.




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



d. Other
   None noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  IEG rates efficacy modest based
                                                      Moderately
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory                                    on partial achievement of
                                                      Unsatisfactory
                                                                                  outcomes.
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were drawn from the ICR and adopted by IEG:

The results framework should have targets attributable to the project and at a level of
ambition feasible for the country context. In this case, the PDO's relevance was reduced by
selecting indicators that were not clearly attributable to the project and targets that were too
ambitious for the country context.



Success with PFM reform projects is critically dependent on context and the operating
environment in a fragile situation such as in Guinea Bissau. The project aimed at covering a
range of PFM challenges from the revenue and expenditure side. While all were important, a broad
approach was too taxing for the authorities, translating into scattered and partial outcomes; rather, a
more selective approach might have achieved and more sustainable better results. One strategy for
dealing with fragility challenges is to start with moderately ambitious goals and then refocus on those
for which there is adequate support. This would respond to the difficulty of knowing in advance
which potential reforms are achievable.



PFM reforms need to focus on behavior and policy changes as well as technical
solutions. While reforms targeted by the project were directly linked to and integrated into the
government’s reform agenda, volatility in government commitment proved to be a key challenge,
where policy anchoring and sensitization could have helped to push forward lagging activities




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Public Sector Strengthening Project (P150827)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The evidence presented in the ICR formed a good basis for evaluating the project. The ICRR was based on
evidence included in the text and, when necessary, expanded on in the Annexes. The text was results-oriented
and the various parts were internally consistent. Still, there could have been more clarity in the report’s
messaging: a more structured analysis, especially of efficacy, could have enriched the evaluation. This could
have been achieved by making stronger distinctions between different categories of revenue and expenditure in
the write-up.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                               Page 13 of 13
