     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022650

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                     Project Name
 P143844                                        Drina Flood Protection Project

 Country                                        Practice Area(Lead)
 Bosnia and Herzegovina                         Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                               Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54440                                      31-Dec-2019                                        18,963,854.37

 Bank Approval Date                             Closing Date (Actual)
 16-May-2014                                    31-Dec-2020

                                                IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               24,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                22,269,181.60                                              0.00

 Actual                                            18,963,854.37                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally                 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan              Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Drina Flood Protection Project (DFPP) as articulated in
   the Project Appraisal Document (paragraph 18) was identical to the one stated in the International
   Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) and aimed to:

   "provide increased protection from flood events to agricultural and commercial interests and
   communities in the project area."


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



   The project beneficiaries were the populations along the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) side of the 346-km
   long Drina River, specifically in and around the towns of Bijelijna in the Republika of Srpska (RS) and
   Goražde in Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) of BiH. An estimated 175,000 people live within the
   main municipalities along the river of which an estimated 20,000 suffered direct economic losses from
   recurring floods.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following two components:

   1. Flood protection works and support for Bijeljina area (appraisal cost US$17.60 million, of which
   US$13.80 million IDA contribution; actual cost US$10.08 million, all IDA contribution). This
   component would fund the civil engineering works and related investments for the flood protection in the
   Bijeljina area, in the downstream flat plains near the confluence with the Sava River. The bulk of the works
   would consist mostly of earth moving, dike construction and/or re-construction, and limited riverbank
   shaping work (culverts, rip-rap cover, parapets, gabion placement, etc.). The dike would protect the Bijeljina
   town and the Janja and Amajlije, as well as other smaller, settlements, on the Lower Drina left bank. The
   construction would also protect against the added risks from climate change and variability. The alignment
   of the new dike would be on the land parallel to the river and based on an optimization depending on the
   distance to the river. The dike would comprise three sections with a total length of 33.36 km, of which the
   middle part (from Glogovac pumping station [Dasnica] to the road towards the Pavlovica bridge) was
   considered the priority and to have the highest readiness. The dike would be 16 km long and about 2-3 m in
   height. The upstream section, from the Glogovac pumping station to Janja, would be the second phase.
   The downstream portion, from the road to the Pavlovica bridge to Balatun, would be the third phase. The
   funding would also provide for the effective implementation of the social safeguards and environmental
   measures identified in the Environmental and Social Assessment and accompanying documents.

   This component would also support the Agriculture Project Coordination Unit (APCU) at RS Ministry of
   Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (MoAFW) to facilitate project implementation.

   2. Flood protection works and support for Goražde area (appraisal cost: US$10.67 million, of which
   US$10.20 million IDA contribution; actual cost: US$10.23 million, all IDA contribution). This
   component would fund the civil engineering works and related investments for the flood protection in four
   clusters of works in the Bosnia Podrinje Canton (around Goražde), in the Middle Drina. The project would
   cover works, equipment, minor land acquisition, the building of similar protective structures for roads,
   bridges and other infrastructure along the river, and earth moving, dike construction and/or re-construction.
   Works were envisaged along the Drina main stem (in, and near Goražde town center, and upstream and
   downstream of the center) as well as on the Podhranjanski potok and Praca torrents near the settlements of

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



  Praca and Hrenovica, in the Municipalities of Goražde, Pale-Praca and Foca-Ustikolina, respectively. The
  construction would also protect against the added risks from climate change and variability. Funding
  would also provide for the effective implementation of the social safeguards and environmental measures
  identified in the Environmental and Social Assessment and accompanying documents.

  This component would support the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at FBiH Ministry of Agriculture, Water
  Management and Forestry (MoAWF) to facilitate project implementation.

  Revised Components.

  Component 1. The originally planned dike comprising three sections spanning over a 33.4 km river stretch
  was canceled at the first restructuring in June 2019 due to the lack of agreement with citizens from the
  settlements of Janja, Popovi, and Amajlije on the proposed dike alignment. As an alternative solution to the
  dike, the project decided to reinforce the degraded sections of the existing embankment of Drina at 11
  locations with a cumulative length of 8.4 km. This investment enabled the protection of highest priority area
  (section 2) without major land acquisitions, though the extent of protected area was reduced. In addition,
  embankment rehabilitation and riverbed consolidation of the Janja River for a total length of 1.8 km, which
  was included in the original work package, remained as a sub-component.

  Component 2. After the completion of first phase sub-components in Pale-Praca and Foca-Ustikolina and
  the design studies for seven subcomponent works in Gorazde and Foca-Ustikolina, the FBiH decided to
  prioritize the construction of the Drina River embankment in Gorazde. Five sub-projects in Gorazde and one
  in Foca-Ustikolina were canceled due to lack of funds to cover the cost overrun.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated to be US$28.27 million. This was revised downwards to
  US$26.53 million after the first restructuring. Actual cost according to the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was
  US$20.31 million or about 71% of the appraisal estimate. The ICR did not explain why the actual costs were
  29% lower than the appraisal estimate. The World Bank project team stated that this difference was caused
  by the cancelled subprojects at the first restructuring and the works that were not implemented under the
  first component.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA Credit worth US$24.00 million. At the first
  restructuring, US$1.72 million IDA credit were cancelled. The actual disbursed amount was US$18.96
  million or 79% of the total financing. The ICR did not explain why the actual disbursed amount were 21%
  lower than the total expected financing, but, as the project team explained, this was attributable to the
  cancelled subprojects and the works that were not implemented.

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was expected to provide US$4.27 million in counterpart funding for
  land acquisition and selected other preparatory activities. The actual amount of counterpart funding was
  US$1.35 million or about 32% of the expected amount at appraisal. The lower borrower contribution than
  expected was because of the lower land acquisition requirement due to the cancellation of the dike under
  the first component.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 16, 2014 and became effective one year later on May 21, 2015.
  The delay in effectiveness was attributed to the multilayered administrative level (state and entity levels) in

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



   BiH (ICR, paragraph 50) combined with significant floods in 2014 that focused the government efforts on
   rehabilitation of the damages caused by the floods (Restructuring Paper, paragraph 2). The Mid-Term
   Review was conducted on November 16, 2017 about two and half years into implementation. This was in
   line with PAD expectation that "a Mid-term Review (MTR) mission will be fielded in 2017 (PAD, paragraph
   4, page 43)." The project was expected to close on December 31, 2019, but the original closing date was
   one year later on December 31, 2020. According to the ICR (paragraph 21) "the extension of the project
   closing date for 12 months is ascribed to the cumulative delays of works both in the RS and FBiH." The
   project was restructured twice, both level 2, as follows:

   1. On June 19, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$7.95 million, in order to change the Results
   Framework (see section 9.b M&E Implementation), change components and cost, cancel US$1.72 million
   IDA credit, and to reallocate between disbursement categories.

   2. On December 3, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$9.81 million, in order to extend the closing
   date by 12 months as stated above.

   This Review is in agreement with the ICR (paragraph 18) that "the TOC was not substantially altered by the
   restructurings during implementation." The first restructuring reduced the scale of the project. The
   cancellation of planned dike in Bijeljina as described in the ICR (paragraph 19) was for unforeseen reasons.
   However, "the cancellation of six sub-projects in the FBiH resulted from cost overrun after the design study
   was completed in September 2018 (ICR, paragraph 20)." The extension of the project by twelve months
   was logical given the delays and to allow enough time to complete activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal the PDO was in line with Government priorities for the
management of the Drina river basin. The Strategic Framework for BiH (2015), prepared to set out the
medium-term planning, defined sustainable growth as one of its five pillars for the growth of BiH. The pillar
specifically included Priority Area V.3.2. ‘improving environmental management and development of
environmental infrastructure while increasing resilience to climate change,’ which set forth the enhancement
of resilience against the disasters that were exacerbated by climate change.

At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Government priorities as reflected in the
national development plan ‘Economic Reform Program of BiH 2020–2022’. The program prioritizes
sustainable and integrated river basin management and capacity development of responsible ministries
under its sub-objective ‘improving the competitiveness of agriculture, forestry, and water management’.

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Bank’s overall
objectives for poverty alleviation and fostering shared prosperity as the benefits from reduced flood risk
would accrue directly to all those affected by flooding, but also to those that avoided investing in the project
areas due to the risk posed by recurring floods. That, said, it is worth noting that the project did not include
activities that would directly contribute to poverty alleviation. The PDO was also in line with the Bank's

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



               Country Partnership Strategy for BiH (CPS, FY2012-15). It would contribute to the key objectives under the
               CPS to promote: (i) competitiveness; (ii) social inclusion; and (iii) environmental sustainability, including for
               improved water resource management. One of the specific CPS outcomes was “better flood preparedness
               and management along the Drina River Basin.” The project would also enhance the hydraulic capacity of
               the riverbed, thereby contributing to increasing the environmental sustainability of hydropower production,
               and thus assist BiH’s efforts towards energy security in the light of climate change impacts.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               BiH (FY2016–FY20). The CPF had flood management as a core element of Focus Area 3 ‘Building
               Resilience to Natural Shocks’, which emphasized BiH’s vulnerability to natural shocks such as floods, heat
               waves, and forest fires as well as the impact of disasters in derailing the country’s development path. Also,
               the CPF Objective 3b ‘Build resilience to floods’ emphasized flood disaster management with following
               results indicators: indicator 1: People in flood affected/prone areas benefiting from goods received and
               infrastructure rehabilitated with projects' support, Indicator 2: Strengthened capacity in water resources
               management, including flood management, forecasting and warning, in Drina and Sava River basins.

               Previous Sector Experience. Several studies and plans exist that analyze water management and flood
               protection, including the1964 Drina Master Plan, the 1972 Sava Study, and, more recently, the more
               generic International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR) Danube River Basin
               Management Plan (2004) and the Sava River Basin Management Plan (2013). The DRB is also benefiting
               from the Bank’s West Balkans Regional Flood and Drought Initiative, a non-lending TA program, which has
               led to a Rapid Trans-boundary Diagnostic Scan and Analysis (2012) based on basin-wide data collection
               and cross-sectoral dialogue, and a Framework for Flood Management on the Drina River (2012) that
               reviewed parameters for flood management for BiH. Other relevant Bank-financed projects include: West
               Balkans Drina River Basin Management Project (P145048), BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project
               (P151157), the Irrigation Development Project (P115954), and Sava and Drina Rivers Corridors Integrated
               Development Program (P168862).



               The statement of objectives was clear and focused and reflected adequate ambition with regards to the
               Bank's experience. The PDO was also in line with the Government and Bank priorities as explained above.
               Lastly, given the nature of the Drina river basin, protection of agricultural and commercial interests and
               communities from flood events and building resilience will continue to be relevant objectives in the future.

               Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To provide increased protection from flood events to agricultural interests in the project area.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The overall objective of increased protection from flood risks in agricultural and
commercial (urban/semi-urban) areas would be realized by the construction of embankments and associated
infrastructures in the Bijeljina area, RS, and in Gorazde area, FBiH. Construction activities included:
rehabilitation of existing flood protection infrastructure and new construction of flood dikes. The expected
outcomes included the protection of beneficiaries in urban and semi-urban areas from floods and the
protection of agricultural lands from floods. Anticipated long-term outcomes were defined as follows:
(a) improved flood resilience in the target area, and (b) enhanced long-term investments for economic
development in the areas previously exposed to flood risks.

The ToC included two key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective: 1."Flood
protection infrastructures are maintained properly", and 2. "That the local administrations effectively enforce
land use regulation and restrict illegal construction of residential and commercial facilities in the areas that are
not protected by the embankments (ICR, paragraph 5)." However, the implementation experience
demonstrated that another key assumption was overlooked. This assumption was ensuring that local
stakeholders approved the construction of the new infrastructure in their areas. This proved critical and
resulted in changing the scale of the project due to lack of agreement with local stakeholders.

Overall, the ToC reflected activities that were linked to the PDO in a valid causal chain. However, the key
assumptions were deficient as explained above.

Outputs

The outputs below were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise.

      The project reinforced erosive banks of the Drina at 8 locations, out of originally planned 11, over a 16
       km section between Janja confluence and Bijeljina-Badovinci bridge (ICR, paragraph 31).
      The project rehabilitated the embankment and consolidation of unstable riverbed of the Janja River
       over a 1.8 km section up from its confluence to the Drina (ICR, paragraph 27).
      The project rehabilitated the embankment and consolidated the unstable riverbed of the Praca River
       for a 3.4 km section in Hrenovica settlement in Pale-Praca (ICR, paragraph 31).
      10.9 km of river embankments were rehabilitated and improved in RS (original target: 33.40 km,
       revised target: 12 km, target not achieved).
      18 km of river embankments/dikes were rehabilitated and improved in FBiH (original target 32 km,
       revised target: 18, target achieved).

Outcome

3,136 ha of rural/agricultural lands were protected from floods in project locations according to the
2010 baseline against an original target of 8,500 ha (PDO outcome indicator #2) (37% achievement rate).
The agricultural and rural land around the rehabilitated embankment at eight locations on the left bank of the
Drina achieved 1-in-100-year level protection through the project. The lowland plain around Bijeljina, which
includes the most developed agricultural area in the RS, suffered from recurrent floods that affected the

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



region almost every two years. Since the works in Bijeljina were completed in December 2020, the direct
project benefit was yet to be observed. According to the ICR (paragraph 33) “the damages and losses from
the agricultural sector in the Bijeljina area are expected to be reduced significantly.”



The project fell short of achieving its outcome target. Therefore, the efficacy of achieving this objective is
rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To provide increased protection from flood events to agricultural interests in the project area.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The same ToC applies. There was no revision of the PDO, only the outcome
target of the second outcome indicator was revised down to 3,200 ha compared to an original target of 8,500
ha.

Outputs

The project was expected to construct a 33.4 km long continuous dike designed to withstand a high-water
frequency of 1-in- 100-year level (5,600 m3 per second). However, protests by the local landowners resulted
in scaling to down the activity to 12 km, and as a result, the target values of protected agricultural/rural land in
Bijeljina were reduced by 5,272 ha (ICR, paragraph 35). Also, the cancellation of five sub-projects in Gorazde
in the FBiH reduced the protected agricultural/rural land by 28 ha.

Outcome

The same as above. The only difference is that the project achieved 98% of the revised target for the second
outcome indicator (3,136 ha against a revise target of 3,200 ha).

Overall, the efficacy of achieving the revised objective is rated Substantial. This rating reflects the
achievement of 98% of the target for the second outcome indicator. It is plausible to assume that through the
supported infrastructure improvements, the project would achieve increased protection from flood events to
agricultural interests in the project area.



Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide increased protection from flood events to commercial interests and communities in the project
area.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Same as above.



Outputs

      10.9 km of river embankments were rehabilitated and improved in RS (original target: 33.40 km,
       revised target: 12 km, target not achieved).
      18 km of river embankments/dikes were rehabilitated and improved in FBiH (original target 32 km,
       revised target: 18, target achieved).
      Project-supported works included: the construction of a dike on the left and right bank of the Drina
       River for a 2 km section from the Gorazde city center to downstream, rehabilitation of the
       embankment and consolidation of unstable riverbed of the Praca River for a 3.2 km section in Praca
       settlement in Pale-Praca, and rehabilitation of the embankment and consolidation of unstable riverbed
       of the Janja River over a 1.8 km section up from its confluence to the Drina.

Outcome

Flood protections in semi-urban/urban areas and rural areas were mutually intertwined because many of the
flood dikes in rural areas also benefit semi-urban/urban areas and vice versa (ICR, paragraph25). The ICR
did not clearly differentiate between increased flood protection to commercial interests and protection to
communities.

The project’s civil works achieved flood protection that withstand a high-water frequency of 1-in- 100-year
level (4,080 m3 per second at Gorazde). Before the project, Gorazde municipality, located in the middle reach
of Drina, was subject to bank erosion and overtopping with recurring floods almost every two years. Similarly,
the Pale-Praca area, located in the upstream of a left tributary of the Drina, also suffered from the negative
impact of floods almost every two years due to the torrents that merged in its upstream.

By project completion, 119.6 ha of semi-urban and urban areas (40 ha in RS + 79.6 ha in FBiH) were
protected from floods in project locations using the 2010 baseline against an original target of 54 ha (PDO
outcome indicator #1, target substantially achieved). This was largely achieved through the project-financed
civil works in Gorazde and Pale-Praca in the FBiH and Janja in the RS.

The ICR (paragraph 29) noted that while a moderate flood was observed in the city of Gorazde in February
2021 and the water level almost reached the designed high-water level with some overflows, no major
damage was reported. Also, since 2017, there has been no major inundation or infrastructure damages
in Pale-Praca, which suffered from the negative impact of floods almost every two years, where the project-
financed infrastructure was completed at an earlier stage.

Incomplete works included auxiliary facilities such as recreational parks and landscaping of construction sites
and horticultural parks in Gorazde municipality. According to the ICR (paragraph 30) these "had no

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



                              substantial impacts in terms of flood protection, and they are to be completed by Gorazde municipality at its
                              own expense."

                              Efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial. The project achieved its outcome targets and the
                              evidence provided in the ICR pointed to increased flood protection to commercial interests and communities
                              in Gorazde and Pale-Parca as a result of the project investments.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the Efficacy was rated Modest. The project achieved mixed results, while it substantially achieved its
                            target for the first outcome indicator, it only achieved 37% of the original outcome target for the second
                            indicator. Some minor activities were not implemented.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project substantially achieved its target for the first outcome
                            indicator and achieved 98% of the revised target for the second outcome indicator. Also, the evidence
                            provided in the ICR point to increased flood protection in Gorazde and Pale-Praca where no major flood
                            damage was reported.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   ex ante




                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 21
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



     The overall economic assessment showed that the aggregate project investments had an Economic
        Rate of Return (ERR) of 23.6%. The ERR for the proposed investments for Component 1 in Bijeljina area
        was 29.9%. For the sites in the Component 2 Goražde areas the ERR averaged about 12.7%.
       The project investments would reduce the frequency and cost of related flooding events. The economic
        analysis was carried out for a 20-year period (2015–2034) with a cost-benefit analysis comparing
        scenarios with and without the project.
       Avoided damages were calculated in the model as the difference between damages caused in the
        existing situation vulnerable to frequent floods (without the proposed project) and the project scenario in
        which no damages would occur up to a certain magnitude of the river flows and flood events. As flood
        events occur to different degrees and frequency, the calculation considered the probability of occurrence
        of different flood intensities and the related damages caused by floods weighted by the respective
        probability in both scenarios.
       Farm models combining typical cropping patterns were also prepared, representing farms in the project
        areas.
       Assumptions: no significant price distortions were considered for the economic analysis. Taxes were
        deducted from prices, and unskilled labor costs were corrected using 0.7 as conversion factor (CF). The
        average price for damages in houses was estimated based on the average property value of 1,000
        KM/m2. In the case of industrial/business assets the damage was estimated at 30% of the costs of the
        building taking into account irreversible damages to the industrial equipment.
       The economic analysis was limited because the actual data was insufficient to show whether the
        structures built under the project would prevent floods as expected at the time of appraisal. It is also very
        difficult to quantify the economic benefits because such data are generally not available. The ICR (p.35)
        also acknowledges this: “Most of these benefits are difficult to measure as necessary data for doing it
        properly are not available.”

ex post

     The overall economic assessment in the ICR showed that the aggregate project investments had an
        ERR of 17.6% compared to 23.6% at appraisal. The ERR for the investments for Component 1 in the
        Bijeljina area was estimated at 27.6%. For sites in the Gorazde areas the average ERR was about
        15.4%. The site in Pale Praca had a low estimated ERR of 4.3%. The ICR (Annex 6, paragraph 21)
        explained that this site was included in the project at the request of the Government "because it is one of
        the poorest areas in Bosnia and as such needed to be supported for reducing development disparities
        among regions."
       The ex post analysis used the same model at appraisal, with a difference in partial inclusion of other
        benefits (avoided traffic disruption, recreation benefits, and tourism development, for Gorazde area)
        which were not included at the appraisal stage. The ERR without these benefits was 15.7%.
       The lower ERR at completion was due to the unrealized benefits in the Bijeljina area due to the
        cancellation of sub-projects (ICR, paragraph 42). According to the ICR (paragraph 42) economic
        efficiency was not significantly affected by implementation delays and cost overruns. An economic
        analysis was not conducted at restructuring despite that the project scale was reduced.
       At 17.6%, the ERR at completion favorably compares to other Bank financed projects with comparable
        activities such as the Odra River Basin Flood Protection (P086768) in Poland, which had an ERR of
        15.1% and the Jakarta Urgent Flood Mitigation Project (P111034) which had an ERR of 16%.
       The sensitivity analysis suggested that even at 10% and 20% down scenarios, the overall efficiency
        remains substantial with an ERR 15.6% at 10% down scenario, and an ERR
        of 13.3% at 20% down scenario. Both scenarios were higher than the 6% discount rate.

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



      Overall, the economic analysis was robust and provided a solid basis for assessing the project
       efficiency.

Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

Project effectiveness took 12 months due to the 2014 floods and the political change in BiH in April 2015 (ICR,
paragraph 50). The project closed 12 months later than expected. This delay was to accommodate different
implementation-related delays. The implementation of works in Gorazde and Bijeljina was delayed significantly
due to the scope change (ICR, paragraph 41). To minimize the institutional complexity of BiH, implementation
arrangements were such that independent institutional structures for implementation were prepared for
respective entities, the RS and FBiH. There were also procurement related delays of about six months in RS.
The PIUs benefited from low staff turnover where "the Director of the FBiH PIU had no turnover through the
project life, and the Director of the RS APCU had only one turnover (ICR, paragraph 41)."



Efficiency is rated Substantial despite delays and cost overruns. At 17.6%, the ex post ERR was well above the
discount rate at 6%. The ex post ERR also compared favorably with other Bank-financed project with
comparable activities as mentioned above.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 23.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Modest. The project
achieved mixed results, while it substantially achieved its target for the first outcome indicator, it only achieved
37% of the original outcome target for the second indicator. There were also some minor uncompleted activities.
Efficiency was rated Substantial despite delays and cost overruns. At 17.6%, the ex post ERR was well above
the discount rate at 6%. The ex post ERR also compared favorably with other Bank-financed project with
comparable activities.



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



Based on the assigned ratings for the three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency), the
Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Post Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The
project substantially achieved its target for the first outcome indicator and achieved 98% of the revised target for
the second outcome indicator. Also, the evidence provided in the ICR point to increased flood protection in
Gorazde and Pale-Praca where no major flood damage was reported. Efficiency was rated Substantial despite
delays and cost overruns. At 17.6%, the ex post ERR was well above the discount rate at 6%. The ex post ERR
also compared favorably with other Bank-financed project with comparable activities.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency), the
Outcome is rated Satisfactory.

Split Rating

The project disbursement before the restructuring was only 40% in over 4 years of operation, whereas the
remaining 60% was disbursed over the 1.5-year period after restructuring.

                                                 Pre-Restructuring     Post Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives                          High                  High
Efficacy                                         Modest                Substantial
To provide increased protection from flood
events to agricultural interests in the          Modest                Substantial
project area.
To provide increased protection from flood
events to commercial interests and               Substantial           Substantial
communities in the project area.
Efficiency                                       Substantial            Substantial
Disbursement                                     US$7.95 million        US$11.15 million
Numerical value of the outcome ratings           MU (3)                 S (5)
Weighted value of the outcome rating             41.6%                  58.4%
Overall Outcome rating                                       3*0.416 + 5*0.584 = 4.2 (MS)

Based on the above-mentioned split rating, the Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

1. The risk related to the lack of maintenance of the infrastructures constructed/rehabilitated through
the project. Strengthening the technical capacity of relevant agencies and institutions would have a positive
impact on maintenance of infrastructure. The critical factor would be adequate budget allocation to support

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



maintenance. The technical capacity of the relevant ministries and agencies was strengthened through other
Bank-financed projects, namely, the West Balkans Drina River Basin Management Project (P145048) and
BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157). Support was expected to continue through the Bank-
financed Sava and Drina Rivers Corridors Integrated Development Program (SDIP)(P168862), which
encompasses a bundle of investments and technical assistance to improve flood protection and enhance
transboundary water cooperation in the region. Lastly, realization of project outcome will be further ensured
through effective use of flood early warning system supported through the West Balkans Drina River Basin
Management Project and Sava Flood Forecasting and Warning System Project.

2. The risk related to the intensification of flood disasters due to climate change. Climate change could
result in unprecedented floods. Such severe events could negatively impact the hydraulic infrastructure and
possibly result in higher water levels that could breach the dikes and levees in the project area and result in
flood damage. Scientific research based on the Coupled Model Inter-comparison Project, indicates a slight
decrease of annual precipitation in 2040–2059. The model also predicts increasingly variable precipitation
patterns as well as increased frequency and intensity of extreme events in the region, which puts BiH in the
third rank in terms of vulnerability to intense rain and prolonged rainfall (ICR, paragraph 82). The investments
under SIDP will address part of the increased flood risks caused by climate change. At the same time, "BiH
needs continued efforts in updating flood risk analysis in consideration of climate change impact and
implementing both hard and soft measures based on the identified risk (ICR, paragraph 82)."




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Drina Flood Protection Project was proposed following the Bank’s preceding support and the Country
  Partnership Strategy for BiH. The project objective was in line with the Government priorities and with
  Bank strategies (see section 3). The project's concept was formulated through a study ‘Framework for
  Flood Management on the Drina River, Bosnia-Herzegovina (2012)’ prepared as part of the ‘West Balkan
  Regional Initiative on Flood and Drought Management’ supported by the Bank. A project pre-feasibility
  study ‘Protection of Semberija and Janja in the Bijeljina Region against Flooding of the River Drina
  (2014)’ provided more details and updated the information (ICR, paragraph 48). However, the 2012 study
  had outdated cost estimates that the project pre-feasibility did not update. The pre-feasibility study
  also did not reflect the socioeconomic changes in the project area. These two issues undermined the
  project design because during implementation the project faced cost overruns and resistance form the
  local population who did not approve the project-financed works in their area. This situation was
  exacerbated by deferring the detailed designs for the suggested works to implementation.

  The project design benefitted from the lessons and experience of the Bank’s earlier operations, namely
  the Neretva and Trebisnjica River Basin Management Project (P084608) and the Irrigation Development
  Project (P115954). The implementation arrangements featured an independent institutional structure for
  implementation for the respective entities, the RS and FBiH. This arrangement minimized the
  implementation delays arising from institutional and administrative complexity of BiH (ICR, paragraph 49).
  According to the ICR (paragraph 75) "the assessment of risks through the Operational Risk Assessment
  (ORAF) was mostly adequate, including the risk of complicated governance structure of BiH." However,
  the social and environment risk (rated Modest in the ORAF) was underestimated. The mitigation measure
  raised in the ORAF (to prepare individual resettlement plans in compliance with OP/BP 4.12) was not

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



  sufficient to prevent the local protest against the project-supported investments. M&E design was
  deficient in terms of comprehensively assessing the PDO, but the RF included relevant indicators to track
  the progress of the project (see section 9 for more details).

  Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This rating reflects significant design
  shortcomings due to the lack of detailed designs at the start of implementation, and inaccurate cost
  estimates. This contributed to implementation delays and cancellation of sub-projects. Also,
  underestimating the risk related to the social and environment undermined the project and resulted in
  cancelling activities due to the objection of the local population.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (paragraph 77) regular supervision missions were conducted every six months. To
 ensure smooth implementation by the PIUs, the Bank held ad hoc meetings with the client to address
 unexpected situations, such as the grievance case in the RS in 2018. While the project was overseen by a
 total of three task team leaders (TTL), many of the specialists were retained in the task team throughout
 the project life. This, combined with a sufficient transition period during TTL change, ensured "seamless
 and consistent implementation support (ICR, paragraph 77)." The Bank team oversaw the project
 restructuring to address the cost overrun in the BiH and grievance case in the RS. The team also
 provided support on fiduciary and safeguard issues during project implementation to ensure compliance
 with World Bank policies.

 To enhance readiness, the Bank used the 12 months gap between approval and effectiveness
 to provide trainings to the PIU on financial management, procurement, and environmental and social
 safeguards (ICR, paragraph 76).

 The Bank team also prepared and implemented two related projects, the West Balkans Drina River Basin
 Management Project (P145048) and BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157). These three
 projects complemented each other and supported different stages of disaster management cycle (recovery,
 planning, and investment). According to the ICR (paragraph 56) "this programmatic approach enabled
 strengthening the disaster risk reduction capacity of the client in line with the United Nations Disaster Risk
 Reduction (UNDRR) Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015– 2030." However, the project
 team could have put more effort to demonstrate the impact of the project intervention.

 Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory. While the project experienced implementation delays,
 these were mostly beyond the control of the Bank team. The Bank team oversaw this project which had
 serious Quality at Entry issues and guided the project through the complex BiH institutional set-up towards
 a successful achievement of its revised outcomes.

 On balance, Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At the time of appraisal, the PAD did not require a theory of change (TOC). Nonetheless, the ICR
 included an ex post ToC that was based on the Project Development Objective (PDO) and the results
 indicators in the PAD. The ToC outlined the relation between the project inputs, outputs and expected
 outcomes in a valid causal chain (see section 4). The PDO was to be assessed through two key outcome
 level indicators:

 1. Semi-urban and urban area protected from floods in project locations (2010) baseline (target: 54 ha).

 2. Rural/Agricultural land protected from floods in project locations (2010) baseline (target: 8,500 ha).

 These two indicators were directly linked to the PDO, had a clear baseline and were measurable. However,
 they do not capture the project outcomes of “increased protection from floods.” This can only be assessed
 by comparing the flood patterns before and after the project’s intervention. The two indicators defined as
 PDO level indicators are output level indicators measuring the area that were covered by infrastructure built
 or rehabilitated under the project. They do not assess how effective this infrastructure will be in preventing
 floods.

 The RF also included four intermediate outcome indicators, two of which were core Bank indicators relating
 to direct project beneficiaries and female beneficiaries. The other two intermediate indicators were
 quantitative measuring the physical infrastructure supported by the project. These indicators were relevant,
 measurable, and directly linked to the stated activities. The project beneficiaries (target: 20,000) were
 determined based on estimates by the local municipality in FBiH upon request of the PIU and based on the
 feasibility study of the Drina dike in RS (ICR, paragraph 59).

 The ICR (paragraph 57) correctly pointed out a discrepancy in the PAD with regards to PDO outcome
 indicators. The PAD (paragraph 20) stated that "the proposed PDO indicators are: (i) Land area prone to
 floods in each location (hectares urban/rural); and (ii) number of beneficiaries who have reduced exposure
 to the vagaries of floods." However, the RF reflected only the areas protected as the two outcome level
 indicators as explained above.

 M&E design could have benefitted from providing information about past floods and the increase in the
 river level and compared it to river level increases after the project's intervention. This would have provided
 a better assessment of the outcome of the project's intervention rather than just measuring the area the
 project protected. A thorough analysis of the February 2021 flood in comparison to previous floods could
 have been invaluable to demonstrate the impact of the project.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



 Overall, the M&E design was not adequate to capture the project's impact on increasing protection against
 floods, but it was adequate to assess the outcome of the project in "reducing flood risk."




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (paragraph 60) "at project entry, the progress reports of both the PIUs lacked
  standardized reporting parameters that ensure equal application of the same standards, methods, and
  definitions in project monitoring." This situation was remedied by 2017 after both PIUs received support
  from the Bank to establish a uniform standardized M&E table.
  After establishing standardization of the M&E table, semiannual progress reports and M&E tables were
  submitted regularly by both PIUs. The standardized M&E reports helped the Bank to identify incorrect
  reporting by the PIUs where expected results of ongoing civil works were reported as achieved results
  (ICR, paragraph 60).

  Revision of PDO indicators. The end target values of the PDO outcome indicator for rural land was
  reduced at the first restructuring in June 2019 (original target: 8,500 ha, revised target: 3,200) due to the
  cancellation of civil works. However, there was no change in the target values for the urban/semi-urban
  protected areas despite the identification of additional sub-projects by the time of restructuring (ICR,
  paragraph 14 and footnote#4).



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 61) "the original results indicators were used by the project
  management team and decision-makers to monitor progress closely and make adequate changes to the
  project design during the restructuring." Also, monitoring progress continued after the 2019 restructuring
  until project completion.



  Quality of M&E is rated Substantial. M&E design was adequate to assess the outcome of the project in
  "reducing flood risk", implementation had shortcomings that were addressed, and utilization was
  adequate.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was categorized as an environmental Category B project triggering OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment. The works envisaged under the project included construction, rehabilitation and modernization

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



of the drainage and flood protection infrastructure at selected sites along the Drina and tributaries –
specifically in Bijeljina (in RS), Goražde, Foca-Ustikolina and Pale-Praca (the latter three in FBiH). Standard
environmentally sound practices would be implemented to ensure minimal disturbances (dust, noise, leaks,
spills, machinery use, working hours, and safety on site) to the surrounding areas, flora, fauna, and the
population.

The project included construction and civil works of dike systems that involve land acquisition; therefore,
OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered. The project also triggered OP 7.50 Projects on
International Waterways as the Drina is an international waterway and a tributary of the Sava and by
extension the Danube Rivers. Two Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), one for the
FBiH and one for RS, were prepared and disclosed to the public for consultation during the project
preparation period. Also, site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were
prepared for all six subprojects/construction sites, five for the FBiH and one for the RS, for rehabilitation and
improvement of flood protection. Additional ESMPs were prepared for eight locations of erosive river
embankments of the Drina after restructuring.

While the project did not trigger OP/BP 4.11 on Physical and Cultural Resources, a contractor for the civil
works in Gorazde encountered one unmarked historical grave during excavation of right bank of the Drina.
This matter was handled by the FBiH Ministry of Culture and Institute for the Protection of Monuments (ICR,
paragraph 69).

Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 63) "no serious
environmental concerns pertaining to the project were reported throughout the project period." Both PIUs
had a dedicated environmental and social specialist who oversaw all aspects of environmental and social
management.

Compliance with social safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 65) "the land acquisition and other
social safeguard processes were implemented in compliance with the World Bank rules." Grievance redress
mechanisms were available in line with the ESMF at both the RS and FBiH for complaints related to project
design and land acquisitions.

The ICR highlighted a number of incidents relating to social safeguards during project implementation:

1.The land acquisition for a 1.8 km long sub-section of the Janja River in the RS was completed by the local
municipality in 2016 without preparation of the RAP document. This noncompliance case was addressed,
and the RAP document was prepared retroactively, confirming that the land acquisition of 27,610 m2 and
physical resettlement of one household was carried out in line with the national legislation and the World
Bank’s safeguard policy.

2. In Pale-Praca, FBiH, one landowner filed a legal dispute against the local municipality in 2016 as he
found the offered land price unacceptable.

3. In March 2018, 2,206 residents submitted a petition opposing the alignment of the proposed river dike in
Bijeljina. Public consultation meetings with the landowners were held eight times after the submission of
petition, but no agreement was reached, resulting in substantial change of sub-project components in the
RS.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



  4. A landowner claimed compensation of land parcel (100 m2) on the left bank of the Drina River, which
  was affected during construction. the owner filed a case in court against the city of Gorazde. According to
  the ICR (paragraph 71), the city pledged to respect the court decision regarding the compensation amount.

  5. In 2020, the local community of Gorazde raised concerns against the flood protection concrete wall, 300
  m in length and 2.5 m in height, built in the downstream of the city center. In response the city and the PIU
  engaged the local community in consultations to revise the design. However, a final approval of the revised
  design is yet to be issued by the city.



  The ICR did not report an explicit statement of compliance for any of the stated safeguard policies but
  stated that "the overall safeguard rating at project closure was Moderately Satisfactory (ICR, paragraph
  72)."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 73) "the financial management
  arrangements at both implementing units included acceptable accounting, budgeting, organization and
  staffing, internal controls, counterpart funding, audit, and financial reporting practices." Quarterly unaudited
  interim financial reports were submitted regularly to the Bank and were found acceptable. The auditor’s
  opinions of the project financial statements for FY19 were unqualified (clean). The ICR did not report the
  status of the final audit reports for the project.



  Procurement. The PIUs had good experience with the Bank's procurement requirements as both PIUs
  previously implemented four Bank-financed projects. In the early stage of implementation, procurement
  plans were not updated regularly, but this was remedied after guidance from the Bank. According to the
  ICR (paragraph 75) "the procurement
  and contracting procedures and processes followed for the project were of acceptable quality, reliability,
  timeliness, and transparency." There were no identified noncompliance issues nor there was evidence of
  corrupt practices (ICR, paragraph 75). The June 2020 post-review concluded that both PIUs were in
  compliance with Bank's guidelines and rules for procurement activities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  None.


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To ensure timely implementation, project readiness must be assessed and ensured as
much as possible before effectiveness. The project entered effectiveness without technical and
operational readiness for infrastructure design, which caused substantial delays and subsequent
restructuring during implementation. The project was hastily prepared under budgetary limitation of
both the RS and FBiH that lacked resources to implement design studies on its own and optimistic
assumptions that the civil works identified by past studies would not require substantial adjustment
in design. The operational timeline set out during preparation also underestimated the time required
for the procurement and implementation of engineering design studies, associated environmental
and social studies, and mandatory safeguard processes.

2. Proactive and participatory engagement with citizens is key to successful land acquisition
and project implementation. Public hearings need to be conducted as often as possible until the
project and local stakeholders reach full understanding and agreement. Every possible measure,
including roundtable workshops, participatory consultation approaches, and use of visualization tools
(videos and computer graphics of as-built infrastructures), needs to be employed to facilitate public
understanding. The project experience suggests that compliance with the Bank procedures was not
necessarily sufficient in engaging local stakeholders. Local landowners were opposed to the dike
alignment in Bijeljina despite the disclosure and consultation process in compliance with World Bank
safeguard procedures. Interviews with the PIU and World Bank team indicated a lack of interest
among the project beneficiaries during the consultation process despite the PIU’s efforts in
publicizing the project through various channels (such as TV, radio, and newspaper).

3. Continuous maintenance efforts with due consideration of climate change impact are
important to ensure sustained project benefit and should be built into the design of floods
management projects. The continued fulfillment of project benefit requires periodic maintenance of
the infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated. In the long run, the infrastructure may also need
reinforcement or expansion considering the threats of growing intensity and frequency of heavy rains
due to climate change. The project recognizes maintenance of public infrastructure as the


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)



responsibility of local municipalities, and establishment of effective maintenance mechanisms was
not embedded in the project’s scope. Inclusion of such mechanisms, including integration of climate
adaptation measures, would bolster the sustainability of investments. Use of community
engagement is also an effective approach to ensure long-term maintenance and management of
infrastructures as well as to raise disaster awareness among public citizens.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. M&E design was adequate, but there were some minor implementation shortcomings.
Overall, the M&E system provided reliable data to assess implementation progress and the achievement
of reducing flood risk.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence base
to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the PDO. It provided
a well-balanced discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to the indicators and
what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify the assigned outcome
rating. Discussion of outcomes was comprehensive, and the efficiency analysis was robust.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and candidly
reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. However, the outputs in Annex
lacked the expected end targets and the reporting on safeguards did not included an explicit statement on
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies. The ICR reported different restructuring dates (paragraph 13
compared to the ICR data sheet). Finally, the ICR did not clearly explain the reason(s) that the actual costs
were 29% lower than the appraisal estimate.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Drina Flood Protection Project (P143844)




                                                                        Page 21 of 21
