     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022635

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P122950                                     BJ-Cities Support Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52740                                   30-Jun-2020                                         56,009,004.17

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2013                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         56,125,844.32                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 19),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Benin Cities Support Project (Projet d'Amenagement Urbain
   et d'Appui a la Decenralisation or PAURAD) was "to increase access to urban services and improve urban
   management in selected cities of Benin."




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



   In this review, the project performance is assessed against the achievement of the PDO under two sub-
   objectives, in line with the ICR assessment:

         to increase access to urban services in selected cities of Benin
         to improve urban management in selected cities of Benin



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Service Delivery Improvement through infrastructure rehabilitation, maintenance, and expansion
   (US$49 million at appraisal, US$48.74 million actual). This component would finance the rehabilitation and
   expansion of urban infrastructure based on the development plans of 10 participant cities. The subprojects
   would include urban drainage systems, urban roads, water supply, sanitation facilities, local markets, and
   preservation and rehabilitation of cultural assets.

   2. Municipal Management and Deepening Decentralization (US$5 million at appraisal, US$4.56 million
   actual). This component would finance training and capacity building of cities and municipalities in
   procurement, project management, financial management (FM), social and environmental safeguards
   design and implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and disaster management. Training would
   also strengthen the local government financial base through improved revenue collections. Capacity
   building efforts would also be directed at the National Local Finances Commission (Commission Nationale
   des Finances Locales or CONAFIL) to manage the Municipal Development Fund (Fonds d'Appui au
   Developpement des Municipalities or FADeC). This component would also finance equipment purchase.

   3. Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Project
   Management (US$6 million at appraisal, US$4.45 million actual). This component would
   finance project management, including M&E of results, and train city, municipal, and central government
   officials involved in project implementation and on FADeC or Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer System
   (IFTS).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was US$60 million equivalent. The credit disbursed US$56.12 million
   equivalent. The balance was due to foreign exchange losses, as confirmed by the Task Team in their
   September 9, 2021 email to IEG.

   Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) fully financed this project.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



   Borrower Contribution: The recipient had no counterpart contributions.

   Dates and Restructurings: The project was approved on June 21, 2013 and made effective on June 6,
   2014. It was originally scheduled to close on June 30, 2020. A Mid Term Review (MTR) was completed on
   January 19, 2018. A level 2 restructuring extended the project closing date by 6 months to December 31,
   2020. There were two level 2 restructurings:

         On June 29, 2019, to introduce two sets of changes informed by the MTR. The first, to the results
          framework: (i) drop one outcome indicator, (ii) drop four intermediate indicators; (iii) increase target
          values of 3 outcome and 6 intermediate outcome indicators due to changes in data collection
          methodologies. The second, to the institutional arrangements, to allow direct project implementation
          by the remaining 8 (of 10) cities.
         On May 27, 2020, to extend the project closing date from June 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020 due
          to the impact of the Covid 19 pandemic.

   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome was not undertaken. Target values for outcome indicators were
   significantly increased due to a change in methods for collecting target beneficiaries data and changing the
   basis for end target values of infrastructure sub-projects. The previous method of extrapolating from the
   2013 census was replaced by statistical surveys to collect empirical data on beneficiaries. In addition,
   foreign exchange gains financed additional sub-projects (ICR, paragraph 25 and footnote 11). An outcome
   indicator -- Number of additional operational Neighborhood Development Committees (NDC) formed -- was
   dropped at restructuring because there was no activity to support its creation (ICR, paragraph 17, 24, and
   Annex 6).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. The coastal country of Benin adopted a new constitution in 1990 and shifted its
economy from a centrally planned to a market based one. By the 2000s, rural to urban migration had fueled
rapid urbanization growing at a rate of 38.3 to 47.0 percent between 2000 and 2019. Forty one percent of
the country's population was urban with about half coming from the three main cities of Cotonou, Porto
Novo, and Parakou. The urban population continued to grow at a rate of 5 percent compared to 3.5 percent
for the rest of the country. The existing urban infrastructure was strained by this growing demand for
services. In a disastrous flooding caused by heavy rains in 2010 and 2012, under-funded services,
insufficient asset management, and poor maintenance further exposed the inadequate state of
infrastructure in these dense urban areas. In 1999, laws defined the legal and institutional framework for
decentralization, created 77 communes, 12 administrative regions, and assigned "Special Municipal" status
to Cotonou, Porto Novo, and Parakou. In 2008, the government created the National Commission for
Municipal Finance (Commission Nationale des Finances Locales or CONAFIL) and a Municipal
Development Fund (Fonds d'Appui au Developpement des Municipalities or FADeC). FADeC was an
intergovernmental transfer mechanism that financed both current operating and capital investment needs of
decentralized services. The PDOs at closing were relevant to addressing the urban infrastructure needs of
the country's urban areas.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



Alignment with Country Development Plans: The government adopted a National Decentralization and
Deconcentration Policy (Politique Nationale de Decentralisation et de Deconcentration or PONADEC)
covering 2009-2019. PONADEC laid the institutional conditions for sustainable development through
coordinated local governance, transparency, and city/municipal empowerment. The Government Action
Program for 2016−2021 (Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement or PAG) premised on the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, outlined the following initiatives, sectoral policies, and reform plan for the
period: (i) consolidation of democracy, the rule of law, and good governance; (ii) structural transformation of
the economy; and (iii) improvement of social wellbeing. The National Development Plan (Plan National de
Developpement or PND) for 2018−2025 supported a program of growth and sustainable development with
a goal of inclusive sustained growth of at least 10% by 2025 by improving agroindustry, tourism, and local
and national governance with improvements in human capital and infrastructure. The PDOs were highly
relevant to these plans, particularly those focusing on local governance and infrastructure improvement.

Alignment with World Bank Strategy in the Country: The PDO remained relevant to the World Bank's
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Benin for FY19-FY23. The CPF focused on (i) structural
transformation of the economy to promote competitiveness and productivity; (ii) investing in human capital;
and (iii) enhancing resilience and reducing climate-related vulnerabilities. The PDOs contributed to Focus
Area 1: Structural Transformation for Strengthened Competitiveness and Productivity through Objectives 2:
Improving the quality of Infrastructure; and 3: Improving governance in management of public finances and
improving the central government's administration of decentralized public service delivery. The PDOs were
also relevant to Focus Area 3: Increasing Resilience and Reducing Disaster and Climate-Related Risks
through support to Objectives 7: Building resilience at the community level and 8: Reducing vulnerability to
climate-related threats. The PDOs were directed at increasing the capacity of urban governments in a
decentralized system to deliver social and infrastructure services that may be disrupted by climate induced
shocks (CPF, paragraph 34). Increased capacity in urban management would lead to efforts
in reducing risks from climate-led disasters and informing speedy restoration of delivering urban
services. The PDOs remained relevant to the Bank's programs directed at strengthening and improving
services down to the commune level.

Prior World Bank Experience in the Country and in the Sector: The Bank supported urban development
and management in Benin in three successive operations for almost two decades (1993-2012). These
included:(i) Second Decentralization City Management Project (Projet de Gestion Urbaine Decentralisee or
PGUD II); (ii) Emergency Urban Environment Project (Projet de Gestion de l'Environement et Management
Urbaine or PGEMU); and (iii) the Decentralized Community-Driven Services Project (Projet de Services
Décentralisés Conduits par les Communautés or PSDCC). These operations focused on infrastructure and
capacity building for a subset of municipalities as part of decentralization. The present project was the
fourth urban-focused intervention and was designed to build on the outcomes of these prior interventions to
further strengthen decentralization (see also Section 8 Assessment of Bank Performance (a) Quality at
Entry below).

Overall, the relevance of the PDOs is rated high. The operation built on the outcomes of over two decades
of urban management interventions and complemented government decentralization plans.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase access to urban services.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The results framework at appraisal (PAD, Annex 1) showed the main causal chain to
               achieve the PDO. Inputs such as construction or rehabilitation of infrastructure, would result in outputs such
               as improved/increased length of roads, drainage, and flood reduction works, and intermediate outcomes such
               as increased income due to the number of person-days associated with labor-intensive jobs created during
               the construction or rehabilitation works. These inputs and intermediate results would lead to three outcomes
               defined at appraisal as the number of: (i) direct beneficiaries; (ii) additional people protected from seasonal
               flooding; and (iii) additional people with improved access to all season roads. The outcome indicators at
               appraisal were the same as in the TOC at closing, except for the increased end target values introduced at
               restructuring due to changes in data collection methodology. The TOC was valid because the project
               interventions were properly sequenced, in scale appropriate to each infrastructure element since these were
               identified in respective local plans, and sufficient to achieve the expected outcome as defined.

               The TOC in the ICR did not identify assumptions for this objective such as foreign exchange gains although
               its impact was acknowledged to lead to additional investments that benefitted an increased number of
               beneficiaries than originally envisaged (ICR, paragraph 28). Also, the component description assumed that
               the infrastructure improvements were identified in the development plans of the ten participating cities. The
               beneficiary survey conducted at closing provided additional justification for outcomes achieved.

               OUTPUTS: The following outputs were exceeded:

                     33.82 km (original target 8) of roads were rehabilitated. Foreign exchange gains increased project
                      investments in roads than originally planned.
                     8.4 km (original target 4) of primary drainage network and one water catchment basin were put in
                      place. Foreign exchange gains increased project investments in drainage infrastructure than originally
                      planned.
                     Other basic services were provided, as targeted such as (i) 1,117 solar street lighting poles (23
                      kilometers) installed; (ii) 5 local markets rehabilitated including 38 hangars (shaded portions of trading
                      areas) built; (iii) three tourist sites in two cities (a temple, a palace, and three afro-Brazilian houses)
                      rehabilitated; (iv) a bus station in Bohicon for local and regional traffic upgraded; and (v) 65 serviced
                      classrooms, including toilets and ablution facilities built.
                     156,000 person-days of employment (original target 2.5, revised to 14,200) were created, with 3.8
                      percent (original target 10 percent, not achieved) for women.

               OUTCOMES: The following outcomes were exceeded as well.




                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)




  936,975 residents (original target 95,000, revised target at restructuring to 900,000), benefited directly
     from the infrastructure investments. 51 percent of these direct beneficiaries were female, as targeted.
    369,477 beneficiaries (original target 40,000, revised to 151,000) were protected from seasonal
     flooding.
     250,939 persons (original target 25,000, revised to 246,000) were provided access to other basic
     services
     At closing, an independent consultant carried out a beneficiary assessment on a sample of 2,500
     households living within a radius of 500 meters of project interventions. 78 percent were satisfied with
     the quality of improved services in the ten cities. 81 percent were satisfied or very satisfied with the
     usefulness of the completed works. The following outcomes of the infrastructure investments were
     noted but without supporting data beyond reference to the response to the beneficiary assessment
     conducted at closing:
           o Solar streetlights addressed road accidents, sense of insecurity, and lack of evening
             activities. The new poles facilitated access to social infrastructure at night and in areas where
             street vendors, especially women were present. Solar powered lighting decreased the
             urban carbon-footprint. Safer streets were created (no data on reduced incidence of crimes).
           o Drainage / flood control. Drainage works led many to move back to previously flooded
             neighborhoods, reclaim their lands, and increased population settlements. These drainage
             investments improved infrastructure needed to prevent recurring floods. 369,477 beneficiaries
             (original target 40,000, revised to 151,000) were protected from seasonal flooding. Project
             design allowed flexibility and an ability to respond to unforeseen events (e.g., a public
             space/playground was created following a flood event in a flood prone area). 70 percent of
             beneficiaries agreed that there was no more flooding in their neighborhoods following the
             project interventions.
           o Transport. The bus station, along with the road investments, improved traffic (according to 87
             percent of respondents) and eased home-to-work travel (according to 84 percent of
             respondents). Mobility of residents improved in segments where major flooding issues in roads
             caused traffic disruption or detours (impeding people's access to markets, schools, and
             community facilities). 378,352 beneficiaries (original target 60,000, revised to 315,000) were
             provided access to all season roads. Drains constructed along some of these roads reduced
             localized flooding during the rainy season (369,477 beneficiaries (original target 40,000,
             revised to 151,000) were protected from seasonal flooding). Large quantity of debris (no data
             reported), especially in markets, were removed improving sanitation. Foreign exchange gains
             resulted in additional roads works.
           o Markets. The respondents to the beneficiary assessment estimated that work in markets
             contributed to an increase in: (i) market attendance (56.6 percent), (ii) sales volume (73.3
             percent), (iii) number of clients (70.5 percent), (iv) the emergence of new sales outlets (75.1
             percent), and (v) commercial exchanges between communities (67.2 percent).
           o Education. Improvements in pre-schools and primary schools increased school attendance
             (71 percent).
           o Tourism. Respondents to the beneficiary assessment estimated that this contributed to the
             increase in the number of tourists by 84 percent in one city and 40 percent in the other.
    Jobs were created in works that relied on manual labor. Incomes increased (no value reported).
     However, the project did not proactively attract women to participate in urban civil works as noted in
     the output above. Low female participation in the labor-intensive works was due to access to year-long
     economic opportunities (such as small-scale retail or catering activities) for women in urban areas
     unlike women in rural areas. These were more often profitable alternatives of income generation

                                                                                                Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



       and often perceived as less difficult and more attractive than labor-intensive public works programs. At
       closing, beneficiary assessment indicated that the original and revised target for the number of jobs
       created by the Delegated Contract Management (Maîtrise d'Ouvrage Déléguée or MOD)-supervised
       works were underestimated and those generated by works implemented by the participating cities
       after the MTR were not captured.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial because original and revised
targets for outcome indicators were exceeded. Beneficiary assessments at closing supported substantial
satisfaction with the completed works.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve urban management.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The results framework at appraisal (PAD, Annex 1) showed the causal chain to achieve
the PDO. These inputs - training and technical assistance of city/municipal and central government officials in
management and fiduciary and safeguards compliance - would result in outputs expressed as the number of
officials trained, cities with publicly-disclosed budgets, with budgets that allocated for operations and
maintenance (O&M), and with asset inventories conducted. Outcome indicators were the number of additional
operational Neighborhood Development Committees formed, additional cities disclosing annual budgets, and
growth rate of FADeC funds transferred to communes. Note that two of these outcome indicators were
outputs. These PDO outcome and intermediate outcome indicators were the same at appraisal and in the
TOC at closing except for changes introduced during restructuring. These changes included dropping one
outcome indicator because there were no inputs that would lead to the expected outcome (formation of
additional Neighborhood Development Committees); and three intermediate outcome indicators because
these were unclear or were existing functions. These were the number of cities (i) with staff basic training
package because the training package was undefined; (ii) with O&M targets because the targets were
unclear; and (iii) with markets with management systems because local governments already managed these
markets.

The TOC made two assumptions under this objective: (i) after the MTR, the remaining 8 cities would have
built their implementation capacities without MOD supervision, and (ii) procedures at the national level would
be amended to allow local implementation of their respective infrastructure investments as designed. These
assumptions were realized during implementation and led to achieving the PDO. The TOC was valid because
the results chain showed the causal link from project interventions (inputs) that led to outputs and were
sufficient to achieve the expected outcomes, as defined.

OUTPUTS:




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)




    Overall, all technical and social and environmental safeguards requirements were met by the selected
       cities and works were completed with MOD supervising the execution of 135 works and equipment
       and the 10 participating cities directly implementing 44 infrastructure works.
      All 10 participating cities, as targeted prepared and used a manual of administrative and financial
       management procedures; generated, disclosed, and discussed quarterly progress reports of their
       annual budgets beginning in 2019; completed and updated their annual asset inventory using
       equipment acquired under the project; and dedicated at least 15 percent of revenues to infrastructure
       maintenance in 2019 and 2020. Appropriate operations and maintenance arrangement were put in
       place to ensure the sustainability of investments after project closing.
      The central government and the cities agreed and implemented an intergovernmental financial
       transfer system (IFTS) formula, as targeted. Starting in 2017, the government publicly disclosed the
       IFTS formula to allocate FADeC resources on the CONAFIL website. 99.4 percent (original target 100
       percent) of the resources allocated to the performance-based tranche were disbursed through the
       FADeC earmarked window in 2020. This target was almost achieved because the final amount spent
       on public works contracts was lower than what was originally planned.
      Two independent city/municipal capacity assessments were carried out - one in 2017 and another at
       closing.
      The following tools were implemented to support decentralization reforms and improve local urban
       governance: (i) the Local Government Training Center (Centre de Formation pour l'Administration
       Locale – CeFAL) delivered 10 training modules; (ii) a manual on local administrative and financial
       procedures; (iii) two manuals on procurement procedures; (iv) evaluations of the public FM system
       according to the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) framework (at the level of the
       ten cities); (v) two handbooks on decentralization; and (vi) a guide on how to promote the local
       economy. The following new urban planning and management tools were also produced: (i) storm
       water management master plan studies for five cities; and (ii) urban mobility plans for five other cities.
      Capacity building activities at the central and local levels resulted in 58 (original target 12) central
       government officials trained in IFTS management and financial auditing of cities and municipalities, 68
       central government staff were trained including officials of the public deconcentrated services and two
       national inspection institutions (Inspection Générale des Affaires Administratives or IGAA and
       Inspection Générale des Finances or IGF), on topics related to inter-communality, administrative and
       financial oversight. Local staff in charge of accounting and FM and tax collectors (Receveurs
       Percepteurs) in all 77 municipalities of Benin received training on maintaining satisfactory
       bookkeeping. 297 local officials (original target 40) trained in fiduciary, safeguards, project
       management, and engineering services in local taxation by 2020. The ten participating cities received
       training in the maintenance of urban infrastructure and climate change and disaster risk management
       issues.

OUTCOMES:

    At project closing, all participating cities delivered all planned investments they directly implemented
     as designed, by accurately budgeting the infrastructure investments and overseeing procurement and
     implementation. All cities and municipalities were now legally required to disclose budgets and
     progress reports.
    All ten participating cities, as targeted, increased their infrastructure assets to improve service delivery
     in drainage, transport, education, achieving their respective development priorities. The average
     annual city investment executed from 2013-2019 ranged from US$0.48 million to US$7.2 million while


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



                                     project-financed investments over the project duration were equivalent to 6 times more (ICR, Annex
                                     6.6).
                                    An independent consultant carried out two municipal capacity assessments that
                                     showed improvements in the performance of municipalities in the areas of planning and budgeting,
                                     financial management, and revenue mobilization. Specifically, (i) planning and budgeting had a 12
                                     percentage point increase from 2017 to 2020 and FM and revenue mobilization had a 27 percentage
                                     point increase over the same period; (ii) performance levels in the areas of procurement and human
                                     resources and organization were found acceptable; (iii) secondary cities outperformed the three
                                     largest cities (Parakou, Porto Novo and Cotonou); (iv) difficulties in infrastructure operations and
                                     maintenance persisted. Porto Novo and Sèmè Podji showed lower scores in 2020 than in 2017,
                                     because of structural constraints, according to MOD staff interviews (ICR, footnote 19)
                                    IFTS now mainstreamed as evident in the use of FADeC to course project funds through this IFTS
                                     system in 2020. Sectoral ministries used IFTS to reinforce fiscal decentralization. Starting 2017, as
                                     targeted, the government publicly disclosed the IFTS formula to allocate FADeC resources on the
                                     CONAFIL website. To render the resource distribution process transparent and objective, the annual
                                     amounts allocated per city/municipality were adopted by ministerial orders (arrêtés) published on the
                                     website of the CONAFIL and Ministry of Economy and Finance.
                                    Materials on how to promote the local economy were distributed to all 77 cities and municipalities of
                                     Benin and served as a key reference in the training that is being provided by the CeFAL. These were
                                     produced in close collaboration with the cities and municipalities and other stakeholders and were
                                     validated at the technical level. The new urban planning and management tools would guide future
                                     investments in the national and local development plans.
                                    By way of comparison, only five out of the 67 municipalities that did not benefit from this project
                                     (PAURAD) allocated 15 percent of their resources to O&M (7.5 percent vs. 100 percent for the
                                     PAURAD cities). These were important results to help institute financial accountability that uses
                                     publicly accessible financial information as a mechanism beyond voting to hold the public services
                                     providers accountable. The ten beneficiary cities continued this practice in 2021. The rest of the 67
                                     municipalities in Benin also adopted this good practice.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial because target indicators were
                            achieved or exceeded. The ICR acknowledged that the institutional outcomes could have been further
                            strengthened in two aspects. First, a single system such as a unified national audit or performance
                            assessment could have been used to reinforce national decentralization efforts. Second, using the first
                            component to leverage activities from the two other components. For example, offering municipalities with
                            learning-by-doing opportunities (component 2) in small-scale works (component 1); or creating incentives
                            (component 3) by allocating local government grants (component 1) based on achieving a minimum score for
                            performance improvements (ICR, paragraph 30) (see also Section 12 Lessons below).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)




  Rationale
  Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives is rated Substantial because all target indicators
  were achieved or exceeded. The project interventions were not changed but at MTR the outcomes were
  clarified to better show the causal link between inputs and outputs. End target values were adjusted at
  restructuring to take advantage of changes in data collection methodology (see Section 9 Monitoring and
  Evaluation Design below), although some original targets values were not adjusted even as resources were
  added by foreign exchange gains. The project's overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, the PAD did not provide a detailed methodology for the
economic and financial analysis of the project (ICR, paragraph 37). Nevertheless, the PAD presented a cost
benefit analysis to justify the viability of both rehabilitation investments and institutional development of local
administration. The analysis used two (unexplained) discount rates- one at 12 percent for the economic analysis
related to flood prevention and adaptation; and the other at 5 percent for the financial analysis related to
institutional capacity building. The ex-ante economic analysis yielded an economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) of 31 percent and 11.24 in benefit cost ratio for flood protection. An ex-ante financial analysis for
institutional capacity building yielded a 10 percent EIRR and a 1.5 benefit cost ratio. The project components
remained viable even after a sensitivity analysis considered factors such as reducing to 2 days the number of
flood-days; reducing incremental land value by 5 percent; a 5 percent increase in city operating costs and a 2
percent decrease in revenues. No details were provided in the PAD.

At closing, no comparative methodology could be applied. No methods and assumptions used at appraisal were
available. COVID 19 prevented the conduct of onsite surveys to conduct ex-post economic analysis (ICR,
paragraph 37). The following alternative valuation methods were used: (i) hydro meteorological event risk
affecting health and activity; (ii) hydro meteorological event producing damages to public and private assets, (iii)
fee payment avoided to third party for tendering, (iv) economic multiplier effect due to labor income activities; (v)
improved livelihood associated with income generating activities; (vi) improved schooling - were used to
analyze the economic efficiency of the project. Several assumptions were identified including a 6 percent
discount rate the World Bank recommended for economic analysis (as opposed to the 12 percent discount rate
used ex ante). Benefits were derived from (i) prevented premature death; (ii) avoided damages and loss of
opportunities associated with reduced floods; (iii) improved project management; (iv) socio economic value
added from urban infrastructure and labor intensive works. Sensitivity analysis used 4, 6, and 12 percent
discount rates yielding positive project viability. The ex post EIRR was 20 percent and benefit cost ratio ranged
from 2.5 at 4 percent discount rate, 2.1 at 6 percent and 1.5 at 12 percent.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The design called for a two-step implementation process reflecting
lessons learned from similar World Bank operations in the sector; existing local capacity and to
leverage ongoing government programs such as PONADEC (see Section 8 Assessment of Bank Performance,
(a) Quality at Entry below). The project was restructured twice, one after the MTR to adopt the second step of
the implementation design and the second to extend completion in the face of the COVDI 19 pandemic. There

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



were notable implementation delays: (i) an 8- month delay in effectiveness of the credit after a procurement
complaint against MOD (AGETUR) to implement the first phase of the project; (ii) a 6- month hold on
disbursements while social safeguard compliance was addressed (see Section 10 Other Issues below); (iii) a
12-month delay after MTR recommended that the remaining period of implementation be handed over
by MOD to the participating cities. The two step approach proved beneficial. AGETUR was an experienced
MOD. Infrastructure outputs were delivered early on while local capacities were preparing to take over
implementation after the MTR (ICR, paragraph 49). Cities took over implementation in the last 18 months of the
project. Project was completed with a 6 month extension of the original closing date. The experience provided
the evidence that enhanced local capacities could deliver decentralized services. According to the ICR
(paragraph 38 and footnote 27), this transfer of service delivery from central to local authorities was achieved
without a perceived loss of central government power. Project management with the initial MOD fees did not
exceed 8 percent of the total project cost (ICR, paragraph 38 and Annex 3).

Overall, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                 20.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated High. Overall efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives
and efficiency are rated Substantial. As a result, the project outcome is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



     Government Commitment: The risk of the government's commitment to decentralization is rated
      low. The government is currently implementing its Government Action Plan for 2016-2021 (Le
      Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement or PAG) and drafting a new one for 2021-2026. Both these
      plans reinforce their commitment to decentralization focusing on the legal framework for
      intergovernmental transfers to build on the momentum from PAURAD activities. Local elections were
      held In May 2020, in the middle of the Covid 19 pandemic, indicating active citizen engagement.
      A stable fiscal environment would foster local government's’ ability to fulfill their assigned mandates
      and fortify Benin’s decentralization policies. The follow-on program - Benin Resilient and Inclusive
      Cities Program-for-Results (P176653) - would further mitigate this risk and target municipalities to
      strengthen its governance and financing for public infrastructure.
     Resource Mobilization: There is moderate to high risk in the capacity of target cities to
      mobilize resources to finance O&M, asset management, and capital investment planning. The local
      government's ability to mobilize resources was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic as it
      affected the national government's own ability to raise revenues. Mitigation may be offered by the
      follow-on program for results. .




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was simple. Objectives were stated in the tradition of a classic infrastructure service
  delivery and municipal capacity project. Design was informed by the country's urban development and
  decentralization priorities. The Bank's over two decades of prior operations in the country (see Section 3
  Relevance of Objectives, Prior Experience in the Country and Sector above) and this fourth urban sector
  project complemented the government's National Decentralization and Deconcentration Policy (Politique
  Nationale de Decentralisation et de Deconcentration or PONADEC). Design included the following
  lessons from these operations: (i) focus on a smaller number of reforms, in this case releasing funds to
  municipalities through a window of the existing intergovernmental transfer mechanism; (ii) more direct
  commitment at the local level (city/municipal and community priorities) that support decentralization, such
  as community involvement in generating commune development plans that identify priority investments;
  (iii) complete technical studies before effectiveness and establish follow-up of institutional components
  (PAD, paragraph 35). The PMU, familiar with Bank-financed projects, acquired sufficient capacity to
  support the two step implementation approach. In the first step, a Delegated Contract Management
  ((Maîtrise d'Ouvrage Déléguée or MOD) would first implement the project while building capacity of the
  cities. In the second step, MOD would turn over to the cities to complete sub-project implementation. This
  approach, together with the strategy of working out the challenges of the IFTS as the project was
  implemented and the availability of completed technical studies (ICR, paragraph 45) marked readiness to
  implement the project.

  The ten target beneficiary cities ensured geographic spread (ICR, paragraph 44). At appraisal, baseline
  data were collected from participating cities on revenues and infrastructure (ICR, paragraph 44) but not
  baseline data for institutional assessment that could have informed how the three simultaneously
  implemented components could better institutionalize a decentralized service delivery (ICR, paragraph
  44). The Bank team conducted fiduciary, policy and institutional, implementation, M&E arrangements, risk
  assessment. Mitigation measures addressed the unfamiliarity by the 10 municipalities with World Bank

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



  implementation procedures. Among these were having an MOD in place and hiring an M&E specialist as
  key PMU staff (ICR, paragraph 46).

  Overall, the Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The ICR (paragraph 67) notes that, in terms
  of readiness, safeguards and accompanying arrangements fell behind, and the targets set at appraisal
  could have been more ambitious if a baseline study complemented the experience of the preceding
  Second Decentralized City Management Project (Project de gestion urbaine decentralisee or PGUD II)
  experience.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 15 supervision missions over the 7-year implementation period. There were
 three task team leaders during preparation and implementation of the project with some transition overlap.
 No disruption in continuity was reported, although initial missions were conducted in an irregular manner;
 clearances of Procurement Plans, No-Objections to terms of reference and project documents submitted in
 bulk were delayed; and composition of the team handicapped by overstretched and understaffed fiduciary
 and safeguards experts (ICR, paragraph 69).

 Proactive measures were undertaken in response to safeguards non-compliance
 by suspending disbursements for a period while the implementing entity adopted corrective measures (see
 Section 10 Other Issues below). Separate Financial Management (FM) missions supplemented staff
 constraints to maintain low FM risks. Procurement shortcomings during implementation were addressed by
 closer monitoring by the World Bank team and training. Until September 2017, there was a high turnover in
 the Bank's social safeguards staff and consultants. Frequent social safeguard missions were conducted
 outside of the project missions. These factors resulted in institutional memory gaps and
 diminished attention to social safeguards issues (see Section 10 Other Issues below). Monitoring
 compliance of social safeguards improved after staff was hired. After the MTR discovered shortcomings in
 the parallel simultaneous implementation of the project components, restructuring introduced features to
 better integrate the activities under Components B (municipal management) and C (institutional
 strengthening) to reinforce Component A (infrastructure investments). The MTR also strengthened
 definition of indicators in the results framework. The output targets remained unchanged even when
 investments were added due to foreign exchange gains.

 Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to delays and issues in the
 implementation of fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the operation.

 Overall, the quality of Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory based on the same ratings for the
 quality at Entry and at Supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design was reflected in the project’s results framework, which established a causal link between
 17 intermediate and 7 PDO outcome indicators. Inputs were based on the three project components. Some
 indicators, however, would have benefited from a better description or defined activities to support target
 outcomes. For example, there was no activity that would lead to ‘the formation of additional operational
 neighborhood development committees' as an output. This was later dropped at restructuring.

 Original target values, set at appraisal, were modest (ICR, paragraph 56). However, M&E design was
 improved during implementation by addressing these conservative targets. Data collection methods were
 revised from extrapolating from the 2013 census to conducting surveys. At the Mid Term Review (MTR),
 targets increased to more realistic values to capture the change in data collection methodology,
 acknowledge the influx of new migrants attracted by the project, and implementation progress. Project
 baselines and data sources were identified. Some, however, were not differentiated from the general
 decentralization efforts of the government. As a result, institutional outcomes could not be solely attributed
 to those generated by the project. The design of the M&E framework did not include the impact of
 intermittent ministerial orders to the formula used for the intergovernmental transfer in allocating funds to
 cities and municipalities. The results framework had limited gender specific indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was implemented by the Technical Secretariat (TS) in the Ministry of Environment, Housing and
  Urban Development (MEHU) as designed. An M&E Specialist was hired. Independent capacity
  assessment, works supervision reports, and other data were communicated to the TS and consolidated
  into the regular project monitoring report and reviewed by the Inter-ministerial Steering Committee (ISC).

  Data collection methods were refined during M&E implementation. Target indicators were increased at
  restructuring to accommodate the change in data collection methods and to acknowledge completed sub-
  projects by the time of the MTR. Two city/municipal capacity assessments were carried
  out. These provided details on the impact from improvements in urban services and management
  introduced by the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data informed project management, the ISRs, and the Mid Term Review (MTR). M&E data
  informed the restructuring to allocate resources for direct implementation by the participating cities.
  At closing, M&E data informed the dissemination of results through print media and videos. The project



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



  also used the beneficiary assessments at closing to capture some evidence of impact that supplemented
  the inadequately defined outcome indicators (ICR, Annex 6).

  On balance, the quality of M&E is rated Substantial. Design was improved by more realistic targets to
  accommodate change in methods for obtaining beneficiary data, the influx of new urban migrants to the
  target municipalities, and implementation progress achieved so far. Implementation captured the
  improvements achieved in urban services through two capacity assessments. Utilization also showed
  how M&E data informed project progress and the outcome of the project through multimedia
  dissemination. Beneficiary assessment at closing strengthened the justification for achieving outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project received an environmental category "B" because no activity was expected to have
   significant negative environmental or social impacts. The project triggered three safeguard policies:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP4.12). The project sites were not known at preparation, an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared. These
   instruments were complemented by other instruments such as actionable notes in aide memoires.

   There were some social safeguards compliance issues in specific resettlement plans, but these were
   resolved before the project closed. For example, in implementing the Resettlement Action Plan, insufficient
   communication with the Project Affected Peoples (PAPs) was noted. Also, a not fully completed RAP was
   under implementation; PAPs were not fully compensated before the start of civil works as planned. A 6-
   month hold on disbursement was made for a social safeguards audit and corrective measures to be
   carried out. The PMU safeguards specialist left in 2018 and was replaced by four city social and
   environmental safeguards officers. At closing, the ICR indicated overall compliance with the social
   safeguards (ICR, paragraph 62) but did not specify the implementation of Physical Cultural Resources
   safeguards.

   Environmental safeguards compliance also noted implementation issues. These included (i) failure to
   provide environmental control offices with an outline for the environmental monitoring report of the works to
   be completed; (ii) lack of environmental monitoring and social implementation of ESMPs by the National
   Environment Agency (Agence Béninoise de l’Environnement); and (iii) MOD failed to send to the
   PMU ESMF-compliant report for completed works (ICR, paragraph 63). At closing, the ICR reported
   compliance with environmental and social safeguards as moderately satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 61).




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



   Financial Management (FM). FM arrangements during project implementation were reported to be
   satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 65). All the interim financial reports were submitted on time and were of
   acceptable quality to the World Bank. External auditors issued unqualified opinions on annual financial
   statements. Audit recommendations were implemented.

   Procurement. The project complied with the World Bank’s Procurement guidelines (ICR, paragraph 64).
   Procurement staff in the PMU and MOD attended an Africa Region World Bank procurement training in
   May 2018. The project employed the World Bank's Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
   (STEP) in implementing the Procurement Plan. However, project documents showed some issues such as:
   (i) similarities in offers for some civil works tender; (ii) bias in method used to evaluate 'Consultant's
   Qualification'; (iii) single, rather than the required two signatures on contracts; (iv) the frequent use of lump-
   sum contracts; and (v) delays in procurement. Securing World Bank's No-Objections were delayed by
   the bulk submission of Terms of Reference and project documents (see Section 8 Assessment of Bank
   Performance, (b) Quality of Supervision above).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

Following are three of the five lessons offered in the ICR, with minor additions from IEG (ICR,
paragraphs 74-78).

      Customized capacity development interventions may best enhance readiness by cities
         to implement decentralization reform. In this project, the two-step implementation
         arrangement allowed the delivery of needed infrastructure while capacities in delivering
         decentralized services at both the city and central levels were bolstered. This approach also
         showcased how increased autonomy of cities and municipalities to execute investments that
         deliver services to their constituents. At closing, beneficiary cities showed improvements in
         urban management performance and delivered investments in a timely manner. Two

                                                                                                       Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)



         city/municipal capacity assessments identified where longer-term reforms and support were
         needed:(i) in local asset management, and (ii) local resource mobilization. Areas of future
         local capacity development support may include (i) interventions using this
         project's experiences; (ii) allow cities or municipalities to plan and implement civil works
         after their capacities improve; and (iii) consider changing needs of the recipients, such as city
         or municipality size/tier of government/geographic situation etc.
        Using an existing window for intergovernmental transfers may provide a central entity
         with the incentive to make the system work effectively. In this project, funds were
         coursed through an earmarked window of FADeC. The sectoral ministry test ran its fiscal
         transfer system (FADeC) and provided a level of ownership for the project to work, rather
         than establishing a standalone mechanism. FADeC was an important vehicle for sectoral
         ministries to transfer earmarked funds to cities and municipalities in accordance with locally
         determined priorities while maintaining an oversight role. Optimal use of the FADeC by line
         ministries may include further incentives and support such as improving the predictability of
         transfers, regular notification by the central government to cities and municipalities on their
         allocations, and creating a more systematic transfer of responsibility of decentralized
         services to cities and municipalities.
        A multidimensional approach may be useful to encourage women participation in
         labor intensive public works. In this project more proactive measures
         may encourage women to participate in labor intensive, civil works e.g., road
         construction/rehabilitation, and street cleaning. Measures may include working with
         contractors to: (i) use flexible task-based payment to attract women to worksites; (ii)
         reach out to women’s groups, since working in groups fosters safety and help overcome
         perceived danger; (iii) provide childcare facilities and allow flexible working hours; (iv)
         sensitize employees and subcontractors on gender-based violence codes of conduct; (v)
         set a quota, where possible, for minimum participation by female workers.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and provides a clear picture of the project design and implementation. It is outcome -
oriented, and follows the guidelines. The overall quality of evidence and analysis is satisfactory. The ICR is
candid, in particular, in reporting on the Bank performance, and provides a good explanation behind the target
setting revisions. The annexes are very helpful, especially the cost comparison, by component (Annex 3),
showing foreign exchange gains that led to exceeding the original targets for roads and drainage investments.
Annex 4 details an economic analysis of the sub-projects using various methods to justify efficiency at closing,
acknowledging that a comparison with the ex-ante economic efficiency method could not be made.
The recipient assessment (Annex 5) adds specifics, and a detailed beneficiary satisfaction with components by
city (Annex 6) supports the project outcomes. Lessons are informed by the project experience and useful for
similar operations in the sector.



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BJ-Cities Support Project (P122950)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   High




                                                                     Page 18 of 18
