     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022665

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145618                                     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mexico                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-19403                                    31-Dec-2019                                            13,399,083.07

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Mar-2015                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             16,880,734.00                                     16,880,734.00

 Revised Commitment                              13,399,083.07                                     13,399,083.07

 Actual                                          13,399,083.07                                     13,399,083.07




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Fernando Manibog              Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Global Environment Facility (GEF) Grant Agreement (p.6) dated May 8, 2015 and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, p.5), the project objectives are “to improve the institutional capacity of advanced
   clean energy technology institutions (both public and private) in the territory of the Recipient, and to foster the
   commercialization of advanced clean energy technologies by providing financial incentives to the private
   sector, which together are expected to lead to GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions reductions in the future.” The
   “Recipient” is defined as the United Mexican States—the official name of Mexico.


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Aug-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the grant agreement (p.6) the project consisted of three components:

   A. Regional Needs Assessments. (Appraisal cost: US$94.58 million; actual cost: US$2.27 million)

   This component was to provide technical assistance to carry out Regional Needs Assessments (RNAs) to
   evaluate the capacity of academic and research institutions, private enterprises, and public entities in
   Mexico to develop and commercialize advanced clean energy (ACE) technologies. The key outputs of
   RNAs were to be a set of Clean Energy Regional Investment Plans (CERIPs) that would identify the
   investments and strategic actions to strengthen human capital in science and technology and
   entrepreneurial disciplines critical to the commercialization of ACE technologies. The Secretariat of Energy
   (Secretaría de Energía – SENER) was to provide US$90.00 million, through the public Sustainable Energy
   Fund (FSE – Fondo Sectorial CONACYT-SENER de Sustentabilidad Energética) to finance the follow-up
   investments identified in the CERIPs, but this financing did not materialize; hence, the actual component
   cost was much lower than the cost estimated at appraisal.

   B. Incentives to the Private Sector for the Commercialization of Advanced Clean Energy
   Technologies. (Appraisal cost: US13.35 million; actual cost: US$11.93 million)

   This component was to provide subgrants, through calls for proposals, to eligible beneficiaries to carry out
   advanced energy activities, which consisted of proof-of-concept or prototype development activities and/or
   collaborative clean energy commercialization (CCEC) activities targeting industry-academia collaboration
   for ACE technologies. It was also to provide technical assistance to eligible beneficiaries to incentivize the
   commercialization of ACE technologies supported under this component, such as business plans,
   intellectual property protection and monetization, marketing strategies, access to finance, and safeguards.

   C. Project Management. (Appraisal cost: US$2.80 million; actual cost: US$3.04 million)

   This component was to support project implementation unit within SENER in project coordination and
   management.

   Revised Components


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



  In the second project restructuring in August 2018, the implementation of CERIPs was dropped from the
  project scope that corresponded to US$90.00 million funding by SENER under the first component (see the
  entry for Second Restructuring in the following section).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$110.73 million. On December 31, 2020,
  the project closed with a total cost of US$17.24 million. The actual project cost was lower than the project
  cost estimated at appraisal because of the cancellation of the implementation of CERIPs that corresponded
  to US$90.00 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the GEF grant was estimated at US$16.88 million. The project disbursed
  US$13.40 million. Private firms were expected to contribute US$1.85 million under the second component
  to match grants. The ICR does not report the actual contribution of private sector enterprises. The grant
  beneficiaries were expected to contribute 15 percent of the cost of the subprojects. Since the total cost of
  the 15 subprojects financed under the project was US$12.35 million, the private firms’ contribution is
  estimated to have been around US$1.85 million.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$92.00 million. Out
  of this amount, US$90.00 million did not materialize because of the cancellation of the implementation of
  CERIPs. The borrower contributed US$2.00 million under Component 3, Project Management.

  Restructurings: There were three project restructurings:

        First Restructuring (Level 2 – July 26, 2017): The definition of the eligible beneficiaries was
         revised to include research centers and higher education centers, in addition to private sector
         enterprises, which were already included in the Project Operation Manual and the call for proposals
         for the first round of subgrants under the second component. In this restructuring, the Banco
         Nacional de Obras y Servicios Públicos (BANOBRAS) was removed as a signatory of subgrant
         agreements with the beneficiaries, because BANOBRAS executed payments to beneficiaries as
         instructed by SENER, and the bank’s signature was not required in the subgrant agreements.
        Second Restructuring (Level 2 – August 30, 2018): At this restructuring, the results framework
         was substantially revised. The definitions of two indicators, out of three that were classified as
         project development objective indicators, were modified as follows: (i) first indicator was revised from
         “CERIPs designed and initiated” to “CERIPs published” because SENER could not obtain the
         endorsement of the 32 autonomous states that were to implement the CERIPs; and (ii) the second
         from “Private Capital Mobilized” to “Capital Mobilized for Government programs or initiatives aimed
         at fostering clean energy innovation (public and private)” because the FSE’s eligibility criteria could
         not be revised to include private firms for ACE projects, and it was recognized that “it would be
         harder than anticipated to mobilize capital, in addition to GEF funds, for ACE technologies
         implemented by private enterprises” (ICR, p.11); hence, capital mobilized from public sources was
         included to the definition. In accordance with these modifications, definitions of some intermediate
         indicators were modified or some were deleted because they were not relevant any more: (a) The
         indicator “Number of investment opportunities identified in Component 1 that receive funding through
         FSE” was modified to “Number of high-relevance investment opportunities identified in Component 1
         that could be potentially supported by national and/or international sources of financing;” (b) the
         indicator “Number of patents for ACE technologies” was modified as “Number of patents or other

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



          industrial/intellectual property schemes for ACE technologies;” and (c) the indicators “Number of
          ACE program recipients identified from Component 1,” “Number of CCEC grants awarded,” and
          “Number of prototypes completed” were deleted. Lastly, six new indicators were added to monitor
          the achievements of outputs under the second component and because of corporate requirements:
          (1) Web-based platform developed; (2) Number of incentives awarded, with at least 40% of them
          under the CCEC category with a target value of 15; (3) Number of commercialization plans
          developed with a target value of 15; (4) Jobs created by the ACE program beneficiaries with a target
          value of 15; (5) Number of safeguards follow-up plans developed and in place with a target value of
          15; and (6) Registered grievances satisfactorily resolved in line with the Grievance Redress
          Mechanism (GRM) with a target value of 100 percent.
         Third Restructuring (Level 2 – November 20, 2019): The project closing date was extended by
          12 months from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020 to allow time for the completion of the
          ex-post analysis of the RNAs and CERIPs that was delayed because of slow procurement, and the
          completion of the sub-projects awarded under the second component in the third round of calls in
          2018. Funds were also reallocated among expenditure categories to allow the project
          implementation unit to operate during the extended 12 months of project implementation using the
          additional funds that resulted from the depreciation of the Mexican peso against the US dollar, and
          the savings incurred because of competitive procurement processes under the first component.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 6, 2015 and the signing of the grant agreement by various
   parties on different dates was completed on May 8, 2015. The project became effective on September 21,
   2015. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in March 2018. The original closing date was December 31,
   2019. It was extended by 12 months, and the project closed on December 31, 2020. The reasons for
   closing date extension have been outlined in the third project restructuring entry above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were substantially relevant to the country context. Mexico is the 12th largest emitter
of greenhouse gases in the world and 8th among countries most at risk to the impacts of climate change. In
2016, the Government of Mexico announced the National Climate Change Strategy (p.18) with the objective
“to face the effects of climate change and transition to a competitive, sustainable, and low-carbon emission
economy.” The government is also committed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 22 percent in 2030.
However, limited funds and incentives, and insufficient capacity to develop advanced clean energy (ACE)
technologies are among the barriers to the achievement of the government’s goals. Therefore, the
objectives were appropriately pitched for the development status and capacity in the country, and were also
outcome-oriented, but the constraints in the operational context were to be expected to adversely affect the
achievement of the project objectives, such as the 32 states having the authority to implement the Clean
Energy Regional Investment Plans (CERIPs), which was outside of the project’s control, and political
decisions needed for the inclusion of private entities as eligible beneficiaries from FSE funds to implement
ACE projects.

The project objectives were aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for the United Mexican States, FY2020-25. The project sought to address the
development problem of insufficient capacity to develop and commercialize advanced clean energy (ACE)

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



               technologies and contribute to the achievement of competitive, sustainable, and low-carbon economy and
               climate change mitigation goals of the country. The project was to achieve this by supporting a nationwide
               needs and capacity assessment and piloting a grant program to facilitate private sector involvement and
               academia-industry collaboration in ACE technologies development and commercialization. The project
               objectives correspond to the CPF’s Objective 7 “Support the Government in reaching its climate change
               goals” under the third focus area of “Enabling sustainable infrastructure and climate action.”

               Before this project, the World Bank had already become an important development partner of Mexico in
               climate change mitigation. The World Bank began implementing the GEF-financed Methane Gas Capture
               and Use at a Landfill Demonstration Project in 2001. Since then, the World Bank provided funds to Mexico
               for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects and loans for low-carbon and climate change
               development policies. The project was designed based on the experience gained and lessons learned
               during the implementation of previous projects. The project objectives were adequately challenging but
               overly ambitious in the expectation that the CERIPs—the key outputs of the project that would contribute to
               the improvement of the institutional capacity of public and private advanced clean energy technology
               institutions and the commercialization of ACE projects—could be fully concretized during project
               implementation.

               Overall, the relevance of the project objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the institutional capacity of ACE technology institutions (both public and private) in the territory of
                             the recipient.

                             Rationale


                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., GEF grants, were to be used to finance
                             consultancy services to conduct Regional Needs Assessments (RNAs) as follows: (a) surveying and mapping
                             the resources and capacities of Mexican universities, research institutions, and clean energy enterprises; (b)
                             identifying the ACE technology needs of enterprises in strategic sectors; (c) identifying each region’s
                             comparative advantage in science and technology sectors and the clean energy value chain; (d) reviewing
                             the capacities of subnational government entities to implement sound policy and regulation conducive to the
                             dissemination of clean energy technologies; (e) assessing existing regional and national financing sources;

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



and (f) assessing financial, regulatory, and policy barriers. The key outputs of these RNAs were to be Clean
Energy Regional Investment Plans (CERIPs) for each autonomous state, which were to identify the
investments and strategic actions with strong potential over the medium term to boost human capital in
science and technology and entrepreneurial disciplines critical to commercialize ACE technologies. These
investments and strategic actions were to consist of curriculum changes, creation of new incentives, policy
reforms, establishment of chairs in universities in relevant scientific field, support for center of excellence for
specific clean energy technologies, joint research initiatives with industry, and purchase of scientific
equipment for laboratory upgrades. The CERIPs were to identify ACE investments, advanced research
activities, and other initiatives that could be undertaken by FSE to reduce GHG emissions and create a
potential pipeline of projects to be financed under the ACE program of the project. Through FSE, SENER was
to finance the programs and projects identified in the CERIPs during project implementation. The outcome
expected from the implementation of these programs and projects and technical assistance to be given to the
firms under the ACE program of the project was improved capacity and means of public and private
stakeholders to identify, develop, and commercialize ACE technologies. Overall, the causal pathways from
inputs to expected results were valid and direct, and the results achieved could be attributed to the project’s
intervention, but there were gaps in the theory change. First, it was assumed that the 32 autonomous states
would have a strong ownership of the CERIPs and be willing to implement them. Second, it was assumed
that the FSE would be reformed, so that its funds could be used to finance private sector projects identified in
CERIPs. These were overly optimistic assumptions.

Outputs

      The project financed consultancy services, and 10 RNAs were prepared as planned.
      Based on the findings of the RNAs, 32 CERIPs were prepared, one for each autonomous state,
       defining the specific areas of investment for SENER and the federal government, local and state
       governments, and other investors in ACE technologies. The RNAs and CERIPs can be found on
       SENER’s web-based Clean Energy Innovation Observatory (https://oel.energia.gob.mex)
      Of the 847 investment projects included in the CERIPs, 94 were identified as high relevance
       investment opportunities. Original target was 32 investment opportunities that would receive funding
       through the FSE.
      A total of 55 firms received technical assistance through information workshops organized by SENER.
       The target was 15 firms.
      An analysis of the RNAs and CERIPs was to be conducted after their implementation. This analysis
       could not be conducted because of delays in procurement and ineligibility of offers.

Outcomes

      CERIPs designed and initiated: This indicator was defined as “the number of CERIPs that are
       prepared and implemented in Mexico” as a result of the project (PAD, p.18). The CERIPs were to be
       implemented by each state, during project implementation, with funding from the FSE to finance the
       programs and projects identified in these plans. However, SENER could not obtain the endorsement
       of the states to implement the CERIPs. As a result, none of the 94 programs or projects that were
       identified in the CERIPs received funds from the FSE. Because CERIPs were not implemented, the
       outcomes expected from projects identified in CERIPs to improve the institutional capacity of ACE
       technology institutions were not achieved.
      The ex-post analysis of the RNAs and CERIPs could not be conducted. Therefore, the information
       expected from this analysis did not materialize: (i) an assessment of the relative performance of states

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



       and other entities in implementation of CERIPs; (ii) an assessment of the amount of other resources
       (private, local government, and other federal agencies) leveraged by the project; and (iii) a detailed
       accounting of the number of initiatives and subprojects identified for support by the ACE program and
       the FSE that applied for and/or received support.
      The ICR (p.15) states that the technical capacity of the 55 firms that received technical assistance
       support under the project to develop ACE technologies was strengthened, and the “strengthened
       capacity was demonstrated in the quality of the beneficiaries’ final reports and associated
       presentations to SENER and the World Bank team.” The ICR (p.15) also states that the Collaborative
       Clean Energy Commercialization (CCEC) scheme implemented under the second component
       facilitated efficient collaboration between private firms and academic institutions, which maximized the
       comparative advantage of the partners. The evidence is insufficient to validate these assertions.

The project was successful in conducting the RNAs and preparing the CERIPS, but the outcomes expected
from the implementation of project and programs identified in the CERIPs could not be achieved. Therefore,
the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to improve the institutional capacity of ACE technology
institutions (both public and private) is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the institutional capacity of ACE technology institutions (both public and private) in the territory of
the recipient (with amended indicators).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1 Revision 1

At the second restructuring, the implementation of CERIPs was dropped from the project scope. The project’s
revised theory of change for Objective 1 indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., GEF grants, were to be used
to finance consultancy services to conduct Regional Needs Assessments and the preparation of the CERIPs,
which was identical to the theory of change before restructuring (see Theory of Change for Objective 1
above). However, exclusion of the implementation of CERIPs from project scope created a significant gap in
the result chain linking the preparation of the CERIPs to the achievement of the project objective to improve
the institutional capacity of public and private ACE technology institutions. The project output, i.e., CERIPs,
could not be expected to lead to any outcome, because they were not to be implemented during project
implementation, and there were no arrangements made for their implementation after project closure. Overall,
the causal pathways from inputs to expected results were not valid, nor direct, and the results achieved could
not be attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs

Please see output under Objective 1 above.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



Outcomes

      CERIPs published: The definition of this indicator was revised at the second project restructuring as
       the number of CERIPs that are prepared as a result of the project. CERIPs were the main outputs of
       the project. Therefore, this indicator captures the output of the project, not the outcome.
      As explained under Objective 1, the ICR (p.15) states that the technical capacity of the 55 firms that
       received technical assistance support under the project to develop ACE technologies was
       strengthened, and the CCEC scheme implemented under the second component facilitated efficient
       collaboration between private firms and academic institutions. The evidence is insufficient to validate
       these assertions.

The project was successful in preparing the RNAs and CERIPS—the project outputs—but these outputs did
not lead to any outcome. Therefore, the project’s efficacy after the restructuring in achieving the project
objective to improve the institutional capacity of ACE technology institutions (both public and private) is rated
Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To foster the commercialization of ACE technologies by providing financial incentives to the private sector.

Rationale


Theory of Change for Objective 2

The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., GEF funds, were to be used to provide
grants through a competitive financing program (ACE program) and technical assistance to private firms for
the development and commercialization of innovative ACE technologies. This was a pilot approach that was
to give a leading role to private sectors, and, if successful, it would have been expected to increase SENER’s
support for private sector led initiatives in ACE technologies. The ACE program was to finance two kinds of
projects with technical assistance to the winning proposals: (a) Proof-of-concept or prototype projects aiming
to help stimulate entrepreneurship and to incentivize researchers to incorporate and take risks for stimulating
innovation and technology transfer; and (b) collaborative clean energy commercialization (CCEC)
projects aiming to provide an incentive to stimulate academia-industry collaboration in ACE technologies. The
expected output was the implementation of 12 ACE prototype development subprojects and 12 CCEC
subprojects. The implementation of these subprojects was expected to lead to the development of
commercialization plans and patent applications for ACE technologies by the subproject grantees as
intermediary outcomes. The successful implementation of the ACE program and the subprojects would have
been expected to have a demonstration effect and facilitate the mobilization of private capital to supplement
the GEF grant and SENER’s support to private sector-led initiatives. The outcome would be the scaling-up of
the commercialization of ACE technologies that, together with the improvement of institutional capacity in the
development of ACE technologies, would have been expected to positively affect the competitiveness of the

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



industrial and commercial sector in Mexico while mitigating the climate change risk through reduced GHG
emissions. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to expected results were valid and direct, and the results
achieved could be attributed to the project’s intervention, but the assumptions on which the theory of change
was built were overly optimistic, such as adequate collaboration between academia and industry, sufficient
private sector interest in the ACE program, adequate subproject implementation capacity by private firms, and
availability of additional private and public funds to support the GEF grants in scaling up the ACE program.

Outputs

      Number of prototypes completed: This indicator was to count the number of prototypes produced
         among winning grant recipients, and the target was 12. At project closing, only six subprojects were
         awarded grants for prototype development, but none of the prototypes were completed at project
         closing.
        Number of CCEC grants awarded: Nine subprojects were awarded grants for CCEC. The original
         target was 12.
        Number of patents for ACE technologies: The number of patents that were produced from ACE
         program applicants was three. The original target was also three. Six more patent applications were
         pending approval at project closing.
        Number of ACE Program recipients identified from Component 1: The target was six, but none
         was identified, because of the delayed completion of CERIPs.
        Number of recipients of technical assistance: Fifty-five firms (15 grant recipients and 40 firms that
         were shortlisted for grants) received technical assistance support. The original target was 24.

Outcomes

      Private capital mobilized: As a result of the demonstration effect of the project activities in
       supporting the commercialization of ACE technologies by private firms, it was estimated that US$6.00
       million would be mobilized to sustain the ACE program beyond project closing to support the
       development and commercialization of ACE technologies. Such private capital mobilization did not
       materialize.
      The ICR (pp.17-18) states that five subprojects (one prototype and four CCECs) out of 15 (six
       prototypes and nine CCECs) that were supported by the project were identified as project with good
       commercialization prospects. This result was not captured by the results framework; hence, there was
       no target set.

The project was partially successful in supporting subprojects at the proof-of-concept or prototype stage and
CECC through grants and technical assistance, and one third of the subprojects were identified as having
good prospects for commercialization. However, the project was not successful in mobilizing private funds to
ensure the sustainability of the ACE Program beyond project closure. The evidence is insufficient that the
project’s intervention will have an impact on fostering the commercialization of ACE technologies in Mexico.

On the other hand, the project piloted a new approach to support the commercialization of ACE technologies.
In other words, the project tested a new approach on a small scale, and the results of the test was to inform
the decision of whether to implement the new approach on a larger scale or not. For such a decision to be
made in a pilot project, the project should rigorously monitor and evaluate the approach it was testing,
produce information, and distill lessons. Although the approach being tested did not yield positive outcomes,
a project could be successful in achieving its goal by implementing a pilot approach that would help decision

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



makers to make informed decisions. However, the evidence is insufficient that this project produced such
information and distilled lessons based on rigorous monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to inform a decision to
implement the ACE Program on a larger scale or cancel its implementation. The M&E system did not produce
sufficient information to assess the success or the shortcomings of the ACE program.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to foster the commercialization of ACE
technologies by providing financial incentives to the private sector is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To foster the commercialization of ACE technologies by providing financial incentives to the private sector
(with amended indicators).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2 Revision 1

At the second project restructuring the target values of some indicators were revised downward, some
indicators were deleted, and additional ones were introduced (see the entry for Second Restructuring in
section 2.e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates above). These changes
did not have an impact on the theory of change for Objective 2 (see the discussion of the theory of change for
Objective 2 above).

Outputs

      Number of incentives awarded, with at least 40 percent of them under the CECC category: A
       total of 15 subprojects (six prototypes and nine CCECs) were awarded grants under the ACE
       Program. Against the target of 15. The share of CECCs was 60 percent above the target of 40
       percent.
      Number of Commercialization Plans developed: All 15 beneficiaries of ACE Program grants
       developed commercialization plans for their subprojects against the target of 15, but the ICR (p.37)
       states that “the depth of the commercialization plans vary greatly.”
      Number of patents or other industrial/intellectual property schemes for ACE technologies: The
       number of patents that were produced from ACE program applicants was three. The original target
       was also three. Six more patent applications were pending approval at project closing.
      Number of recipients of technical assistance: This indicator was not revised. Fifty-five firms (15
       grant recipients and 40 firms that were shortlisted for grants) received technical assistance support.
       The target was 24.

Outcomes




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)




      Capital mobilized for government programs or initiatives aimed at fostering clean energy
       innovation (public and private): The project could not mobilize any private capital. The ICR (p.31)
       states that FSE provided US$18.93 million for projects implemented by public entities, and Fondo
       Sectorial de Innovación Tecnológica (FIT – a public fund) provided US$1.25 million to the ACE
       projects of small and medium-sized private enterprises, but the mobilization of these funds could not
       be attributed to the project activities.
      The ICR (pp.17-18) states that five subprojects (one prototype and four CCECs) out of 15 (six
       prototypes and nine CCECs) that were supported by the project were identified as having good
       commercialization prospects. This result was not captured by the results framework; hence, there was
       no target set.

After the revision of the project’s results framework at the second project restructuring, the project’s efficacy in
achieving the project objective to foster the commercialization of ACE technologies by providing financial
incentives to the private sector is rated Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
The project’s “Global Environment Objective” was to reduce GHG emissions in the future as a result of the
project’s intervention in institutional capacity building and commercialization of ACE technologies.

Rationale
Rationale

For the theory of change, please see Objective 2. For the project outputs and outcomes, please see the
relevant sections in Objective 1 and 2, and their revised versions above.

The five subprojects supported under the ACE program with good commercialization prospects are expected
to generate 4.2 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) of reductions in GHG emissions. The target
set at appraisal was 2.4 million tCO2e. However, the commercialization of these subprojects depends on the
beneficiaries’ mobilization of additional financing for the investments required to develop their business plans,
securing their target market, and establishing business alliances (ICR, p.28). Therefore, given the possibility
that some of these subprojects might be commercialized as planned, the actual GHG emissions reduction
could be lower than the expectations. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving GHG emissions reduction in
the future is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives to improve the institutional capacity of ACE
                            technology institutions (public and private) and to foster the commercialization of ACE technologies by
                            providing financial incentives to the private sector was both rated Modest. The project is expected to achieve
                            the target set for future GHG emissions reduction, assuming that all five subprojects with high
                            commercialization prospects will be successfully implemented, but it is likely that not all subprojects would be
                            commercialized and the future GHG emissions reduction would be lower than expectations. Overall, the
                            project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Following the second project restructuring, the project scope shrank, and the results framework was revised.
                            The project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives to improve the institutional capacity of ACE
                            technology institutions (public and private) and to foster the commercialization of ACE technologies by
                            providing financial incentives to the private sector was both rated Modest. The project is expected to achieve
                            the target set for future GHG emissions reduction, assuming that all five subprojects with high
                            commercialization prospects will be successfully implemented, but it is likely that not all subprojects would be
                            commercialized and the future GHG emissions reduction would be lower than expectations. The project’s
                            overall efficacy in achieving the project objectives after the restructuring is also rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, the economic impact of the project’s intervention in improving the institutional capacity for the
   development of ACE technologies was expected to be positive (PAD, p12), given that the economic rate of
   return to public investment in research and development capacity in countries such as Mexico was estimated at
   55 percent. The project would support the first nationwide assessment of capacities to develop and
   commercialize ACE technologies (i.e., Regional Needs Assessments-RNAs), and based on these assessments
   and the Clean Energy Regional Investment Plans (CERIPs) to be prepared, SENER (through FSE) would
   support investments in human and institutional capacity building by providing US$90.00 million during project
   implementation. Since CERIPs could not be implemented, SENER could not finance investments in human and
   institutional capacity building. The benefits expected from institutional capacity building did not materialize as
   expected.



                                                                                                                              Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



To assess the economic impact of the ACE program of the project, an economic analysis was conducted at
appraisal based on the reduction in GHG emissions as a result of the renewable energy or energy efficiency
subprojects to be supported by the project. It was assumed that for a US$10.5 million investment in the ACE
program by the project, there would be a US$60.38 million worth of private investments (US$24.15 million for
renewable energy and US$36.23 million for energy efficiency) and the success rate would be 10 percent—one
in ten subgrants was expected to become a commercial success. The lifespan of energy efficiency projects was
assumed eight years, and renewable energy projects 20 years. Both direct GHG reductions (because of
subprojects funded by the project) and indirect GHG emissions (achieved after project closing by scaling up the
ACE program) were estimated at a total of 2.4 million tCO2e. In terms of cost effectiveness, the estimated GHG
reductions were to be achieved at an overall cost of US$7.01 per tCO2e. At project closing, the economic
analysis was repeated using actual data from five subprojects supported by the project that had good
commercialization prospects. The calculations resulted in an expected emissions reduction of 4.2 million tCO2e
with an overall cost of US$3.2 per tCO2e. These calculations assumed that the direct and indirect emissions
reductions will be in the same amount, whereas at appraisal it was assumed that indirect emissions reduction
would be three times of direct emissions reduction. However, given that the project was not successful in
mobilizing capital to replicate the ACE program, there is a high probability that indirect emissions reductions
might not materialize. The analysis at project closing assumed that all five projects, out of 15 supported by the
project, would be commercially successful. This corresponds to a ratio of 1:3, much higher than 1:10 assumed
at appraisal. As the ICR (p.28) notes, these projects’ actual success is uncertain; therefore, the future GHG
remissions reductions because of these projects could be significantly lower than the expectations (see
Objective 3 under section 4. Efficacy above).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The CERIPs could only be completed after the launch of the second call for proposals to be supported by the
ACE program. This mismatch in sequencing the completion of CERIPs and announcement of calls for proposals
prevented the subprojects identified in these investment plans to participate in the first and second calls for
proposals. Project implementation slowed down following the elections in December 2018 that resulted in
changes in the SENER management and was suspended for almost six months due to budget restrictions
imposed on the federal administration in 2019. The implementation of the ACE program was adversely affected
by the change in government priorities towards development through public sector rather than promoting private
sector led ACE technology development. Since the elections, no calls for proposal have been announced for
innovative clean energy projects to be financed by the FSE, because the funds are channeled to address other
economic and social issues. The reform of FSE to allow it to finance private firm projects is not expected to
happen under the new government. The shortcomings in appraising and preparing the project at entry resulted
in three project restructurings. The second restructuring resulted in the deletion of some project activities, such
as the implementation of CERIPs, that adversely affected project efficiency.



While the project was completed without a cost overrun, the economic and social benefits from improved
institutional capacity in ACE technologies development did not materialize and the methodology used to
calculate the benefits from reduced GHG emissions could not be adequately validated. There were also some
moderate shortcomings in operational and administrative efficiency of the project. Overall, the project’s
efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project objectives to the country context and their alignment with the World Bank strategy
for Mexico were rated Substantial. The project’s efficacy in achieving the project objectives based on the original
and revised indicators is rated Modest because the CERIPs could not be implemented, and sufficient capital
could not be mobilized to sustain the ACE program beyond project closure. These were expected to improve
the institutional capacity in ACE technologies development and to foster the commercialization of these
technologies. The project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective was rated Modest, because the benefits
from improved institutional capacity did not materialize, the methodology used in the calculation of GHG
emissions reductions have some gaps, and there were moderate shortcomings in the operational and
administrative efficiency of the project. Overall, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory*.

* The changes to the results framework require a split rating, but because the efficacy of the project in achieving
the project objectives is rated Modest both before and after the second restructuring, a split rating is not
undertaken.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial: Insufficient funds to support the private sector-led development of ACE technologies stands out
as the major risk to the limited results achieved under the project. The project was not successful in
mobilizing private funds to supplement GEF funds to support ACE technologies development. Public funds
through FSE are exclusively allocated to public projects. Private firms have limited access to funds to finance
their ACE projects through the Technology Innovation Fund (FIT – Fondo Sectorial de Innovación
Tecnológica)—only US$1.2 million between 2015 and 2020. Public support to private firms in developing




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



ACE technologies will not be likely unless eligibility criteria for FSE funding are revised to include private
firms.

Commercial: The project supported 15 subprojects, five of which have good commercialization prospects,
but the actual success of these subprojects remains uncertain. Innovation projects have in general a success
rate of 10 percent. All 15 subprojects developed their business plans, with varying qualities, but their actual
commercialization depends on mobilizing financing for actual investments, securing a target market, and
establishing business partnerships. If these conditions are not met, subprojects supported under the project
might not move to the commercialization stage, and the expected GHG emissions reduction might not
materialize.

Government commitment: The federal government in Mexico is committed to addressing the climate
change through renewable energy and energy efficiency projects. However, it is not clear how committed the
government is in supporting innovation and development of ACE technologies led by private sector.
Currently, revision of the FSE’s eligibility criteria to include private firms is not on the government’s agenda.
At the local government level, the project was not successful in obtaining commitment from 32 autonomous
states to the implementation of the CERIPs. There is no indication that autonomous states would be
committed to the implementation of CERIPs beyond project closing.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in accordance with the low-carbon
  development program of the Government of Mexico was of high strategic priority. The project was to
  support the achievement of this objective by strengthening the institutional capacity in developing ACE
  technologies and supporting the development of such technologies by private firms. The project’s
  approach was straightforward; the project was to provide financing for the preparation of RNAs and
  CERIPs. SENER would provide financing, through FSE, for the implementation of the subprojects
  identified in CERIPs, and to private subprojects for the development and commercialization of ACE
  technologies. However, the implementation of CERIPs depended on the endorsement by 32 autonomous
  state governments. At entry, the commitment of the local governments was not obtained; hence, the
  CERIPs could not be implemented. Similarly, it was assumed that FSE would be reformed to provide
  funds to private firms’ subprojects for the development and commercialization of ACE technologies. This
  was an overly optimistic expectation because reforming FSE was a politically difficult process. Hence,
  FSE’s reform did not materialize and the absence of FSE funding to private firms adversely affected the
  sustainability of the project’s ACE program. These two significant shortcomings resulted in a shrinking of
  the project scope during implementation. The expectation that RNAs would be completed within one year
  and the CERIPs implementation in the following three years was not realistic, either. The preparation of
  CERIPs took longer, and the subprojects identified in these investment plans could not participate in the
  first two calls for proposals under the ACE program.

  The project’s monitoring and evaluation system was sufficient to measure the project’s outputs, but it did
  not adequately capture the outcomes that would support the achievement of the project objectives to
  improve the institutional capacity in the development of ACE technologies and foster their
  commercialization. The risks were adequately assessed, and mitigation measures were identified, except

                                                                                                       Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



  the risk of changing government priorities due to a change in government. As the subprojects were not
  known at appraisal, only an Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework was prepared at entry. The
  fiduciary aspects were adequately identified. SENER had sufficient capacity to implement the project.
  The project benefited from the lessons learned from prior projects implemented in Mexico to prevent
  implementation delays, such as avoiding output-based disbursements and construction of large-scale
  new technologies.

  Overall, because of significant shortcomings at entry that led to a shrinking in project scope and
  weaknesses in the M&E system, the quality-at-entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was continuity in the project team. The task team leader located in Mexico had been with the project
 from the start of project implementation until project closure. Supervision missions were held once a year
 because of the limited budget allocated by GEF for supervision (ICR, p.27). After the onset of COVID-19,
 two supervision missions were held virtually. The candor and quality of performance reporting in the
 Implementation Status and Result Reports and Aide Memoires were high. The project team’s supervision
 of fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project was sufficient. The project team organized training
 workshops with SENER on procurement, financial management and safeguards to increase stakeholder
 awareness and compliance with the relevant World Bank guidelines (ICR, p.28). However, the project
 team’s focus on development impact had gaps. The project restructurings resulted in the inclusion of public
 entities, which was contrary to the project’s original intention of supporting the development of ACE
 technologies by private firms. The restructurings also changed the project’s theory of change, and the
 reduced project scope, i.e., publication of CERIPs rather than publication and implementation of CERIPs
 as originally planned, did not support the achievement of the project objective to improve technical capacity
 to develop ACE technologies. There were also shortcomings in ensuring the sustainability of the ACE
 program and the implementation of CERIPs beyond project closing. Sufficient funds could not be mobilized
 for the continuation of the ACE program, and there is no indication that the autonomous state governments
 will implement the CERIPs.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)




a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were clearly specified and the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid
 and direct, but with some gaps (see the sections of Theory of Change for Objective 1 and 2 above). The
 results framework did not adequately capture the outcomes of the project. The objective level indicators,
 i.e., CERIPs designed and initiated, and private capital mobilized, were at the output level rather than
 outcome level. The outcomes of the activities to improve institutional capacity of the ACE technology
 institutions were not defined nor captured in the results framework. However, the intermediate outcome
 indicators were adequate to capture the project outputs toward achieving the project objectives. The
 indicators were specific, measurable and time bound with baselines and target values, but not relevant to
 capture the project outcomes, nor achievable during the project implementation because the
 implementation of CERIPs required the endorsement of 32 autonomous states, and ACE program required
 the reform of the FSE. The indicator defined to estimate the reduction in GHG emissions reduction had
 some weaknesses, because it was “based on a proxy methodology that entailed considerable uncertainty,
 since the project that would be financed from the subgrants program were not defined” at appraisal (ICR,
 p.23). The indicator measuring the number of female participants was not relevant to capture project
 outputs or outcomes that would lead to the achievement of project objectives. SENER, the project
 implementation entity, had sufficient capacity to implement M&E as designed.



b. M&E Implementation
  The revision of the indicators at the second restructuring weakened the results framework rather than
  addressing its shortcomings. The project objective level indicator “CERIPs initiated and implemented”
  was revised to “CERIPs prepared,” which was at the output level, and did not capture any project
  outcomes. Other changes in the definitions of the indicators expanded project eligibility to cover public
  entities. Without a revision of the project objectives, these changes in the indicators created significant
  gaps in the project’s theory of change; the project activities did not support the achievement of the project
  objectives. Some new indicators introduced at the same restructuring were not relevant to capture the
  project’s outputs or outcomes, but were required as corporate indicators, such as number of jobs created
  by the ACE program beneficiaries, number of safeguards follow-up plans developed and in place, and
  registered grievances satisfactorily resolved in line with the grievance redress mechanism. SENER
  measured the indicators in the results framework and reported in semiannual progress reports including
  procurement and financial management results. Most of the indicators consisted of counting the number
  of project outputs, such as number of incentives awarded, number of commercialization plans developed,
  number of recipients of TA, and number of CERIPs published; therefore, the M&E methodology was
  simple. SENER established a web site for the project including a clean energy observatory database that
  “provides useful information for the design and implementation of clean energy technologies by
  subnational and private actors, including existing projects, actors and regulations related to clean energy
  development in each state” (ICR, p.24). This database is expected to monitor the progress of the
  subprojects supported under the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E activities that led to project restructuring resulted in the shrinking of the project scope and the
  weakening of the results chain in achieving the project objective (see M&E Implementation above and
  Theory of Change for the revised Objective 1 and 2 in the Efficacy section). The M&E data were used to

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



  provide evidence of achievement of outputs, not outcomes. Although the project piloted the ACE
  subgrant program for private sector, the results framework did not provide sufficient data to assess the
  success of the program or to decide to scale it up or not. The M&E data or findings did not inform any
  subsequent interventions.



  Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest because of the weaknesses in the M&E design to capture the
  project outcomes, the shortcomings in the implementation of M&E that created gaps in the results chain,
  and the insufficient utilization of M&E findings to shift the direction of the project’s intervention to achieve
  the project objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an environment Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   did not trigger any other safeguards policy.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The subprojects to be financed by the project were expected
   to have limited environmental impact. To screen subprojects and help subproject applicants prepare their
   proposals for financing under the ACE program, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed in Mexico by SENER and on the World Bank’s InfoShop. The World
   Bank project team provided training to the key SENER personnel and the members of the investment
   committee on safeguards policies and implementation. The grant beneficiaries prepared work plans to
   implement their subprojects in accordance with the requirements of the ESMF. Starting from April 2020, the
   beneficiaries prepared COVID-19 contingency plans. As of May 2021, all beneficiaries prepared
   environmental and social follow-up action plans, as required, and 14 of them were approved. One plan is
   still pending approval. However, the delay in hiring the environmental specialist towards the end of project
   implementation was a major shortcoming in the implementation of this safeguard policy (ICR, p.25).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   SENER had sufficient financial management capacity. The project’s financial management was supported
   by a specialist financed under the project. The funds were allocated to project activities without delay until
   2019. Except for the suspension of project activities for about six months in 2019 due to budget
   restrictions, the project did not encounter any major issues in financial management. SENER submitted
   interim financial reports as scheduled, and they were acceptable to the World Bank. External audits of the
   project were unqualified. SENER implemented the recommendations of the auditors to improve internal

                                                                                                        Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



   control procedures. The ICR does not report any issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with
   the project. All project funds were accounted for at project closing.

   Procurement

   Procurement was conducted according to the World Bank guidelines. SENER had adequate procurement
   capacity. Technical assistance supported the beneficiaries to improve their procurement capacity in
   accordance with the World Bank guidelines. Their implementation of procurement processes was
   satisfactory. The National Financing Agency (NAFIN – Nacional Financiera) reviewed the procurement
   processes to ensure compliance with the World Bank guidelines and procedures. However, the
   procurement of the consultancy services for Regional Needs Assessment was delayed, resulting in late
   delivery of these assessments and their key outputs of CERIPs. The project also could not complete the
   procurement of consultancy services for the ex-post evaluation of the RNAs and CERIPs because of the
   need to align the terms of reference in the first procurement process, which was about to be completed,
   with national development plans, and the failure of the proposals to meet the minimum technical rating
   requirements in the second procurement process (ICR, p.16).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                The relevance of objectives was
                                                                                substantial but the project’s
                                                                                efficacy and efficiency in
                                                                                achieving the objectives are
                                                                                rated Modest, because of low
                               Moderately           Moderately                  achievement of outcomes and
Outcome
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              non-materialization of project’s
                                                                                economic benefits, in addition to
                                                                                shortcomings in administrative
                                                                                and operational efficiency.
                                                                                Hence, outcome is rated
                                                                                Modest.
                               Moderately           Moderately                  There were significant
Bank Performance
                               Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory              shortcomings at entry regarding


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



                                                                               the implementation of CERIPs
                                                                               and reform of FSE. During
                                                                               implementation, the
                                                                               restructurings resulted in
                                                                               weakening the project’s theory
                                                                               of change and under
                                                                               achievement of the project’s
                                                                               outcome. Overall, Bank
                                                                               performance is rated Moderately
                                                                               Unsatisfactory.
                                                                               Overall, the M&E quality is rated
                                                                               Modest because of the
                                                                               weaknesses in the M&E design
                                                                               to capture the project outcomes,
                                                                               the shortcomings in the
                                                                               implementation of M&E that
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                               created gaps in the results
                                                                               chain, and the insufficient
                                                                               utilization of M&E findings to
                                                                               shift the direction of the project’s
                                                                               intervention to achieve the
                                                                               project objectives.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn two lessons incorporating material in section 5. Lessons and
Recommendations of the ICR.

Lack of local governments’ commitment to a project can adversely affect the achievement of
project objectives if project’s implementation depends on the endorsement of the same local
governments. Through technical assistance, the project successfully completed the RNAs and
CERIPs. The 32 autonomous states were to implement these CERIPs. However, at appraisal,
SENER’s limitations in obtaining local governments’ commitment to the project and the
implementation of CERIPs was not adequately assessed. During project implementation SENER
could not obtain the autonomous governments’ endorsement; hence, the subprojects identified in
the CERIPs could not be implemented, and the project objective to improve the institutional capacity
of ACE technology institutions, both private and public, could not be achieved.

A reduction in the project scope without a revision of the project objectives can create gaps
in the theory of change resulting in project activities not supporting the achievement of the
project objectives. When the project scope was decreased from publication and implementation of
CERIPs to only the publication of CERIPs, this weakened the project’s theory of change and created
gaps in the result chain that did not support the achievement of the project objective to improve the
institutional capacity of ACE technology institutions both public and private. The implementation of
the investments and strategic actions identified in CERIPs was to boost human capital in science
and technology and entrepreneurial disciplines critical to commercialize ACE technologies. Since the

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MX GEF Sustainable Energy Technologies (P145618)



project scope was reduced to the publication of CERIPs, the project’s intervention could not support
the achievement of the project objectives, which depended on the implementation of investments
and strategic actions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and provides a comprehensive overview of the project. The report covers a wide range of
issues and follows most of the Bank’s guidance. While it is mostly internally consistent, there are some gaps in
logical linking and integration of various parts of the report. For example, the ICR (p.16) states that non-
implementation of the RNAs and CERIPs reduced the impact of the project on improving the institutional
capacity for ACE development; therefore, the efficacy of the project in achieving the Objective 1 is rated Modest
On the other hand, the publication of CERIPs is assessed as sufficient to improve the institutional capacity;
hence, the efficacy of the project in achieving the same objective is rated Substantial after the restructuring.
The ICR falls into the trap of assessing the achievement of the project objectives by only focusing on the
achievement of the project outputs, not the expected outcomes. The report does not adequately emphasize and
highlight how activities produced outcomes that led to the achievement of project objectives. The ICR does not
present a robust evidence base to support the achievements of the project outcomes and objectives. The ICR
(p.28) acknowledges that innovation projects have a success rate of 10 percent that might result in a
significantly lower achievement of GHG emissions reductions compared to expectations, but this substantial
risk is not reflected in the assessment of the project’s efficacy in achieving Objective 3—related to the reduction
of GHG emissions in the future—that was rated High. The ICR’s lessons are useful and respond to the specific
experiences of the project, but they are mostly in the form of findings and not sufficiently linked to the report’s
narrative.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
