     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022609

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P111153                                      TZ-Strategic Cities Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47270,IDA-54600,IDA-59470                31-Dec-2015                                        340,372,832.17

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 27-May-2010                                  26-Nov-2020

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            163,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             342,997,607.69                                               0.00

 Actual                                         340,372,832.17                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur                Vibecke Dixon                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) was to "improve the quality of and access to basic urban services in
   participating Local Government Authorities (LGAs)" (Financing Agreement page 5 and Project Appraisal
   Document para 15).




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



   The participating LGAs are Arusha Municipal Council, Tanga City Council, Mwanza City Council, Kigoma
   Municipal Council, Dodoma Municipal Council, Mbeya City Council, and Mtwara Municipal Council, and also
   include the Capital Development Authority (CDA) in Dodoma.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  30-May-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Core urban infrastructure and services (appraisal cost US$150.6 million, actual cost
   US$309.78 million). This component would support improvements in core infrastructure and key urban
   services in the Participating LGAs. It included two subcomponents:

   (a) Investment in core urban infrastructure and services for subprojects prioritized by the Participating
   LGAs: (i) urban roads and drainage, including associated structures such as drainage ditches,
   culverts/bridges, footpaths and street lighting; (ii) solid waste management including solid waste collection
   centers, equipment for transportation and disposal, and the development or improvement of disposal sites;
   and (iii) local infrastructure such as bus and lorry stands;

   (b) Technical assistance for construction supervision and support for the implementation and monitoring of
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) linked to
   individual subprojects, including the payment of compensation costs.

   Component 2. Institutional strengthening (appraisal cost US$12.7 million, actual cost US$17.82 million).
   This component would support the strengthening of the fiscal and management capacity of LGAs and CDA
   for improved operations and maintenance (O&M) and infrastructure development. The intended outcomes
   for this component included: (a) improved capacity for urban infrastructure development and management
   including technical design, procurement, financial management, contract management, and environmental
   and social safeguards; (b) improved asset management and O&M; (c) enhanced cost recovery and
   management of key urban services including solid waste; (d) improved own source revenues; (e) improved
   strategic urban planning; and (f) improved capacity of PMO-RALG to provide support to LGAs in the areas
   of urban infrastructure development and urban management.

   Component 3. Implementation support and preparation of future urban projects (appraisal cost
   US$12.2 million, actual cost US$21.74 million). This component would provide (a) support for
   project implementation; and (b) finance preparation activities for future urban projects and technical
   assistance to the urban sector.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



  The two Additional Financings (AF) did not change the PDO or components. The scope of the project was
  expanded under the first AF to new infrastructure investments in urban roads, bus stands, terminals and
  lorry stations, street lights, drainage and new cells in existing landfills (restructuring Paper page 1). The AF
  will also enhance the development impact and sustainability of the investments financed by the original
  project by investing in equipment and operation, and maintenance capacity for existing infrastructure, and
  deepening local government capacity for urban management. The Restructuring Paper notes that most
  activities proposed for a scale-up were appraised when the parent operation was prepared but sufficient
  resources were not available at the time to finance them. These activities were therefore re-appraised for
  technical and financial due diligence.

  The second AF would scale up impact by financing activities of similar nature (proposed under original
  project and the first AF) and other complementary activities including: (i) the
  rehabilitation/upgrading/construction of urban roads, sidewalks, foot bridges, bus/lorry stands, street lights
  and drains, public parks, markets and other community facilities and providing the two remaining cities with
  sanitary landfills; and (ii) strategic institutional strengthening and capacity building activities for project
  LGAs, particularly to build foundations for future local economic development, enhance implementation and
  enforcement of urban plans, and continue to improve solid waste management (SWM) and own source
  revenue (OSR) generation.

  Geographical scope. At appraisal, the project intended to target the following seven urban
  centers: Mwanza, Arusha, Mbeya, Mtwara, Kigoma, Tanga and Dodoma. In Dodoma, the project would
  support both the Dodoma Municipal Council and the Capital Development Authority (CDA). These centers
  were selected on the basis of several criteria including economic contribution, service coverage, urban
  population growth and strategic location.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$340.4 million, substantially higher than the appraisal
  estimate of 175.5 million. This was because the project's scope was expanded, and it received two
  additional financings.

  Financing. The original credit was US$163.0 million. The project received two Additional Financings, the
  first for the amount of US$50 million and the second for the amount of US$130 million. Thus, the total credit
  was US$343 million. The actual disbursement was US$340.4 million.

  Co- financing. The co-financing from the Government of Denmark for the amount of US$12.5 million did
  not materialize.

  Borrower Contribution. None planned.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 27, 2010 and became effective on September 8, 2010. It closed
  on November 26, 2020, after a delay of almost five years (original closing date was December 31,
  2015). The project closing date was extended due to the two additional financings, which increased he
  scope of the project; and also to complete some contracts, which were adversely affected due to the
  emergence of COVID-19.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



   Additional Financing (AF). Two AFs were approved:

         First Additional Financing of US$50 million was approved by the Board on May 30, 2014 and
          became effective on October 3, 2014. The PDO indicator “people with access to an all season road”
          was dropped because it was a subset of the indicator “direct project beneficiaries”. The PDO
          indicator “roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads” was dropped because
          according to the Restructuring Paper (page 3), Tanzania did not have a standardized definition of
          roads in “good and fair condition”. The ICR notes that this indicator was influenced by other non-
          project related activities (e.g. inadequate maintenance of the road network outside the project area)
          and therefore found to be an imprecise measure of project results. A new indicator “Non-rural roads
          rehabilitated or constructed to paved standard” was added.
         Second Additional Financing of US$130 million was approved by the Board on February 27, 2017
          and became effective on June 20, 2017. The project closing date was extended to May 26, 2020.

   Split Rating. The two Additional Financings did not change the PDO or components. As discussed above
   under components, the scope of the project was expanded. The PDO targets were increased (except for the
   waste disposed at landfills; it was overachieved in the end). A split evaluation will not be carried out.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context: At appraisal (from 2002 to 2008), Tanzania was experiencing a strong
economic growth of 7.0% (PAD para 1). However, the main challenge was to translate economic growth
into poverty reduction, with the country registering only a small decline in poverty incidence from 35.7% in
2000 to 33.5% in 2007. Tanzania was experiencing rapid urbanization, the urban population was growing
over 5% per annum - more than twice the rate for the population as a whole. The PAD (para 6) noted that
the percentage of people living in urban areas was likely to grow from 24% in 2005 to 38% in 2030.
However, the cities were constrained by (a) urban infrastructure deficits and proliferation of informal
settlements; (b) inadequate fiscal and management capacity for sustained urban development and
management.

Alignment with Country Priorities: The project objectives are fully aligned with the Tanzania
Development Vision 2025. The Vision 2025 emphasized “economic transformation”, i.e., the need for more
inclusive growth and poverty reduction, underpinned by the structural transformation of the economy from
“a low-productivity agricultural economy to a semi-industrialized one” (PAD para 3). The Vision 2025
underpinned well-functioning and productive urban centers as essential for catalyzing and supporting the
transformation of the Tanzanian economy and efforts to translate economic growth into poverty reduction.
Tanzanian cities were the engines of economic growth, with industry and services (based in cities)
contributing 56.3% of the country’s growth from 1990 to 2003 (PAD para 4).

The project was consistent with the Government’s second National Five-year Development Plan 2011/12-
2015/16, theme of “Nurturing Industrialization for Economic Transformation and Human Development” (ICR
page 23).



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy: The PDOs were aligned with the World Bank’s Country
               Assistance Strategy 2012–2015, which recognized the rapid urban population growth and high urbanization
               rate faced by Tanzania as one of the main development challenges for the country. The project objectives
               are highly aligned with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY2018 - 2022,
               especially the third Focus Area 3 “modernize and improve efficiency of public institutions” and sub-objective
               3.1. “ Strengthen Public Sector Accountability and Financial Efficiency in Delivering Services”.

               Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank had financed rehabilitation and construction of essential
               urban infrastructure through several projects. The Urban Sector Rehabilitation Project (which closed in
               December 2004) financed essential rehabilitation and expansion of urban infrastructure in ten project
               towns. The Local Government Support Project supported community urban infrastructure upgrading in Dar
               es Salaam only. The Urban Development and Environment Management supported Local Government
               Authorities (LGAs) in financing “strategic large infrastructure investments”. This project would not only
               provide the critical infrastructure in key urban LGAs but also support improvement in fiscal and
               management capacity for urban development and management.

               The degree to which the PDO reflects a solution to a development problem. While there is a clear
               alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and World Bank strategies, the
               relevance of the objectives is pitched at a level that does not adequately reflect a potential solution to a
               development problem. While acknowledging the difficulty of the operational environment, a shortcoming
               here was that the objective was not defined such that its achievements would be plausibly traceable to
               improvements envisioned to arise from “improved the quality of and access to basic urban services”.
               Focusing on "improved quality and access to basic urban services" alone is not outcome focused and does
               not help in understanding what development results were expected as a consequence of the project,
               whether those results would increase incomes, economic growth or other factor affecting urban livelihoods.
               These may be longer term targets but tracking them and identifying them is an important aspect of a
               successful development operation. Besides, apart from infrastructure development and service delivery, the
               project also supported institutional strengthening, and promoting accountability and governance.

               While there was a clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country and World
               Bank strategies, the PDO formulation was pitched at a level that did not adequately reflect a solution to a
               development problem. Relevance of objectives is therefore rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality of and access to basic urban services in participating Local Government
                             Authorities (LGAs).

                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)




Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The ToC envisioned that project activities such as rehabilitation and expansion of
core urban infrastructure services would result in outputs such as construction of roads, bus stations and lorry
stands, drains, and landfills. These outputs would support the achievement of the project objective of
improving access to basic urban services, i.e., "the extent to which there is improved geographical coverage
of urban services", and of improving the quality of services, i.e., "the extent to which there are improvements
in the condition of infrastructure" (PAD, Annex 3-Results Framework). The project also included the focus
on improved institutional capacity of the participating Local Government Authorities (LGAs) and recovery of
operational and maintenance (O&M) cost of urban infrastructure.

The key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO were: (a) LGAs would have sufficient
and capable staff for project implementation; and (b) the learning-by-doing approach during implementation
would be effective to train staff.

Outputs

Urban infrastructure and services.

43 km of drains were constructed, exceeding the revised target of 31 km and original target of 15 km.

253.6 km of non - rural roads were rehabilitated or constructed (to paved standard), exceeding the revised
target of 220 km and original target of 231km. These roads now provide all-season access to hospitals, jobs,
schools and markets. The ICR reports (page 18) that the business owners and patrons along upgraded roads
report increased safety associated with streetlights, which has enabled an increase in operating hours of
formal and informal businesses as well as reduction in crimes. The reduction in crime is reported by the
daladala bus drivers in Kigoma-Ujiji (no specific numbers are provided in the ICR).

Prior to the project, there were no sanitary landfills in Tanzania. The project cities relied on informal, unlined
dumpsites and lacked formal collection points and modern solid waste collection equipment. 7 landfills were
constructed or improved, achieving the original target of 7; and 17 cells were constructed, exceeding the
original target of 15 cells. Solid waste management equipment was purchased for the seven landfills.

277 waste collection points were constructed/ rehabilitated, exceeding the original target of 255.

11 bus stations, terminals or lorry stands were constructed or improved, exceeding the original target of 10.

29 sub-projects included gender-sensitive design features, exceeding the revised target of 17 (no original
target was set).

Institutional strengthening.

By project close, all 8 LGAs were covered by General Planning Schemes (urban master plans), which are an
important tool for cross-sector coordination, capital investment planning, and neighborhood level zoning (ICR
page 18). The ICR also notes that 7 LGAs had up-to-date strategic urban development plans as targeted.

An IT-based Local Government Revenue Collection and Information System (LGRCIS) was developed and,
as reported by the ICR (page 80), it was scaled up from 8 LGAs to all 185 LGAs in mainland Tanzania. The


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



ICR estimates (page 18) that revenue losses due to siphoning of manually recorded revenue collections
were substantially reduced due to increased accountability and transparency through project investments in
the electronic revenue collection information and asset management systems. LGRCIS automates billing
through bar codes on invoices. By project closure, taxpayers in all project cities had access to electronic bills
for taxes and fees due, and electronic receipts upon payment. Prior to the project, billing and receipts were
manual.

The ICR (page 77) reports that due to initial delays in mobilization and then additional delays caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, planned institutional strengthening activities relating to urban planning systems, GIS
mainstreaming, and OSR strengthening were dropped under the project but taken up under the ongoing Dar
es Salaam Metropolitan Development Project.

Outcomes

Access

The project activities improved access to basic urban services in participating Local Government
Authorities (LGAs). The project infrastructure investments benefitted 1,890,687 beneficiaries, exceeding the
revised targets of 1,741,000 (AF2) and 1,483,000 (AF1); and original target of 952,806. The ICR notes that
49% of the beneficiaries were females.

At project closure, 1,278,053 people had access to improved public transport services (bus stations, terminals
or lorry stands), exceeding the revised target of 1,266,200.

Quality

Based on the interviews with project beneficiaries (no specific numbers were given), drains installed in
previously impacted areas are reported to have dramatically reduced the occurrence of flooding. In addition to
interviews, it would have been useful for the project team to have collected data on the amount of rainfall and
the data on water levels and flooding. Officials from the Dodoma City Council reported that prior to the
construction of storm water drains, flooding was a common occurrence in Ilazo and Ipagala wards, often
necessitating emergency rescues of households, and that road and electricity infrastructure in the area
experienced recurrent damage from flooding. Flooding to these areas have effectively been eliminated as a
result of project investments.

At project closure, 85% of waste was being disposed at landfills (as percent of total waste generated in
LGAs), exceeding the revised target of 40% (AF1 and AF2) and the original target of 58%. While the ICR
reports (para 27) that regular solid waste collection services were being provided at the 277 solid waste
collection points financed by the project, it is not clear how 'regular' is defined, and to what extent the
collection services have improved (e.g., % coverage, and % of collected waste of the generated amount) in
the selected LGAs.

LGAs own-source revenue (from base year) increased substantially by 457%, exceeding the revised targets
of 100% (AF2) and 70% (AF1); and the original target of 45%. The ICR notes (page 38) that this was due to
the rapid growth of the City and plot sales (which were a major source of revenue).




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



                            There was an increase in spending on operations and maintenance (O&M) that would support the quality of
                            services. Overall, municipalities were spending 28% of their total municipal expenditure on operations and
                            maintenance (O&M), exceeding the revised target of 20% and original target of 16% (baseline was 8%).

                                   84% of O&M cost for solid waste management were being recovered from direct fees and charges,
                                    against the revised target of 25% and original target of 12%.
                                   95% of O&M cost for bus stations, terminals or lorry stands were being recovered from direct fees and
                                    charges, against the revised target of 80% and original target of 65%.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved the PDO to improve the quality of and access to basic urban services in participating
                            Local Government Authorities (LGAs). The project exceeded all four of its PDO indicator targets. While the
                            increase beyond the targets is notable, this cannot be attributed to the project activities in all the cases, i.e.,
                            increase in own-source revenue over base year. Also, it is not clear what project activities led to the increase
                            in O&M spending and cost recovery. Overall, project efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. At appraisal, the economic rate of return (ERR) was 24.5% for roads, 13.8% for solid
   waste investments and 18.4% for bus and lorry terminals. The costs and benefits were assessed by comparing
   the “without” and “with” investment scenarios. Costs include the present value of the investment costs,
   estimated compensation costs for involuntary removal of people or assets, and operations and maintenance
   costs. Benefits included the revenues from income generating assets and the quantifiable economic benefits for
   the main beneficiaries (e.g. users of the infrastructure and services, and property owners benefiting from
   infrastructure improvements. A 20-year time horizon and 12% discount rate were assumed (PAD page 19). The
   average ERR was 22%.

   The ICR used the appraisal methodology and a sample of interventions were selected. The sample consisted of
   six road interventions (Mwanza City, Ilemela Municipality, Dodoma City, Mbeya City, Mtwara Mikindani
   Municipality and Kigoma Ujiji Municipality), one bus terminal and lorry terminal in Tanga, solid waste
   management in Tanga, landfill in Arusha, Duga water drainage in Tanga, and improvement of OSR in Mwanza,


                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



Arusha, Ilemela, Kigoma, Mtwara, Tanga and Mbeya. The ex-post ERR was 48% for roads, 12% for solid waste
management – Tanga, 32% for Arusha landfill, 13% for bus station and 33% for Duga drainage (ICR para 33).
The overall ERR was 40%, higher than the appraisal estimate of 22%. This was mainly because the actual cost
was lower by 10% and actual benefits were equal or higher (ICR page 55).

Administrative efficiency. There were some construction delays due to delays in compensation payment.

Overall, project efficiency was substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   94.00
 Appraisal                                                22.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
 ICR Estimate                                             40.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies is rated substantial. The project achievement
of the PDO to improve the quality of and access to basic urban services in participating Local Government
Authorities (LGAs) is rated substantial. Efficiency is rated substantial. Based on these ratings,
the project outcome is satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk. Inadequate operations and maintenance (O&M) for sub-projects financed under the original
credit was noted during implementation. Municipalities’ limited funds for operations and maintenance of solid
waste equipment and drainage poses a substantial risk to the proper maintenance and operation of the
sanitary landfills (which are associated with substantial operating expenses for moving and compacting
waste) and stormwater drains (which are prone to blockage from solid waste and sedimentation).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



Regarding the Local Government Authorities (LGAs) ability to afford O&M, it is unclear if there will be a
revenue sharing arrangement between LGAs and the central government and if so, what the percent split
would be. While property tax collection was centralized in 2016, it was delegated back to the LGAs in early
2021. This is a promising development for O&M, however the change is recent and the revenue sharing
arrangement between LGAs and the central government is unclear.

Institutional Risk. There is a lack of an institutional arrangement for effective metropolitan governance.
While Dar es Salaam and Mwanza have City Councils with coordination powers, these lack legal mandates
empowering them to effectively coordinate development actors such as municipal councils which are the
land use planning authorities, and centralized roads authorities and state-owned enterprises such as electric
and water/sanitation utilities. Institutional risk is substantial.

There is a substantial risk to the implementation of master plans and proper use of infrastructure
investments. Although master plans are now in place, they are used by LGAs as guiding documents rather
than authoritative. The land uses proposed in master plans are not statutory zoning and tend only to be
enforced where detailed neighborhood-level plans are in place (as these contain legally binding zoning).

The ICR notes (para 81) that the cities were struggling to maintain some infrastructure (particularly
sidewalks) for its intended use “urban management strategies were not effectively balancing the space
needs of informal trading with mobility needs”. Some sidewalks constructed under the project had been
repurposed as semi-permanent trading spaces for informal vendors, and LGAs were not empowered by
central government to seek solutions that balance this demand for public space.

Trends towards recentralization of service delivery may adversely impact sustainability of infrastructure
funded by the project. In 2019, reporting lines for town planners and land officers were transferred from
President Office - Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG) to the Ministry of Lands,
Housing, and Human Settlements Development (MLHHSD). However, the staff from these agencies were un
available to serve the needs of the municipalities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objectives statement was clear, the project design was simple, and the planned investments were to
  be selected based on community preferences and an multi-criteria. The design incorporated lessons from
  other Bank projects in Tanzania namely, the Urban Sector Rehabilitation Program (USRP) and Local
  Government Support Project (LGSP). These included: (a) simple and easily manageable activities,
  especially in the context of weak capacity for project implementation; (b) instilling ownership at the local
  level; and (c) applying a “contractual approach” through a municipal contract mechanism (PAD page 10).
  The PAD specified the risks the Project would face and identified adequate mitigation measures. The
  overall risk rating was moderate. Feasibility, designs, and safeguards documents for some priority roads
  and drainage works were prepared by appraisal and procurement initiated soon after effectiveness. The
  quality at entry was satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank undertook 22 implementation support missions during the project’s 10 years and 6 months
 of implementation. Technical missions were carried out to resolve pending issues and to provide hands-on
 support to the implementing agencies and LGAs. The World Bank team engaged a solid waste
 management expert for landfill construction, operation and management.

 Supervision of social and environmental safeguards was adequate. The ICR notes (para 75) that close
 follow up was provided to ensure land issues were resolved in compliance with resettlement procedures.
 The team was also proactive in flagging potential issues and devising action plans to remedy them, as well
 as taking strong measures to proactively address problems when they arose.

 Staff turnover on the World Bank team was high - the project had six Task Team Leaders (TTLs) and three
 co-TTLs between 2010 to 2020. The ICR (para 72) notes that the TTL changes did not disrupt project
 implementation as the transition was smooth with proper documentation. The quality of supervision was
 satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project design included overall adequate outcome and intermediate indicators to measure the
 achievement of the PDO. The PDO, however, did not reflect all the depth of project interventions that
 related to institutional and sustainability aspects. The target values and definition of outcome and
 intermediate outcome indicators were specified in Annex 3 of the PAD. It lacked relevant indicators to
 measure reduction of flooding.

 The Prime Minister’s Office - Regional Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG) was assigned
 the responsibility for monitoring and evaluation system, in coordination with the participating LGAs. The
 PMO-RALG was also responsible for compiling data and executing surveys and regular evaluations as
 necessary to monitor progress on project outcome indicators, with quarterly report updates on these
 indicators (PAD para 39).




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)




b. M&E Implementation
  During the project implementation, each LGA’s PIU and the PO-RALG PCU maintained two M&E officers
  responsible for M&E. The results framework was revised during additional financing to update indicators
  to reflect the additional subprojects and new activities. The indicator relating to property valuations was
  dropped as it was no longer relevant due to shift in responsibilities for valuation, billing and collection of
  property tax from the Local Governments to the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA), in July 2016.

  The indicators on roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads in target area (km,
  %) and people with access to an all season road (number, % of targeted population) were dropped, as
  these indicators were determined to be influenced by other non-project related activities (e.g. inadequate
  maintenance of the road network outside the project area) and therefore found to be an imprecise
  measure of project results. The following new indicators were added: non-rural roads rehabilitated or
  constructed to paved standard, amount spent on O&M as total municipal expenditure and People with
  access to improved public transport services.

  There were some weaknesses during early implementation. These included: (i) poor data quality and
  data gaps; (ii) inadequate information sharing; (iii) weak technical capacity in LGAs; and (iv) poor
  understanding of M&E function. M&E capacity improved through training, better coordination,
  sensitization and awareness and development of an online M&E platform.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 58) that the data collected from M&E was used to inform project management and
  decision-making, especially monitoring the progress of infrastructure works, solid waste management
  and community facilities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category "B" and three safeguards policies were
   triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11),
   and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01. At appraisal, the government carried out an Environmental and
   Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for all sub-projects and also prepared Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs). The PAD stated (para 69) that most of the proposed roads were in developed
   areas and the potential environmental impacts would be managed through a generic ESMP, which would
   cover associated structures such as drainage, footpaths and street lights. However site-specific ESMPs

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



  were prepared for the solid waste disposal sites, which included recommendations for designs to address
  key aspects such as ground water and soil types, drainage and surrounding land uses.

  The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs) including ESMPs and Resettlement Action
  Plans (RAPs) for each city were disclosed in the World Bank's InfoShop on February 2, 2010 and in-
  country on May 5, 2010.

  The ICR reports (para 61) that the Project had diverse challenges related to regular monitoring and
  reporting of safeguards issues but provides no details. The ICR notes that LGAs and contractors generally
  complied with Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).

  The ICR reports (para 61) that the compliance with environmental safeguards was moderately
  satisfactory.

  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The upgrading of the Mikindani road in Mtwara which passes
  by Livingstone’s abode, which is considered as a heritage site - triggered OP/BP 4.11. The ICR does not
  report on compliance with this safeguards policy. According to the email from TTL (dated August 10,
  2021), "In Mtwara Mikindani there were no road infrastructure constructed within or along the heritage site.
  Small improvement was done on existing commuter bus stand (also known as daladala) at Mikindani along
  the Lindi – Mtwara existing trunk road. Also, the Livingstone rest house was provided with paving blocks
  along their walkways (for community passageway) without impacting physical cultural aspect. Thus,
  physical cultural element of the safeguards remained satisfactory throughout project implementation".

  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The project investments were not expected to result in large
  scale displacement of people and loss of assets (PAD para 66). An abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
  (RAP) was prepared.

  The ICR notes that LGAs and contractors generally complied with the RAPs. Compensation was delayed
  (sometimes by over nine months) because LGAs lacked funds - resulting in delays in RAP implementation.
  Also, the changes in design of drainage system resulted in changes to affected people. The ICR reports
  (para 61) that the compliance with social safeguards was moderately satisfactory.

  The ICR reports (para 62) that the compliance with occupation health and safety (OHS) measures
  was adequate. There was one fatal accident in 2019 involving road construction in Dodoma. Following the
  fatality, immediate corrective actions were undertaken to ensure (i) the contractor paid insurance to the
  victim’s family; (ii) protection of all work sites; and (iii) hiring of an OHS expert by supervising consultant to
  strengthen OHS capacity.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The ICR notes (para 65) that the project complied with the World Bank’s financial
  management procedures. There were some weaknesses in internal audit arrangement and advance
  payments. These were addressed through capacity building and handholding by the World Bank Financial
  Management Specialists and consultants.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



   Financial management was rated satisfactory during project implementation. The audit reports were
   unqualified. The implementing agency had adequate financial management capacity with a qualified full-
   time financial manager and an accountant. The quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) and annual audit
   reports were submitted within the stipulated timelines.

   Procurement. The ICR notes (para 68) that the procurement capacity was adequate at national level but
   was low in the participating Local Government Authorities (LGAs) partly due to the huge staff turnover.
   Contract management weaknesses affected procurement performance. In some cases, the LGAs/ PCU
   took corrective action on contracts that were flagged as being at risk.

   At project closure, three packages (two for solid waste management equipment and one for GIS electronic
   equipment) amounting to nearly US$3 million were not delivered as per contract terms due to COVID-19
   pandemic. These contracts were terminated as per contract terms (ICR para 67).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are adapted from the ICR:

Long-term transformative impact and sustainability of urban development projects in rapidly
growing cities relies on the government’s ability to plan and enforce land use regulations and
to secure public land for future infrastructure. Interventions such as demarcation of
infrastructure rights of way, identification and protection of environmentally sensitive and hazardous
lands, assembly of land would be needed for future infrastructure and services (through acquisition
or land readjustment), and drastically increasing coverage of neighborhood-level land use plans may
be complicated from a political or social safeguards management point of view.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



Enhancing own source revenue (OSR) collection in local governments requires a deep and
robust understanding of the policy environment, current practices, and incentive structures
surrounding Local Government Authority (LGA) OSR generation. System development and
upgrading is an important entry point that can achieve immediately impressive results, as was the
case for Local Government Revenue Collection Information System (LGRCIS), but anchoring
system improvements in a comprehensive institutional strengthening program that includes
development and operationalization of revenue enhancement strategies through training, hands on
support for data collection, continual M&E, and ongoing technical assistance is necessary for
cementing and deepening system benefits.

To ensure sustainability of project investments, business plans and operation and
maintenance (O&M) arrangements of economic infrastructure needs to be prepared upfront.
The project experience shows that while most infrastructure became operational right after
completion, some economic infrastructure such as the two lorry terminals were not put into operation
due to the absence of business plans and associated O&M arrangements.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and complies with the OPCS guidelines. The ICR provides a set of
observations that are aligned to the project development objective. It offers several useful and specific lessons
drawn from the project experience. While the report presents a theory of change and related assumptions, the
efficacy section of the main text does not sufficiently explain the linkages between the project activities and
selected outcomes, in particular, for example, which activities led to the increase in O&M spending. Annex 6-
Supporting Documents is extremely useful. It provides much more substantive and candid reporting on the
component 2- institutional strengthening activities than the main text; with regard to the infrastructure support, it
is however largely based on assumptions, without data analysis, even if selectively. For example, "new
standalone drains resulted in reduced water borne diseases and improved health conditions, improved
environment (erosion control) and provided a safer living environment", or "stakeholders noted improved health
with reduction in waterborne disease, declined malaria cases, reduction in pollutants and reduced medical
costs through environmental management". For the 10-year investment operation of US$340 million in
infrastructure in the selected LGAs, the development impact could have been better measured. The ICR has
some inconsistency in reporting on the outputs, e.g., it says in the main text (page 18) that all 8 LGAs were
covered by urban master plans, while in Annex 6 it says that seven out of eight LGAs were covered by an
approved master plan, referred to in Tanzania as a General Planning Scheme (GPS). It also has a minor
omission in the data presentation: incomplete project cost by components table in Annex 3. Overall, the quality
of ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
TZ-Strategic Cities Project (P111153)



Substantial




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
