     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022588

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P132443                                      DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Moldova                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84510                                   30-Jun-2020                                           40,280,856.05

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Nov-2014                                  30-Jun-2020

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              40,500,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                               40,500,000.00                                                  0.00

 Actual                                           40,280,856.05                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo            Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Ramachandra Jammi                IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Loan Agreement (LA, p.6) dated April 15, 2015 and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD,
   p.6), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to contribute to improved operational efficiency and
   financial viability of the new district heating company and to improve quality and reliability of heating services
   delivered to the population of Chisinau". The PDO was unchanged throughout project implementation. This
   review will assess the project performance by parsing the PDO as follows:

           (i) to contribute to improved operational efficiency of the new district heating company,

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



         (ii) to improve the quality of heating services delivered to the population of Chisinau,
         (iii) to improve the reliability of heating services delivered to the population of Chisinau, and
         (iv) to contribute to improved financial viability of the new district heating company (Termocom, the
            heating utility at appraisal, was renamed Termoelectrica during project implementation)

        



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Investments to District Heating System: (Cost at appraisal of US$38.50 million and
   actual cost amounted to US$33.30 million). Under his component, the following activities were to be
   financed: (a) modernization of selected pumping stations to reduce electricity consumption and provide for
   efficient variable flow operation mode of the District Heating (DH )system; (b) rehabilitation of selected
   segments of the distribution network to ensure continued secure DH service and reduction of losses of heat
   and hot water; (c) replacement of old and inefficient central heat substations (CHS) with modern fully-
   automated individual building level heat substations (IHS) for more efficient and secure heat supply to end-
   users; and (d) reconnection of about 40 public institutions, which were earlier disconnected, to the DH
   system to improve the usage of the DH system.

   Component 2: Support for streamlining operations: (Cost at appraisal of US$10.1 million, with actual
   cost of US$5.50 million). This component intended to finance the following activities related to closure of
   the Combined Heat and Power Station-1 (CHP-1) plant: (a) the connection of an alternative heat distribution
   network and construction of new pumping stations to service the area supplied by CHP-1; (b) supporting the
   design and implementation of the Social Impact Mitigation Plan, which included severance payments,
   retraining and placement services to provide new employment opportunities, and grievance mechanism;
   and (c) carrying out an Environmental Audit for the CHP-1 site.

   Component 3: Project Management: (Cost at appraisal of US$2.9 million and actual cost amounted
   to US$1.50 million). This component was to fund the following activities: (a) to carry out project audits; (b)
   to carry out the financial management and procurement requirements under the project; (c) to ensure the
   monitoring and evaluation of project activities; (d) to provide capacity building and cover project
   implementation costs of the Moldova Energy Projects Implementation Unit (MEPIU); (e) to fund public
   awareness campaigns for dissemination of the benefits of energy efficiency improvements and efficiently
   operating Chisinau’s district heating system; and (f) to provide technical assistance to Termoelectrica (the
   new district heating company).

   Revised Component 3: When the project was restructured in February 2019, the item (e) of Component 3
   was renamed as "Technical Assistance for developing the Corporate Communication Strategy for TE and
   Public Awareness Campaigns for dissemination of the benefits of Energy Efficiency improvements and



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



   efficiently operating Chisinau’s District Heating system during the first season of Strategy
   implementation". There was no other revision to the components.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$61.10 million, including US$3.00 million
   for physical contingencies and US$6.50 million for price contingencies, as well as in-kind contribution from
   the borrower estimated at US$20.6 million. At project closing, the actual project cost amounted to US$40.30
   million.

    Financing: At appraisal, the project financing was estimated at US$40.50 million from an International
   Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan. At project closing, actual disbursements amounted
   to US$40.30 million from the IBRD loan window.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower was to provide in-kind contribution estimated at about
   US$20.60 million (PAD, para 17&24). While the ICR did not discuss the extent of borrower contribution, the
   World Bank Task Team Leader (TTL) indicated that investments amounting to about US$20.0 million were
   undertaken by the new heating company but not considered as co-financing or parallel financing, as this
   was not specified in the loan agreement.

   Restructurings: The project went through one Level 2 restructuring in February, 2019. The project
   restructuring aimed to reallocate funds from Category 2 to Category 1 as set out in the withdrawal of loan
   proceeds table in the Loan Agreement.

   Dates: The project was approved on November 21, 2014 and became effective on August 14, 2015. The
   Midterm Review was completed on November 15, 2019, and the project closed at due term on June 30,
   2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Overall, the relevance of the objectives was rated high because the objectives were consistent with the
country's priorities, as their identification was informed by analytical work and previous Bank's engagement
in the country, andthey were in line with the Bank's partnership agenda in the country.

The project was aligned with the country's context and priorities: The poor quality of district heating
(DH) services, combined with the inability of consumers to regulate their heat consumption led to increased
disconnections from the centralized DH system by the more affluent residents of Chisinau, who installed
individual gas boilers in their own apartments. The poor and vulnerable population could not afford
individual boilers, and remained on the DH system, often receiving poor quality of heating and hot water
service delivery. This high rate of disconnections reduced Termocom’s (TC – the municipality-owned
heating utility at appraisal) paying consumer base, leaving the utility with fewer ways of recovering its
costs. Failure of the DH system would have meant that about 40 percent of DH clients could have been left
with no alternative in a region where space heating during cold winter months is essential for the

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



               population’s health and well-being. The design and approval of this project was prompted by the acute
               needs from the poorest category of the Chisinau city. At project closure, key PDOs were still highly relevant,
               as the project was supporting the improvement of the district heating efficiency, including the recovery
               process of TC, a complete corporate restructuring and staff optimization, the reduction of heat losses and
               electricity consumption, as well as service modernization and client orientation and return to profitability.

               The PDOs were consistent with Bank's involvement in the sector: This project was the first initiative in
               Moldova to improve the operations of a major district heating company in a systematic manner. The World
               Bank launched this project by drawing from substantial experience in policy, institutional, and investment in
               the heating sector in other regional countries. At the country level, three initiatives lay the foundation to this
               project: (i) a World Bank Policy Note helped to prepare an Action Plan for the financial stabilization of the
               district heating sector in Chisinau in November 2009, (ii) a Chişinău Heat and Electricity Supply Institutional
               and Financial Restructuring Study in 2011, and (iii) an Energy Sector Reform and Efficiency Improvements
               (ESREI) Project, which funded investments in rehabilitation of the heating engineering systems in 2014,
               provided TA to identify near-term priority investments and to implement the support to corporate
               restructuring of TC, completed in June 2015.[IKH1] The pursuit of identified PDOs was a logic
               continuation of the previous World Bank’s achievements in the areas of heating sector reforms, TA
               and investments.

               The PDOs were in synchrony with the Bank's strategy for Moldova. The Project was fully aligned with
               the strategic objectives of the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Moldova for FY2018-
               21[IKH2] . Rehabilitation and upgrade of the heating infrastructure was the key impediment to improving
               operational efficiency, heating quality and reliability, and financial viability as well. By financing the
               rehabilitation of the DH infrastructure in Chisinau, the project contributed to achieving the CPF Focus Area
               2 (Service Governance), by improving efficiency, quality and inclusive access to public services, and
               specifically, the financial sustainability of energy utilities. In addition, the project was aligned with the CPF
               Objective 1B, namely "Strengthened management of public sector assets ", which aimed to achieve
               effective and independent energy sector regulation and support largest Public Interest Entities (SOEs) to
               timely issue their financial statements. Moreover, through fuel and energy savings, the project was part of
               the Moldova’s efforts to comply with GHG emission reduction goals and to meet its Nationally Determined
               Contributions (NDC) under the Paris Agreement. There was a congruence between the four PDOs and the
               above-described agenda of the Bank in Moldova.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To contribute to improved operational efficiency of the new district heating company (Termoelectrica)

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1

Toward the first objective, the theory of change detailed in the ICR indicates that activities funded by the
project would generate the following outputs: (i) pumping stations were to be retrofitted and installed, (ii)
IHSs were to be installed, and (iii) selected segments of the network were to be rehabilitated. The above
outputs were to directly result in improved operational efficiency of TE, which was to be reflected in the
change in the intermediate outcomes (reduction in heat consumption and surge in individual beneficiaries),
and in the final outcomes (reduction of the breakdown rate, the network heat losses, and the lifetime CO2
emissions, and increase in lifetime energy savings). Overall, the causal chain from inputs to outcomes was
valid and outcomes were directly derived from the project’s intervention. However, the theory of change
did not identify the assumptions that were to be met to ensure that the achieved outcomes would be
sustainable.

Outputs

      Modernization of three main pumping stations (PS-8, PS-12 and PS-13), against a target of two;
      Replacement of 14.4 km of district heating (DH) pipelines against a target of 20 km;
      Reconnection of public institutions to the DH system was satisfactorily completed, despite initial
       delays. TE completed the work with its own funds by the project completion date, and 46
       public institutions were reconnected to the district heating system against a target of 44;
      15 residential buildings have benefited from partial rehabilitation works at the collective heating supply
       system,
      306 IHSs and associated pipes were installed in residential buildings against a target of 114; and
      The Social Impact Mitigation Plan (SIMP) was developed and implemented, as planned, to enable
       execution of the staff reduction program with severance payments by TE according to the provisions
       of legislation in force.

Outcome

      95,580 people benefited from the installation of IHSs and associated pipes, against a target of
         109,000;
        The target for reduction in network heat losses (GCal) was exceeded, reaching a reduction of 55,859
         GCal against a target of 30,000 Gcal;
        The target for projected reduction in network heat losses was also exceeded, reaching
         17,743,071,570 MJ, against a target of 9,603,288,368 MJ;
        The target for the projected lifetime energy savings (MWh) was exceeded, reaching 5,870,910 MWh,
         against a target of 2,849,208 MWh; and
        The target for annual reduction of the projected lifetime reduction in CO2 emissions (tons per year)
         was exceeded, reaching 1,675,500 tons per year, against a target of 685,299.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




      The project allowed the heating company to halt and reverse the downward spiral in DH services in
       Chisinau and to help generate sufficient revenues for maintenance and investment, as reflected by the
       increased profitability developed under PDO-4;
      A Social Impact Management Plan (SIMP) was prepared with clear action plans on training, job
       transition and compensation options for the staff who have been subject to retrenchment.

      Overall, project’s efficacy in contributing to improved operational efficiency of the new district heating
       company is rated Substantial. While the four core PDO indicators were exceeded, the final
       decommissioning of the CHP-1 was postponed until 2023.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the reliability of heating services delivered to the population of Chisinau



Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

Toward the second objective, the theory of change in the ICR assumed that all outputs generated and listed
under the first objective will feed into the achievements of the second objective. The listed outputs were
to logically contribute to improving the reliability of heating services delivered to the population of
Chisinau. The reliability was to be reflected in the change in the final outcomes (reduction of the breakdown
rate, the network heat losses, and lifetime CO2 emissions, and increase in lifetime energy savings).

Outputs

      Please see outputs under Objective 1 above.

Outcome

      Breakdown cases fell significantly, as illustrated by sustained dropping, with 422 breakdowns in
       2016 in the system, 380 in 2018, 334 in 2019, and 118 breakdowns were registered during the first 6
       months of 2020;
      The breakdown rate improved from a baseline of 1.36 breaks per km to 0.62 breaks per km, better
       than the target of 0.90 breaks per km.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




      The achievement of this objective is rated substantial. While the above PDO performance indicator
       was achieved, the ICR did not provide sufficient evidence portraying the reliability of heating services.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the quality of heating services delivered to the population of Chisinau

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 3

The theory of change underlying the third objective drew from inputs that were used to generate the outputs
and outcomes listed under the PDO-1 and the PDO-2. Key outputs included (i) the rehabilitation of the main

network and pumping stations, and construction of a new pumping station and a main pipeline; (ii) the
modernization of three main pumping stations; (iii) the replacement district heating (DH) pipelines; (iv) the
modernization of the heat distribution network, and (v) the installation of IHSs and associated pipes in
residential building. Other outputs aimed to increase the public awareness of the new benefits of energy
efficiency improvements. The key outcome was to be measured by the “percentage of household that
reported improved quality of service in buildings where IHSs were installed”.

Outputs

      Please see outputs under Objective 1 above;
      A Corporate Communication Strategy for Termoelectrica SA was developed and public awareness
       campaigns for the dissemination of benefits of energy efficiency improvements were conducted;
      Public awareness campaigns comprised the following elements: street publicity through (i) 10
       billboards on rented locations and another 19 on the locations owned by TE; (ii) promotional materials
       placed in municipal transport; (iii) branded trolley bus on municipal route for one year period two e-
       banners in online and social media; media campaigns with two video spots and three testimonials,
       and (iv) other local and specific promotional materials.

Outcome

      95,063 people gained access to more energy-efficient cooking and/or heating facilities, against a
       target of 109,000, achieving 87 percent of the target;
      The "percentage of household that reported improved quality of service in buildings where IHSs were
       installed" was measured by a client satisfaction survey. The survey was held after completion of
       investment contracts for installation of Individual Heat Substations (IHSs) and recorded a 63 percent



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



         rate of respondents who reported improved services. The results were satisfactory, but were lower
         than the originally planned target of 80 percent;
        Overall satisfaction with the services provided by Termoelectrica SA increased among the company's
         subscribers, with favorable assessments becoming the majority (53%, compared to 48% in year
         2018);
        An interview reaching out an overall participation rate of 26 percent of consumers found progress, as
         there were improvements in the services referred to 'improved heating and the ability to turn on/off the
         heating and adjust the temperature at the consumer's wish after the IHSs; and
        An important indication of customer satisfaction was the reduction of erosion in TE’s consumer base.
         The total number of disconnections from the DH system reduced from 1,624 in 2011 to just 93 in
         2019. As a result of new connections, TE’s consumer base has actually increased by about 5 percent
         since 2017. This is due to the reduction of heat losses and improved operation of main pumping
         equipment, which increased service quality. Ability to regulate heat consumption improves consumer
         comfort, while reducing heating costs for end-users.
        Overall, the access to more energy-efficient cooking and/or heating facilities was close to the target
         (87 percent), and the TE’s consumer base has been increasing since 2017, although the core
         performance indicator of customer satisfaction reached only 79 percent of the target. While the quality
         of heating services was not at the desired level, a comparison of the achieved outcome to the heating
         situation that would have prevailed without the project shows that efficacy toward the third objective
         was impactful. “Studies showed that the remaining consumers were primarily low-income and
         vulnerable consumers with no other heating option, for whom a well-functioning district heating service
         was essential. Failure of the district heating system would have meant that about 40% of consumers
         of DH services could have been left with no alternative in a region where space heating during cold
         winter months is essential for the population’s health and well-being" (ICR, p.1). The project
         contributed significantly to meeting these consumers’ needs for more reliable heating services and
         allowing the company to retain its customer base, and paving the way to enhancing its financial
         viability.

In conclusion, comparing the achieved outcome detailed above to the situation of heating services that would
have prevailed for the Chisinau population without the project, the performance toward the third objective is
rated as substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To contribute to improved financial viability of the new district heating company (Termoelectrica)

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 4



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



As indicated in the ICR, results under the fourth objective could not be achieved without the achieved outputs
and outcome under the other three objectives. Therefore, all outputs and outcomes achieved under the three
PDOs fed directly or indirectly into the results achieved under the fourth objective. Below are the specific
results in the area of financial management with the project support.

Toward the fourth objective, the theory of change underlying the transformation of funded activities were to
generate the following outputs: (i) the completion of the DH Tariff reform, (ii) the strengthening of the
corporate procurement and financial management, (iii) the completion of an analysis of asset valuation,
depreciation principles, methodologies and procedures, (iii) the reconnection of public buildings, and (iv) the
carrying out of a public awareness campaign. The above outputs were expected to result into the following
outcomes: (i) increased TC managerial and financial discipline, (ii) increased profitability and viability of the
company and (iii) increase of its annual investment. However, the theory of change did not discuss the
assumptions underlying the long-term sustainability of achieved outcome under this objective.

Key outputs and outcomes generated by this project under this objective were as detailed below:

Outputs

      The corporate procurement and financial management were enhanced;
      The reconnection of public buildings was completed (see PDO-1);
      The ESMAP-funded TA on District Heating and Electricity Tariff and Affordability Analysis (P151113)
       was completed in 2015 and informed the DH tariff reform;
      The TA identified areas for improvement in DH tariff methodology and provided the poverty impact
       analysis needed to support the dialogue;
      Toward the tariff reform effort, a qualified International Consultant was hired, and the latter helped TE
       and the National Agency for Energy Regulation (ANRE) assess DH losses and review of existing
       methodologies, and an analysis of asset valuation, depreciation principles, methodologies and
       procedures was carried out; and
      The DH Tariff reform was completed

Outcome

      TE has significantly improved its operating profitability and financial capacity, and has made significant
       progress in paying back its historical debts, due efforts to retain consumers and new connections, as
       well as the adoption of cost-recovery tariff by ANRE;
      Improvement in TE’s financial performance is reflected in the following key indicators:
            o Increased profitability (from a net loss of MDL 361 million or 15% of total revenues in 2015 to a
               net profit after tax of MDL 200 million or 8.5% of total revenues in 2019);
            o Increase in its current ratio (total current assets divided by total current liabilities) from 0.91 in
               2015 to 4.82 in 2019;
            o TE has been able to make payments to its suppliers, including Moldovagaz for current year
               supplies, without recourse to short term borrowings;
            o Key financial indicators which improved were (i) the debt service coverage ratio (DSCR)
               improved to reach 42, against a target superior to 1.2, and (ii) the self-financing ratio
               (SFR) reached 67, against a target superior to a ratio of 25;
            o However, as pointed out in the audit report for 2019, the issue in regard to the historical debt
               owed to Moldovagaz has not been resolved. Satisfactory resolution of this issue, with the

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



                                             active involvement of GoM, would be essential for ensuring the future financial sustainability of
                                             TE;
                                         o TE was able to significantly increase its annual investment program in the DH network, in large
                                             part due to increased cash flow from operations, while paying in advance for current gas
                                             supply, and making some payments to Moldovagaz for the historical gas debt (about 18
                                             percent of the historical debt);
                                         o TE’s increased managerial and financial discipline, along with improved sector regulation, have
                                             helped consolidate the position of DH in Chisinau and start to reverse the previous trend of
                                             erosion of its customer base; and
                                         o The financial viability of the company was measured by the Debt Service Coverage Ratio
                                             and the Self-financing Ratio, all of which were exceeded as indicated above.
                                   In summary, the project performance toward the achievement of the fourth objective is rated
                                    substantial, because of increased TC managerial and financial discipline, increased profitability and
                                    viability of the company and an increase of its annual investments. However, the historical debt owed
                                    to Moldovagaz was not resolved at project closure. Finally, achievement of the outcome is attributable
                                    to both this project and the ESMAP support to the tariff reform.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Overall Efficacy Rating of the project in achieving the project objectives is substantial based on the
                            Substantial rating for all four objectives. Toward the first objective, key outcome included the reduction of the
                            network heat losses, the projected reduction in network heat losses, the projected lifetime energy savings
                            (MWh), and the annual reduction of the projected lifetime reduction in CO2 emissions. Toward the second
                            objective, the key result was the significant reduction of the breakdown rate in the heating system, but
                            evidence for reliability of heating services was insufficient. Performance toward the third objective was also
                            substantial; while the client satisfaction survey recorded a lower than the originally planned target, achieved
                            outcome was impactful to the Chisinau population in comparison with “the without the project” case. Finally,
                            toward the fourth objective, the two core indicators were achieved (the debt service coverage ratio and the
                            self-financing ratio), leading to increased TC managerial and financial discipline, increased profitability and
                            viability of the company, but the historical debt owed to Moldovagaz was not resolved at project closure.

                            .

                            .



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and financial efficiency

The post-completion EIRR and ENPV are substantially lower than the appraisal estimates. The EIRR and the
ENPV at appraisal were 21 percent and US$16.1 million respectively. At project closure, the EIRR stood at 10.6
percent and 9.9 percent, while the ENPV reached US$15.32 million and 12.95 million, respectively with and
without GHG emission reduction benefits. The main reasons for the lower post-completion EIRR and ENPV
were a sharp decline in international gas prices that resulted in lower economic benefits from gas savings, and
the depreciation of the Moldovan currency that substantially increased the project cost in local currency. Despite
being lower than the level expected at appraisal, the post-completion EIRR is higher than the threshold discount
rate of 6% to 8% provided under the current Bank guidelines on economic cost-benefit analysis of investment
projects.

Administrative and operational efficiency

The project’s implementation period was completed according to schedule (61 months). The project’s
administrative and implementation efficiency was overall satisfactory since the project was completed within the
original planned implementation schedule, despite some delays during the early stage of project implementation.
For instance, implementation obstacles had to be overcome, including (i) the resistance from the public sector to
connect public buildings to the DH network, and (ii) the management of the contract to construct the
interconnection pipes and the pumping station between the heating plants circuits. In terms of cost-
effectiveness, the ICR indicates that the project substantially achieved the cost-effectiveness results expected at
appraisal (ICR, p.15).




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     75.00
 Appraisal                                                 21.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     75.00
 ICR Estimate                                              10.60
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was high, both the overall efficacy of the project, and the efficiency were
substantial, resulting in an overall satisfactory rating of the project outcome. Key outcomes include (i) improved
operational efficiency of the new district heating company, (ii) sustained reduction of the breakdown cases, (iii)
improvement of heating services for the Chisinau population in comparison to a “without the project” case, and
(iv) increased TC managerial and financial discipline, and increased profitability and financial viability of the
company as well.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key achieved outcome toward improved operational efficiency includes the reduction in network heat
losses, lifetime energy savings, and reduction in CO2 emissions. Toward improving the quality and the
reliability of heating services, achieved outcome includes an increased customers’ satisfaction level
regarding the improved quality of service and a reduction of the DH system breakdown rate. Toward
improved financial viability, there was progress in company profitability as well as improvements in the debt
service coverage ratio and the self-financing ratio.

Overall, the risk to the above development outcome is low, because of the commitment demonstrated by
both the Government of Moldova and the World Bank towards ensuring the sustainability of the efficiency of
the Moldovan DH sector through (i) the Second District Heating Efficiency Improvement Project (P172668),
which has been effective since March 24, 2021 and is now under implementation, and (ii) the improvement of
the capacity of TE’s financial and accounting personnel as well as the strength of the company's commitment
to build on achieved outcome. The two remaining risks have to do with (i) the firmness of the Government’s
commitment in sustaining the tariff reform, as several tariff decisions were made by the Government that
may pose risks to the financial sustainability of the TE and (ii) the resolution of the historical debt owed to
Moldovagaz.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project activities were consistent with the strategic objectives of the Country Partnership Framework
  (FY 2018-21) as developed under Section 3 of this review. The project initiation drew from the Moldova
  heating challenges, including the deteriorating situation of the heating sector, and the operational
  inefficiencies of the district heating system. The project design and implementation arrangements were
  based on lessons learned from previous projects implemented by the WBG in Moldova and elsewhere.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



  For instance, it is key to combine institutional capacity building with investment operations in order to
  strengthen project implementation and sustainability. The goal was to ensure that the required reform
  actions are completed, including the transfer of responsibilities for DH tariff regulation to the National
  Agency for Energy Regulation (ANRE), and the establishment of TE as a distinct separate entity with its
  own accounts.

  The project had several components that the District heating system needed at that time, including
  investments in DH network, the design and implementation of the Social Impact Mitigation Plan (SIMP),
  the reconnection of public buildings and preparatory work related to the closure of outdated installations.
  The planned investments were assessed to be technically viable, well tested, and not complicated to put
  in place. Similarly, the TA component was reasonably broad in its scope and included a public awareness
  campaigns to reduce the rate of disconnections and a corporate restructuring study. There were key
  issues that were left out, including (i) the DH tariff reform, and (ii) more targeted studies associated with
  the impact of closure some of the system’s operations and the combined company’s financial
  viability. Finally, it was pointed out that the implementation risk was high due to political uncertainties,
  and the fragility of the institutional and governance capacity of the newly formed DH company.

  As discussed in the M&E section below, the ICR indicated on p.26-27 that PDO level indicators were
  repetitive and intermediate indicators did not connect investments to final outcome results, and that the
  results framework for the DH project should have been constructed around heating seasons and not
  years.

  As regards implementing arrangements, there was a good distinction in the implementation
  responsibilities between the Government and the Moldova Energy Projects Implementation Unit
  ( MEPIU). Most of the staff of the MEPIU had acquired sufficient project implementation experience by
  working on previous energy projects, which was further enhanced by managing the various grants for the
  project preparation. For instance, a fiduciary agent of the Ministry of energy, had 14 years of experience
  in implementing the World Bank and other donors’ projects, including the Energy II (P040558). The unit
  was staffed with highly qualified and experienced professionals, both in technical, financial management
  and procurement aspects. Throughout the implementation phase, the MEPIU managed the flow of funds
  on behalf of the TE for the project.

  Overall, at appraisal, the project was strategically relevant, key technical, financial and economic aspects
  were well analyzed. Risk assessment was completed and mitigation measures were considered, and
  implementation arrangements were adequate. However, a number of issues were left out and M&E
  arrangements could have been improved. Based on the above preparation efforts at effectiveness, the
  quality-at-entry is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project implementation was supported by a sustained dialogue among key stakeholders. The Bank’s
 team consistently provided sustained supervision support to the project, ensuring a presence of a skill mix
 of the World Bank staff in the field office in Chisinau, which enabled a constructive working relationship with

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



the coordinating unit in the Ministry of energy (MEPIU) and the TE company, and promptly addressed any
arising implementation issues. Changes in the management at both the DH operator and the MEPIU
level were mitigated by the good relationship built by the Bank team with the project’s
stakeholders. However, the ICR noted on page 27 that the project’s progress, the circulation of aide-
memoires, the the mid-term review and the project restructuring were not fully documented by the team.

Throughout project implementation, the Bank team had to engage with the GoM, TE, and ANRE
and address three key implementation issues: (i) the resistance from the public sector to connect public
buildings to the DH network, (ii) the lack of clarity and consistency in the tariff methodology, and (iii) the
management of the contract to construct the interconnection pipes and the pumping station between the
heating plants circuits. Regarding the resistance from the public sector to connect public buildings to the
DH network, TE identified and agreed with the MoEI/MEPIU and the Bank on an alternative list of public
institutions which expressed the willingness to get connected/reconnected to DH system or required a
proper modernization of their obsolete infrastructure to enable consumption of DHW (new service) and
improved heating services. The project supervision focused on making sure that new institutions
will replace those opposing DH. Regarding the lack of clarity and consistency in the tariff methodology,
the success of the energy tariff reform was crucial to support the financial sustainability of the newly
established DH operator and start solving the issues related to historical debt. The Bank team faced
resistance from the energy regulator to implement the agreed tariff measures and until 2016 no actions
were taken by the GoM and ANRE in this regard. This prompted the Bank to downgrade the Project’s
rating, and the situation began to resolve in September 2016 when ANRE eventually increased the heat
tariff for TE by 8.2 percent. Finally, the Bank team oversaw the design, supply and installation contract for
the construction of the interconnection pipes and the pumping station between the heating plants circuits.

The Bank team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project was adequate. The project
was in compliance with fiduciary and safeguard policies. Procurement supervision was regular and no
major issues were identified. Audit reports were used to monitor the financial indicators of the
project. Procurement challenges at the outset were properly addressed during implementation, including
retroactive payments to reflect updated cost estimates.

The Project implementation was also affected by the COVID-19 pandemic which started a few months
before the closing date. As some of the activities related to the implementation of the TE corporate
communication strategy and the consumer satisfaction survey were supposed to be carried out in-person
among general public or required access to transport, radio & TV, TE and the consultant used alternative
solutions (telephone interviews instead of in-person meetings) which were finalized right before the closing
date. The lockdown also postponed a number of planned activities, including training.

The quality of supervision was overall satisfactory despite the complexity of plant rehabilitation and the
tariff reforms completed during project implementation, and the COVID-19 pandemic. While there were
implementation challenges, the Bank team remained focused on the key aspects of the project’s impact,
including the modernization of the DH infrastructure, the expansion and reliability of the heating services,
and the financial viability of the restructured company.



 Quality of Supervision Rating
 Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As described under section 4 of this review, the theory of change was generally valid, but it had moderate
 weaknesses. For instance, while the PDO were clearly defined, some indicators were insufficient in
 capturing the achievement of the second and third objectives. While the result framework for the first and
 fourth objectives had relevant baselines, specific and measurable indicators, there were moderate
 shortcomings in the results framework in capturing the causal link between the project activities and
 improvement of heating service reliability and quality. Overall, the intermediate indicators were in line
 with expected outcomes, which in turn were linked to project objectives.

 Finally, some indicators were not optimal to measure implementation progress, as they had no baseline
 measure at the time of project preparation. For instance, toward benchmarking the goal of consumer
 satisfaction, there was no survey establishing a baseline that would be compared to results arising from the
 bulk of project investments that were to be completed and commissioned on the basis of project
 resources. M&E implementation arrangements were overall satisfactory, as the MEPIU was responsible for
 data collection, analysis and reporting project progress to the Bank team.




b. M&E Implementation
  As discussed on page 23 of the ICR, the report on the progress of project’s implementation and the
  performance indicators was provided biannually. The MEPIU monitored the project implementation and
  submitted timely and well-prepared project progress reports, following the significant experience the
  MEPIU had in implementing projects financed by international financial institutions, including World Bank-
  financed ones. Nine ISRs of good quality were prepared during project implementation and reported on
  the progress of PDO and intermediate indicators. However, while the performance of the majority of core
  PDO indicators was reported, two of the PDO-level and one intermediate level indicator related to the fuel
  savings were not reported in the first two years of project implementation because of the delays in project
  implementation, and the reporting of the indicator measuring the reduction in heat consumption was
  imprecise. The mid-term review took place in November 2019, but the latter and the project restructuring
  were not fully documented by the Bank team and inadequate indicators were not revised.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR provided limited information regarding the use of the M&E instrument. While
  some intermediate indicators were useful in assessing the project’s progress, a more focused and
  detailed results framework was needed to monitor the progress of the activities financed by the project. It
  was difficult to keep track of the project progress in terms of tangible results when the project was under
  implementation. On a positive note, the effectiveness of the Second District Heating Efficiency

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



  Improvement Project (P172668) in March 2021 drew from results achieved and documented in the M&E
  system of this project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was assessed as a Category B at appraisal as only moderate negative environmental impact
   was expected. The project triggered the following safeguard policies: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01); and (ii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   Environmental safeguards arrangements and implementation remained satisfactory during the course of the
   project’s implementation. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed in consultation with a
   broad range of local stakeholders and publicly disclosed. The MEPIU performed a sustained control of all
   environmental protection aspects during the implementation of construction works at all project sites. In
   addition, TE implemented a program of environmental pollution control at all its generation sources. Monthly
   analyses for air emissions and twice a month analyses for wastewater discharged into the city sewerage
   network proved no overpass of the standard limits at all plants supplying the DH circuit. Overall project
   environmental management and compliance was rated in the ISRs as Satisfactory. The environmental
   safeguards’ reviews concluded that all works executed complied with WB’s environmental safeguards and
   produced no notable impact to environment during project execution and operational phase. All civil works
   were performed in compliance with the project EMP requirements and there were no outstanding
   environmental issues.

   Social risk management was rated satisfactory at the project closing. There were no land acquisition or
   resettlement related impacts under the Project, except for minor and temporary land use and access
   restrictions. Social assessments were carried out to determine the nature and severity of impacts of the
   renovation and rehabilitation works, and were fed into mitigation plans such as the Environmental
   Management Plan (EMP). The social due diligence tasks including public consultations with beneficiaries
   had been conducted successfully by MEPIU.

   The main social risk that warranted careful planning and management was related to the staff retrenchment
   under the TE staff optimization program. A Social Impact Management Plan (SIMP) was prepared with clear
   action plans on training, job transition and compensation options for the staff who have been subject to
   retrenchment. An independent grievance management system analyzed seven staff grievances registered
   since 2017 with one withdrawn, one addressed anonymously and the remaining five were duly addressed.
   The grievances were examined and settled as per the approved Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
   A case lodged by a staff was examined by a designated Commission and a resolution was proposed as per
   the GRM, the person refused to accept the proposed resolution and filed a claim against TE in court who
   ruled in favor of the company. Overall, the project complied with the Bank’ social safeguards requirements
   and produced positive social impacts by providing improved and reliable heating systems to customers in
   both residential and public sector.



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  Implementation of the Financial Management (FM) arrangements was assessed as Satisfactory and there
  was an adequate compliance with the Project financial management covenants and robust internal controls
  were applied over the project expenditures. The quarterly Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were
  timely issued and were assessed to be Satisfactory in the ISRs and annual audits of project financial
  statements were timely carried out by private auditors who issued unqualified audit opinions. The final
  project audit covering the period of January-October 30, 2020 was not finalized yet, because of delays in
  the effectiveness of follow-on project (P172668), which was to provide the needed resources.

  The project implementation also required the completion of the annual audits of the financial statements
  prepared by TE to ensure its compliance with two financial ratios, i.e., the self-financing ratio and debt
  service coverage ratio. The audit opinion issued for TE each year was modified mainly due to concerns
  caused by the company’s historic debts. There were a number of recommendations made by the auditors
  on which TE was continuously working on, but the compliance with the financial ratios was satisfactory.
  Overall, throughout the period of project implementation, there were no major issues affecting
  the performance of project financial management.

  Procurement

  The Ministry in charge of energy had the overall responsibility for project implementation, delegating the
  fiduciary responsibilities to its Project Implementation Unit (MEPIU). The unit was staffed with highly
  qualified and experienced professionals both in technical and procurement aspects. The MEPIU’s ability to
  effect procurement activities in line with the Bank procurement policies and procedures has been
  consistently sound and the Procurement Performance Rating has been Satisfactory throughout the project
  implementation period.

  Procurement supervision was regular and included procurement post-reviews of priority investment
  packages, which were completed as per agreed schedules. The quality of procurement documents
  submitted to the Bank was satisfactory and evaluations were carried out without delays, except until 2016,
  whereby the preparation of procurement packages faced delays and rating downgrades. until the hiring
  of new and experienced technical and procurement consultants. Given the large values of planned
  contracts and low thresholds, most of the procurement packages initially were subject to Bank’s prior
  review. Post-reviews found that procurement processes were reliable, timely, and transparent; evaluations
  were carried out without delays and no complaints were received under the reviewed contracts, and
  publication of contract awards was duly done. There were no disputes under the reviewed contracts, the
  execution was completed within the agreed timeline, and payments were made without delays.

  The MEPIU prepared diligent reports annually, which were sufficiently detailed in providing information on
  all the ongoing procurement activities, and the Bank team acknowledged that the project procurement was
  satisfactorily managed.




                                                                                                Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified a number of appropriate lessons, and this review has taken three of them which
are reformulated below.

(i) A business-minded leadership, supported by a committed Government, can steer change
that can concomitantly contribute to solving technical and management issues of a failing
public heating company. The project succeeded to rehabilitate and modernize a failing district
heating system, and to improve the reliability, the quality of heating services, and the financial
viability of a public heating company. A critical factor of success was a business-minded leadership
which accomplished not only a smooth corporate restructuring program, but also to rapidly shift the
company culture from a supply-driven to a consumer-driven orientation. The company new leaders
brought together key sector stakeholders, including the Government, and this helped to improve the
service quality and to reassure the DH consumers in the long-term viability of the DH system.

(ii) A negotiated and fair tariff system can contribute to a sustainable investment in a
regulated heating system. To ensure the sustainability of the investment in a heavily regulated
heating sector, it is important that the investment lending be conducted hand in hand with the
adoption of a fair tariff system achieved through a regulatory dialogue between the IFI, the utility, the
regulator and the Government. The tariff reforms supported by the project were achieved because
of negotiation and agreements among the GoM, the regulator (ANRE), the TE management and the
international financial institutions. Without this concerted outcome regarding the adoption of a fair
tariff system, the project could not have reached the progress toward the expected objectives.



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)



(iii) A communication campaign targeting the general public of beneficiaries
about a new centralized heating system and reconnection to the DH network can contribute
to the success of an investment and reform project. The importance of the communication
campaign and public outreach has been underlined by the project’s results. Similar to other Bank-
funded projects, there was a strong need to increase the level of end-users’ awareness and
understanding of costs and financing mechanisms associated with the DH supply and the efforts
made by the utility to optimize the service delivery and ensure reliable heat and hot water supply. To
this end, the project’s citizens engagement interventions helped ensure that consumers are aware of
the available financing options and interests of the DH customers were fully taken into account.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project was innovative and achieved substantive results in an important sector of the country. A follow-on
  project has been effective and is under implementation. A PPAR covering performance of the series of
  projects supporting the heating sub-sector would be appropriate to assess the Bank contribution in supporting
  the heating sub-sector.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is comprehensive and broadly consistent with the Bank's ICR guidelines. It provides a detailed
narrative of the project design and context and the achieved results, and it is generally evidence-based. The
results orientation and quality of analysis are strong, as the ICR is articulated around the results framework,
and complemented by a borrower's ICR, which includes the latest achievements and annexes that cover key
areas of the project interventions and performance. Moderate shortcomings of the ICR arose from a weak M&E
system, which led to an internal weak consistency in the ratings of the project efficacy performance.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
DIST HEAT EFFIC IMPR (P132443)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
