     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022644

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P118045                                     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                        Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60160,IDA-H6640,TF-99275,TF-            15-Dec-2016                                         55,968,854.89
 99289

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Apr-2011                                 15-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               9,000,000.00                                  28,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              55,190,873.73                                   26,398,119.84

 Actual                                          55,968,854.89                                   26,398,119.84




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Wally                J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Agriculture Sector Support Project (ASSP) as articulated in
   the Project Appraisal Document (paragraph 13) was identical to both PDO statements stated in the Financing
   Agreement (FA, page 5) and the Grant Agreement (GA, page 5) and aimed to:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



   "(i) rehabilitate and reinforce productive capacities among targeted beneficiaries across Selected
   Value Chains, and (ii) foster an enabling institutional environment for the development of the
   agricultural sector, in the Recipient’s territory."

   According to the PAD (paragraph 14) the project direct beneficiaries included: "approximately 60,000 crop
   farmers, 13,000 animal herders, 1,600 fish producers and 500 fish merchants, within all five administrative
   regions of Togo (of which up to 40 percent females and young producers). In addition, about 650,000
   households raising poultry and/or small ruminants will benefit from the dedicated animal vaccination
   campaigns."




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Promotion of strategic food crop, export crop and freshwater fish development (appraisal cost:
   US$22.90 million, actual cost: US$26.60 million, total Bank channeled contribution of US$17.5
   million under the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program - GAFSP). This component aimed
   to improve production and value-added of key commodities chosen for their growth potential and poverty
   reduction impact. It included the following three sub-components described in detail because of the
   numerous important partnerships, programs and commodities they involved:

   1.1. Support for food crops development (GAFSP contribution of US$7.5 million). This sub-component
   aimed to foster the development of food production and integration of key value chains by building
   innovative and sustainable market based mechanisms. This would be mainly achieved through partnerships
   between producer organizations, input distributors, wholesalers, food processors and marketers, financial
   institutions and other service providers. The project would support: (i) the scaling-up of the already piloted
   ESOP model (Entreprises de Services et d’Organisation des Producteurs successfully developed in Togo
   and Benin since 2002 with support from two NGOs) for processing key strategic products (especially rice,
   soybeans and cassava) through a qualified service provider recruited under a performance based contract;
   (ii) pilot inventory credit schemes (warrantage) for cereal producers (especially maize and sorghum) in
   regions meeting economic viability conditions and in connection with contracting partners already bearing
   expertise in this field, which will be selected through a competitive development funding process; (iii)
   innovative initiatives to expand market access for other crops (e.g. fruits and vegetables) through a
   competitive grant scheme; and (iv) information and communication campaigns to promote Togolese food
   products on local and regional markets, through matching grants. This sub-component would also generate
   synergies with other projects, by capitalizing on the improved technologies and services provided through
   the West African Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP), and on the producer organizations and




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



infrastructures strengthened through the Togo Rural Development Support Project (PADAT), to improve
integration across the targeted value chains.

1.2. Support for export crops (GAFSP contribution of US$7 million). For cotton, the project would
support institutional strengthening of the producers’ organization (Togo Federation of Cotton Producers’
Groups-FNGPC), in order to enable it to take full responsibility for input distribution to farmers, to improve
quality of seed cotton and to participate effectively in the governance of the cotton company (New Togo
Cotton Company- NSCT), as a strategic shareholder. The project would also finance a study for preparing
the entry of a private partner in the capital of the cotton company and for the creation of the cotton inter-
professional board. For coffee and cocoa, the project would support gradual regeneration of the existing
plantations (and some extensions in favorable zones) through (i) provision of adapted technical advisory
services under the initial coordination of the Togo Institute for Agricultural
Extension (ICAT); and (ii) provision of good quality planting material. The Project would also support the
restructuring of the Togo Federation of Coffee & Cocoa Producers’ Groups Union (FUPROCAT) and of the
Coffee and Cocoa Inter-professional Board (CIFCC). For export diversification, the Bank would support
promising innovative micro-projects targeted at nontraditional export crops through a competitive grant
scheme.

1.3. Support for freshwater fish production (GAFSP contribution of US$3 million). This sub-
component aimed at improving the management of inland fisheries and developing fish farming, of
particular interest to small rural enterprises and to youth groups. The project would support efforts to
increase the supply and access to five critical inputs required for aquaculture development: information,
fingerlings, feed, finance and markets. A series of fish production training and demonstrations will be
conducted on existing private fish farms that would serve as a basis for technical packages that
demonstrate profitable and environmentally sound best management practices. Additionally, some small
inland water bodies would be re-stocked with fish following adoption of co-management plans with relevant
stakeholders, particularly fishers. Resources would also be used in a compensation plan to provide legal-
size fishing nets and small livestock as an alternative livelihood for Lake Nangbeto fishers and fish-vendors
(essentially women) for the one season of expected low captures following renewed enforcement of the
fishing regulations.

2. Support for livestock sub-sector development (appraisal cost: US$13.40 million, actual cost:
US$16.40 million, emergency Global Food Response Program - GFRP contribution of
US$9.00 million). GFRP emergency funding would focus on three most critical factors for the livestock sub-
sector: (i) re-stocking with locally available breeding herds and flocks of higher genetic potential for growth
and disease resistance to compensate for asset depletion and mortality in selected areas, drawing on the
experience of competent local NGOs and on enhanced breeding facilities at the Togo Institute for
Agricultural Research (ITRA), as well as new or upgraded border inspection/quarantine facilities for animals
purchased in neighboring countries; (ii) support to animal health and disease control programs (country-
wide de-worming and vaccinations campaigns), using a sustainable mechanism for vaccine procurement
and administration already developed in Togo and enhanced control of the inputs supply chains; and (iii)
support to the provision of enhanced traditional farm animal housing using readily available techniques and
local materials, through the training of available service providers and direct assistance to farmers with a
view to improve traditional husbandry and reduce the loss of animal due to diseases, predation and theft.
Communication to reach out to targeted groups and training to mitigate risks would be included as an
integral part of each of these three clusters of activities.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



3. Support for capacity building and sector coordination (appraisal cost: US$14.90 million, actual
cost: US$18.00 million, total Bank channeled contribution of US$10.5 million, of which US$9.0
million IDA funds and US$1.5 million GAFSP funds). This component aimed to strengthen the capacity
of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Water Resources (MAEP) to coordinate the implementation of
this Bank financed project efficiently and manage other National Agriculture and Food and Nutrition Security
Investment Program (PNIASA) investments, while preparing the transition to a Sector-wide Approach
(SWAp) in the future. It included the following three sub-components:

3.1. Reform and capacity building of MAEP (IDA contribution of US$6.3 million). The project
would support the implementation of MAEP reform including the restructuring of MAEP and its subsidiary
agencies at central and regional/local levels, the introduction of a results-based management and
accountability system (RBMAS), the strengthening of fiduciary management capacities in all MAEP
structures, and the modernization of MAEP infrastructures and equipment. MAEP restructuring would result
in a new MAEP organigram that would be endorsed by the Cabinet. The RBMAS would be introduced as
part of the restructuring targets. MAEP structures (directorates at central level, regional structures and
specialized agencies) would be subject to performance agreements agreed and monitored by the General
Secretariat. The General Secretary would also sign and monitor the implementation of service delivery
contracts with private partners. Specifically, the Project would finance: (i) methodological support (e.g.
studies, manuals) and tools (e.g. software) for the implementation of the MAEP reform (including the
RBMAS), and of the fiduciary management and M&E systems; (ii) the accompanying training plan of MAEP
staff, to ensure effective capacity building; (iii) critical managerial or technical studies to accompany sector
policy reform, and their public dissemination, and (iv) the modernization of MAEP’s infrastructures,
equipment and work environment (construction and restoration of buildings, purchase of computer
equipment, internet access, vehicles, among others).

3.2. Sector coordination and program management (IDA contribution of US$2.2 million and GAFSP
contribution of US$1.5 million). The sub-component would strengthen MAEP’s capacity to coordinate the
implementation of the project and of the PNIASA, overall. To this end, the project would finance the
technical assistance of an International Consultancy Firm (ICF), recruited through a performance based
contract from the beginning of the project to assist in project implementation and supervision, and to
strengthen MAEP’s structures, processes and capacities through the transfer of competencies. The
technical assistance support would cover ICF’s staffing and operational expenses, as well as small office
equipment. In addition, the sub-component would finance: (i) an interim work plan and annual budget, which
would be developed to launch project implementation, before the actual implementation of the MAEP reform
and of the RBMAS; and (ii) activities related to the supervision and the M&E of the Project and PNIASA
(including M&E surveys, and audits).

3.3. Management of financial support instruments (IDA contribution of US$0.5 million). The project
would contract with a private partner to help refine and operate financial support instruments for service
delivery to beneficiaries: (i) grants and matching grants; (ii) competitive funds; and (iii) credit guarantee
(using GoT available resources of US$1.5 million for this purpose). The project would ensure only viable
loans are guaranteed by the fund.



Revised Components. The Additional Financing in 2017 included adding new activities under components
1 and 2.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



  Component 1 had five new activities added: (i) the consolidation of existing 20 ESOPs (Entreprises de
  Services et Organisations Paysannes) developed under the original project with the construction of small
  infrastructure (warehouses and drying areas); (ii) the provision of equipment to improve the quality of
  processed products, capacity building for better management, marketing of final products, and increased
  profitability; (iii) the provision of technical assistance to beneficiaries of sub projects to improve profitability
  of their businesses; (iv) the selection of new beneficiaries under the competitive and matching grant
  scheme; (v) the transformation of successful sub projects into small or medium enterprises with a
  specialized service provider and facilitating access to finance. Further assistance was given to the recently
  created coffee and cocoa inter-profession. The project promoted, in collaboration with WAAPP, the
  dissemination of improved technologies for fish farming.

  Component 2 was complemented with support for processing, quality improvement and increased access to
  markets for animal products through the establishment of small-scale culling areas in key livestock rearing
  regions in the country as well as capacity building of livestock producers for better organization of marketing
  (consolidated sales) of animal products (especially for poultry and small ruminants).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$53.90 million. This amount was
  revised upwards to US$66.49 million after the project received additional financing in 2017. The actual
  project cost according to the ICR data sheet (page 2) was US$67.27 million.



  Financing. The project was initially financed through an IDA Specific Investment Loan (SIL) worth US$9.00
  million over five years, given that the investment activities can be pre-defined and implemented over a pre-
  determined period of time. In 2017, the project received an additional IDA financing of US$20.00 million to
  consolidate and scale up its achievements and enhance the developmental impact for beneficiaries. Total
  IDA financing was US$29.00 million. The project also received US$9.00 million from the Global Food
  Response Program (GFRP), and US$19.00 million from the Global Agriculture and Food Security
  Program (GAFSP). The actual amounts disbursed according to the ICR data sheet (page 2) were: US$8.47
  million of the original IDA amount, US$21.10 million of the IDA additional financing, US$8.17 million of the
  GFRP and US$18.23 of the GAFSP. The total disbursed amount was US$55.97 million compared to an
  original cost estimate of US$57.00 million. The ICR did not explain the reason(s) for a US$1.03 million
  difference between the original cost estimates and the actual amounts disbursed. In a further
  communication between IEG and the Bank project team it was explained that "the second IDA support for
  the project was financed in Euros. Changes in exchange rates between the US dollar and the Euro during
  the lifetime of the project had affected the final US dollar amount of the project proceeds, which increased
  from US$20 million to US$21.09 million equivalent."



  Borrower Contribution. The project was expected to receive US$7.90 million from the Government of
  Togo and US$9.00 million from the project beneficiaries, totaling US$16.90 million. The actual amounts
  according to the ICR data sheet (page 2) were US$11.30 million. The ICR did not provide a disaggregation
  of the reported amount.


                                                                                                         Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)




   Dates. The project was approved on April 12, 2011, and became effective eight months later on
   December 14, 2011. The ICR (paragraph 13) stated that the Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted in
   2014, but no specific date was provided. The PAD did not include a specific date for the MTR. The project
   closed on December 15, 2020 compared to an original closing date on December 15, 2016. The closing
   date was extended twice (see below for more details).

   Restructuring. The project was restructured four times, all Level Two restructurings as follows:

   1. On June 20, 2014, when the total amount disbursed was US$14.14 million, funds were
   reallocated among the disbursement categories. According to the ICR (paragraph 13) this reallocation was
   necessary "in order to make up for the increased costs of some of the inputs (vaccines, deworming
   medicines) and veterinary services, the underestimations in the initial provisions of categories, and the
   cost overruns resulting from the lack of partners’ funding to co-finance component 3 of the project as
   planned."

   2. On August 11, 2016, when the total amount disbursed was US$31.43 million, funds were reallocated
   among the disbursement categories to make up for the increased costs of some of the activities (under
   component 1) as well as for the underestimations in the initial provisions by categories, and to extend the
   closing date from December 15, 2016 to June 15, 2017 "to allow completion of project activities (initially
   delayed by the slowdown in the procurement process and in selecting the beneficiaries of the third batch
   of sub-projects under the competitive grant scheme) and the achievement of the PDO (ICR, paragraph 14)."

   3. On April 14, 2017, when the total amount disbursed was US$34.61 million, additional IDA financing of
   US$20 million was approved to consolidate and scale up the project's achievements and enhance the
   developmental impact for beneficiaries. Component 1 cost allocation increased by US$9.10 million
   equivalent from IDA. Component 2 cost allocation increased by US$6.40 million equivalent from
   IDA. Component 3 cost allocation increased by US$4.50 million equivalent from IDA. Also, the
   implementation schedule changed, and the closing date was extended from June 15, 2017 to June 15,
   2020 to allow more time to implement the activities under the proposed Additional Financing. Indicator
   targets in the results framework were also revised to reflect the increased overall financing.

   4. On May 25, 2020, when the total amount disbursed was US$52.04 million, a final restructuring extended
   the Loan closing date from June 15, 2020 to December 15, 2020 "to compensate for the COVID-19 induced
   slowdown in project, implementation – especially the construction and rehabilitation of warehouses and
   food processing facilities in support of women beneficiaries" (ICR, paragraph 14).

   This review finds the above-mentioned changes relevant and timely to introduce necessary changes to
   facilitate implementation and allow more time to achieve the project outcomes. None of the project’s
   restructuring lowered the level of ambition of the project’s objectives, PDO indicators or targets. Hence a
   split rating of objectives was not necessary.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Togo was severely impacted by the surge in global food and fuel prices, and the
economy was further aggravated by heavy flooding in the summers of 2008 and 2010. According to the
PAD (paragraph 3) food prices rose by 34% on average and never fell back. The agriculture sector usually
provides the greatest potential to respond to food price increases by increasing production which stabilized
food prices and protected the real incomes of the poor. While food production increased at an annual rate
of 3.0% from1990/91 to 2004/05, on-farm productivity was still very low (with no or limited use of improved
inputs, modern production methods or efficient farm machinery), and the irrigation potential was largely
untapped. Key sector constraints, included: (a) low productivity and weak agricultural value chains; (b) lack
of agriculture product processing industries, (c) inadequate research and extension, (d) poor rural
infrastructures and limited funding for agricultural irrigation development, and (e) land tenure issues and
poor access to financial services. This project aimed to target priority investments that were identified in
each of the key production sub-sectors (food crops, export crops, livestock, fisheries), and provide cross-
cutting investments to relevant agricultural inputs and services.

Previous Bank Experience and Linkage with Development Partners. The Bank was co-chair of the
newly created Agricultural Donor Working Group in Togo. The initial group of donors (including the World
Bank, IFAD, West Africa Development Bank-BOAD and ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development-
EBID) had indicated a willingness to invest in the sector and support the first trans-sector national
agriculture and food security investment plan (PNIASA) priorities in a concerted manner. The World Bank,
through its International Development Association (IDA) and the use of trust funds (including the Global
Food Response Program-GFRP and the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program-GAFSP), had
committed to contribute resources for supporting the productive sectors and for institutional strengthening.
The Bank is also committed to financing agricultural research and extension through a separate regional
project, WAAPP (West Africa Agricultural Productivity Project). Additional World Bank support included the
TerrAfrica program (US$5.49 million under GEF5 over the 2011-15 period) to provide “Ecological Support
to Agricultural Activities of PNIASA." through the Ministry of Environment and Forest Resources. Other
contemporary Bank activities in Togo included a Development Policy Operation and the scaling up of the
Community Development Project (CDP).

Consistency with Government Strategies. At project appraisal, objectives were in line with the
Government priorities for the agriculture sector. In 2009, the Government of Togo (GoT) adopted the
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP 2009– 2011), which considered that the agricultural sector was
the key engine of economic growth. In 2009, the GoT engaged in a reform process of key line ministries to
increase its capacity to embrace poverty reduction strategies and economic growth. The reform of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP) already included for the first time implementation of
a Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) in 2010. Togo also encompassed the general orientations
of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) to design its national agriculture
and food security investment plan (PNIASA); the country was the first in West Africa to sign a national
Compact (July 30, 2009), thereby committing to allocate at least 10% of the national budget to agriculture
by 2010 and targeting 6% annual agricultural growth by 2015.

At the completion the objectives of this project were still in line with the government priorities. The PDO was
aligned with objectives 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the PNIASA as well as for the updated version of the PNIASA
(2017-2026) (ICR, paragraph 22). The PNIASA, aimed at achieving five specific objectives: (i) improve the
coverage of the country's food needs and increase agricultural exports; ii) improve the coverage of the
country's needs in livestock products; (iii) improve the coverage of the country's needs in fishery products;


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



               (iv) develop and disseminate improved technologies for the sustainable intensification of agricultural
               production systems and; (v) ensure an efficient management of the sector and improve the provision of
               public services.



               Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal this project's objectives were in line with the World
               Bank’s Interim Strategy Note, as well as with the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and with the
               overall policy declaration of the GoT. This project would support the implementation of the findings of the
               Sources of Growth Study – Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) undertaken in FY09.

               At completion, objectives remained in line with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Togo (CPF,
               FY17-FY22), and contributed to the focus area 1 related to private sector performance and job creation and
               focus area 3 on environmental sustainability and resilience of the extended CPF.



               The PDO statement for this project, while highly relevant, was broad and ambitious since it aimed to
               comprehensively tackle the challenges facing the agriculture sector through multiple interventions.
               However, the PDO statement lacked clarity with regard to its aim to “reinforce productive capacities”.
               because the statement lacked an explicit connection to the ultimate goal of the project, namely, to improve
               agricultural productivity and reduce rural poverty. While the project's objectives were within the capacity and
               experience of the Bank to support, they were ambitious in the context of the project's resources and the
               limited in-country implementation capacity.

               Based on the above assessment, the Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO#1: To rehabilitate and reinforce productive capacities among targeted beneficiaries across selected
                             value chains in the Recipient’s Territory.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The project aimed to achieve the stated objective through the provision of
                             agricultural production inputs, provision of advisory services to farmers, and strengthening post-harvest
                             produce management and marketing – provided through direct support to farmers and through the Business
                             Services and Producer Organizations (ESOPs) whose specific assistance included the replenishments of the

                                                                                                                           Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



number of small livestock with improved breeds and the re-stocking of inland waters for fishing. These
activities were expected to result in the restoration of productive capacity of target beneficiaries across
selected value chains including: rice, corn, soybean, coffee, cocoa, fisheries and livestock (small ruminants
and poultry). Anticipated longer term impacts included: increased productivity and market access for
producers and improved production and value added of key commodities, increased farming revenues and
decreased poverty level, and improved trade balances.

The achievement of the stated PDO in the retrospective theory of change (ToC) presented in Figure 1 in the
ICR was underpinned by two key assumptions:

1. Improved agricultural practices, technologies and marketing services are used leading to productivity and
production increases

2. Increased demand for local products on the local and regional markets.

It is the assessment of this review that the activities included in the ToC were directly linked to the
stated PDO in valid causal chains. The stated key assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs

The following outputs were reported by the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise:

Support for food crops.

      The project supported the establishment of 20 new ESOPs along the rice, pineapple, cassava, honey,
         soybean and groundnut value chains (ICR, paragraph 24).
      191 innovative sub-projects were funded by the project, including 103 sub-projects for the
         development of food crops. These sub-projects covered three areas: the diversification and
         processing of food crops (109 sub-projects), the promotion and marketing of locally processed
         produces (5 sub-projects), and the promotion of the warrantage scheme (9 sub-projects) (ICR,
         paragraph 24).

Support for export crops

      44,427 ha of coffee and 25,806 ha cocoa were regenerated or newly planted against the end targets
         of 40,000 ha and 22,000 ha, respectively (targets exceeded).
        4.3 million units of coffee rootstocks were replaced and almost 390,000 seedlings of cocoa were
         distributed to farmers (ICR, paragraph 24).
        Eight sub-projects on coffee and cocoa were supported under the matching grant scheme.
        22,079 clients were members of created ESOPs and were reached by the project activities, against
         the end target of 17,000 clients (target exceeded).
        592 cooperatives totaling 16,582 producers of coffee and cocoa and 2,500 cooperatives totaling
         80,529 cotton producers, were trained. Two inter-professional bodies (one for coffee and one for
         cocoa) were established (ICR, paragraph 24).

Support for the fishery sub-sector.



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)




      24,800 ha of water areas were covered by new management plans adopted by fishermen themselves
       and 206 fish farms were either established or upgraded as a result of project support, against a target
       of 186 fish farms (target exceeded).
      The project supported 60 sub-projects on aquaculture and fisheries under the matching grant scheme.

Support for the livestock sub-sector.

      3,800 and 2,500 improved housing units for poultry and small ruminants were constructed on
         farms (ICR, paragraph 24).
        13,244 small livestock producers adopted improved animal husbandry practices, against the end
         project target of 13,000 (target exceeded).
        3,679 improved genitors (male biological lines) for small ruminants and 5,300 improved poultry
         genitors were sourced from the Togolese institute of agricultural research and private breeders and
         distributed to livestock producers (ICR, paragraph 24).
        7,479 livestock producers were using improved breeds and 13,244 were using improved animal
         husbandry practices as results of project support (ICR, paragraph 24).
        16.8 million chickens were vaccinated and treated for parasites, while 3.8 million small ruminants
         where also treated for sheep and goat plague (PPR) and other afflictions to improve animal health and
         reduce the mortality rate (ICR, paragraph 24).
        481 commercial farms of poultry and small ruminants farms financed with matching grants against an
         end target of 470 farms (ICR, paragraph 24).
        The project supported processing, quality improvement and increased access to markets for animal
         products through the establishment of small-scale culling areas (of 100-120 animals per day) in key
         livestock rearing regions of the country (Kara, Sokodé et Kpalimé). The ICR did not report how many
         culling areas were established through project support.

Outcomes

The project direct beneficiaries reached 282,92 compared with the target of 200,000 (target exceeded). The
project recorded the following four main achievements towards the objective to “rehabilitate and reinforce
productive capacities among targeted beneficiaries across selected value chains in the recipient’s territory”
through various activities solely financed through the project as follows:

1. Support for food crops. The project supported the creation of ESOPs and funded sub-projects through
matching grants as noted above. These activities led to significant increases in the processing of the rice,
corn, and soybean adding value to their marketing chains: 21,798 tons for rice (155% of the PDO target of
14,000 tons), 18,132 tons for corn (120% of the PDO target of 15,000), and 5,350 tons for soybean (127% of
the PDO target of 4,200 tons, baseline was 874 tons). However, baseline data were only provided for
soybean in the ICR.

2. Support for export crops. The project provided advisory support and training to cooperative
organizations, input support to cocoa, coffee and cotton producers, and support for the establishment of the
inter-professional bodies for the development of coffee and cocoa value chains. These activities improved
incentives for coffee and cocoa production (major export crops), from 10,843 tons to 21,316 tons or 118% of
the PDO target of 18,000 tons for coffee, and from 6,126 tons to 14,264 tons or 129% PDO target of 11,000
tons for cocoa, both PDO targets were exceeded.


                                                                                                Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



3. Support for the fish subsector. The project provided support in five main areas: (i) the development and
implementation of fisheries management plans for the main national lakes and rivers; (ii) training of
fishermen; (iii) technical capacity building of civil servants in charge of fisheries advisory support; (iv) access
to fish feed and fingerlings, promotion of fish processing (especially among women), and improving market
access for fish farmers and fishermen; (v) the production of highly productive fingerlings by the project which
rehabilitated the national aquaculture research and fingerling rearing center; and (vi) assisted private fish
hatcheries. As a result of these activities, annual fish production increased from 600 tons (baseline) to 18,058
tons, significantly exceeding the PDO target of 7,500 tons by 240%.

4. Support for the livestock sub-sector. The project supported the livestock sector through improving
breeds, construction of improved housing for poultry and small ruminant, financing country-wide vaccination
campaigns, and supporting commercial poultry and small ruminants farms through matching grants. These
activities increased livestock numbers for small ruminants from a baseline of 40,000 to 105,218 head or 120%
of the end-project target of 87,000 heads, and increased poultry numbers from a baseline of 60,000
to 394,240 or 157% of the project end target of 250,000. Also, the number of animals marketed by
commercial farms increased to 109,211 heads of small ruminants and 748,415 of chickens exceeding
the project end-targets of 14,100 and 530,000, respectively, no baseline data were provided by the ICR. The
project also supported processing, quality improvements of livestock marketed as reflected in higher prices
received and increased access to markets for animal products by increasing livestock marketing points in
village and regional markets, which resulted in the improvements of food safety standards and quality and a
better hygiene for the meat sold in domestic markets. However, the ICR did not explain how these
parameters were assessed.

In a further communication, the Bank project team explained to IEG that: "the reported improvements were
based on verbal reports of users during monitoring visits of the ministry staff. This was not based on a formal
survey or quantitative assessment. The government planned to conduct a formal assessment of these
parameters in the coming months."

The above-mentioned assessment provides considerable evidence that the project was successful in
“rehabilitating and reinforcing productive capacities among targeted beneficiaries across selected value
chains in the recipient’s territory”. The project also met or exceeded all its output and outcome targets. The
recorded results were attributable to the project activities as the project was the sole source of financing for
agricultural development for the targeted beneficiaries (ICR paragraph 24).

Therefore, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated Substantial.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO#2: To foster an enabling institutional environment for the development of the agricultural sector, in the
Recipient’s territory.

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)




Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). An enabling institutional environment for agricultural sector development would
emerge through support to reforms and capacity building for producers and their organizations, the Ministry of
Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEH) and its affiliated agencies, and the modernization of MAEH’s
infrastructure. Achieving an enabling institutional environment was expected to have a positive impact on
agricultural productivity and would result in increased rates of financial execution of the project.

A key assumption underlying the theory of change was that the overall rate of budget execution of the
project was an adequate proxy for improvements in the enabling institutional environment for agricultural
sector development as this reflected the rate at which planned activities could be implemented – which was a
function of the enabling environment. Also, the relevant reforms needed to be identified and implemented.

The activities included in the ToC were directly linked to the stated PDO in a valid causal chain. The stated
key assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs

      By project completion all (100%) of the entities of the Ministry of Agriculture developed and
       implemented a Results-based management and accountability system, against the end target of 95%
       (target exceeded).
      10 sub-sectoral policies and implementation plans were adopted, against the end target of 9 (target
       exceeded).
      8,579 ministry staff were trained on a Results Based Management and Accountability System
       (RBMAS), fiduciary management, and monitoring and evaluation, against the end target of 7,500
       (target exceeded).

Outcome

To foster an enabling institutional environment, the project focused on two main activities:

1. Supporting reforms and capacity building for the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Water
Resources (MAEH). The project funded the restructuring of the MAEH and its subsidiary agencies and
upgraded its infrastructure. Through the project 's support, ten sub-sectoral policies and implementation plans
were adopted. The project also provided training support to MAEH staff on Financial Management (FM),
Public Relations (PR), Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and a Results Based Management and
Accountability System (RBMAS). According to the ICR (paragraph 24) "these activities resulted in all (100%)
of the MAEH institutional structures using annual work plans and budgets in line with the RBMAS manual and
submitting activity reports following the manual format, against an end project target of 95%." Also, all of the
MAEH staff were participating in performance agreements in line with the RBMAS manual, against an end
project target of 75%. All the projects within the Ministry were monitored through the common platform of a
Monitoring and Evaluation System.

2. Support for sector coordination and program management. According to the ICR (paragraph 24) the
project improved the management of the Ministry’s resources as it managed its delivery against the line items
defined in the annual Agriculture Investment Plan of the government. The impact of the capacity building
activities was demonstrated through the ability of the Ministry to efficiently implement and coordinate three
complementary projects: Togo Agriculture Sector Support Project (ASSP), Togo Rural Development Support

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



                            Project (TRDPSP) and the West African Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP). The strengthened
                            capacity, improved infrastructure, reforms and better sector coordination, enabled the Ministry to implement
                            78% of its National Agriculture and Food Security Investment Program (PNIASA) budget against a target of
                            75%. The ICR (paragraph 24) explained that achieving this result was significant because it happened without
                            the continued technical assistance by an outside consultant to support the management of the process. The
                            project delivered 379 grants to beneficiaries and the project reached 282,921 direct beneficiaries, against an
                            end target of 200,000 beneficiaries (target exceeded).

                            While the Results Framework lacked any direct indicators to assess objective 2, the evidence provided and
                            the proxy indicator used (rate of budget execution of the National Agriculture and Food Security Investment
                            Program) makes it plausible to conclude that the project was highly successful in fostering "an enabling
                            institutional environment for the development of the agricultural sector in the recipient’s territory." However, it
                            is unknown whether this enabling institutional environment would be sustainable post project completion
                            since it is only an achievement if sustained.

                            Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy with which Objective 2 was achieved
                            is rated Substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated Substantial. For PDO#1, the project was successful in rehabilitating and
                            reinforcing productive capacities among targeted beneficiaries across selected value chains. The project also
                            met or exceeded all its output and outcome targets. The achieved results were attributable to the project
                            activities as the project was the only source of financing in the project areas (ICR paragraph 24).

                            For PDO#2, the evidence provided and the proxy indicator used (rate of budget execution of the National
                            Agriculture and Food Security Investment Program) made it plausible to conclude that the project succeeded
                            in fostering an enabling institutional environment for the development of the agricultural sector in the
                            “recipient’s territory”. However, it is unknown whether this enabling institutional environment would be
                            sustainable post project completion.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                                 Page 13 of 24
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

ex ante

     The economic analysis of total project costs and quantifiable benefits showed economic rates of return
        (ERR) and financial rates of return (FRR) of 16.4 % and 17.7 %, respectively, in the base case for 20
        years. For the Additional Financing, the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for the project was estimated at
        21%. The estimated economic NPV at a 12% interest rate was US$13.6 million – again for a 20 year
        lifecycle.
       It was assumed that the project would target the following value-chains: (i) food crops (rice, maize and
        cassava or yam); (ii) export crops (cotton, coffee and cocoa); (iii) freshwater aquaculture production
        (tilapia and catfish); and (iv) livestock (poultry and small ruminants).
       Direct (quantifiable) project benefits were estimated for activities corresponding to Components 1 and 2
        (support to productive sub-sectors). For Component 3 (Support for Capacity Building and Sector
        Coordination), no cost-benefit analysis was prepared because benefits arising from institutional
        strengthening would have been extremely difficult to estimate. Also, since investments were to be
        demand-driven, the type and size of sub-projects and facilities could not be known ex-ante. Hence the
        economic and financial analysis was not based on an actual preset portfolio of investment operations.
        Rather, the analysis was based on the typology of investments expected to be implemented, as a proxy
        to actual investments.
       The analysis used estimated ‘without’ and ‘with’ project situations: in the ‘without project’ situation,
        producers were assumed to use low yielding traditional seeds put aside following earlier cropping
        seasons or bought on the market before the current season. In the ‘with project’ situation, producers
        were assumed to have access to an improved production package (high yielding seeds and improved
        animals, chemical inputs and animal and improved fish feed and fish fingerlings, good quality agriculture
        tools, etc.). They would be provided with advisory services to apply the technical packages. They were
        also assumed to have access to post-harvest facilities and technologies (drying areas, warehouses,
        etc.), processing facilities that added value to their products, as well as marketing advice that improved
        their knowledge of markets, increased their negotiating power which allowed them to obtain better prices.
       The project was expected to generate four benefit streams: (i) Improved farm animal productivity (small
        ruminants, poultry); (ii) Improved aquaculture production (catfish/tilapia); (iii) Increased food crops (rice)
        processing activity; and (iv) Improved export crop production.
       The sensitivity analysis showed that projected benefits were robust against variations in investment
        costs. However, it was critical for the project to be provided with close support for the adoption of
        improved technology embodied in the sub-projects and ensure that farmers adhere strictly to technology
        prescriptions.

ex post

     The ex-post economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project was 23%, the NPV at US$43.5 million
        and the Benefit-Cost Ratio at 1.9, over a 20-year period, with a social discount rate of 6% against project
        expenditures of US$64 million. The economic analysis followed the same methodology as at
        appraisal but relied on the project’s M&E data.

     The sensitivity analysis revealed that even under the most severe scenario, where costs increased by
        25% or benefits decrease by 25% (prices or yields of the crops decrease by 25%), the EIRR was still

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



       positive, above the 6% social cost of capital, respectively at 15.8% with the NPV at US$31 million and, at
       14% with the NPV at US$ 20 million. Even in a scenario where benefits are delayed by 2 years due to a
       crisis linked to conflict or disease, the EIRR remained positive at 13.8% with the NPV at US$27.5
       million.

      The project had a disbursement rate of 99.5% by project closing (ICR, paragraph 42). The expenditure
       by component showed that the project targets were achieved with an efficient use of the allocated
       resources. Additional Financing was used to consolidate and strengthen the results of the initial project
       and speed up the achievement of the project's objectives. The project benefited directly to 282,921
       farmers and agriculture sector stakeholders. This corresponds to a cost per beneficiary of US$201. The
       ICR did not comment on how the cost per beneficiary for this project compared to similar projects so as
       to estimate cost-effectiveness. In a further communication, the project team explained to IEG that the
       cost per beneficiary for this project compared favorably to a similar project in Benin, the Agriculture
       Productivity and Diversification Project (P115886 closing date September 30, 2021) where the cost per
       beneficiary was US$190.

Conclusion. This review finds that the ICR and the PAD both included a robust economic analysis based on
clear assumptions, as well as benefit streams and cost streams based on facts from the project, together with a
logical methodology, to assess the project’s net benefits and rate of return on capital.



Administrative Efficiency

The project effectiveness date was eight months after approval due to delays in meeting the effectiveness
conditions. The project closing date was extended by four years. The ICR (paragraph 21) stated that “the closing
dates were extended to provide additional time to catch up with implementation delays (2016) caused by
procurement challenges and the slowdown experienced by the project because of the government-imposed
restrictions following the Covid-19 pandemic (2020).” Overall, the project experienced considerable delays that
stemmed from administrative and procurement issues (ICR, paragraph 38) and presumably also the impact of
the Additional Financing on project activities. .



Efficiency is rated Substantial, overall. This rating reflects a higher ex-post ERR at 23% compared to 16% at
appraisal and an efficient use of the project's resources despite considerable implementation delays.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



                                                                                    67.00
Appraisal                                                 16.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    65.00
ICR Estimate                                              23.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial. Overall efficacy was also rated Substantial. The project was
successful in rehabilitating and reinforcing productive capacities among targeted farmer beneficiaries across
selected value chains. The project also met or exceeded all its outcome/output targets for PDO#1. In
addition, the evidence provided in the ICR for the achievement of PDO#2, including the proxy indicator used
(rate of budget execution of the National Agriculture and Food Security Investment Program) made it plausible
to conclude that the project succeeded in fostering an enabling institutional environment for the development of
the agricultural sector in Togo. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The project investments resulted in a higher
ex-post ERR at 23% compared to 16% at appraisal with efficient use of the project’s resources, despite
considerable delays.

With the three outcome criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency) all rated Substantial. Hence
there were only minor shortcomings in the project's relevance, efficacy and efficiency and therefore this review
rates the project's overall outcome as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR discussed the following risks that could potentially impact the development outcome:

1. The risk that improved productive capacities will not be sustained. The ICR (paragraph 60) rated this
risk as moderate since the project incorporated sustainability mechanisms. These included: (i) Organizing
and supporting producer's apex organizations so that they could be capable of providing support to
beneficiaries after the project ended; (ii) Capacity building: investments in training were to improve
beneficiaries’ technical and managerial skills for the maintenance and growth of their businesses and as well
as ensuring an efficient of the assets provided by the project; (iii) Support and capacity building for public
entities. The project provided support (training, technical assistance, infrastructures, equipment) to public
entities so that they can continue providing quality inputs capacity building, advisory services and other
supports to beneficiaries with government-funded operational costs even after project closing; and (iv)
Establishment of various revolving funds: these secured and earmarked to facilitate the continuation of
support activities and maintenance of assets funded by the project and ensure that benefits endure beyond
project.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



However, as the ICR noted, sustainability of this outcome could potentially be undermined if: (i) There is a
failure to maintain infrastructure and equipment acquired under the project, (ii) The Business Services and
Producer Organizations (ESOPs) fail to attract the participation of producers and the private sector in the
enterprise ownership. Also, some ESOPs could face difficulties in securing enough funds to purchase the
required quantities of raw materials and cover their operating costs; and (iii) The warehouse receipt system
fails as this would hinder marketing of production. The sustainability of the receipt system hinges around
finding strong financial institutions willing to lend to the warehouse owners.

2. The risk that fostering an enabling institutional environment will not be sustained. The ICR
(paragraph 61) rated this risk as moderate based on the cross cutting support provided by the project to the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. The challenge for the Ministry will be to maintain or improve
on its performance levels that were achieved through the project's support. A critical factor to sustain
performance going forward is the allocation of adequate budget to the agriculture sector and meet the
CAADP commitment of 10% of the national budget. This would help maintain the performance achieved at
project closing.



3. The risk related to external factors such as: COVID-19, natural disasters and climatic shocks, and a
fall in the demand for agriculture products on the local, regional, and international markets. These
factors are beyond the control of the project and could negatively impact the sustainability of both of the
project's main outcomes. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic could over-stretch the government
resources and result in a reduction of budget funds allocated to agriculture. Also, natural disasters (such as
pest outbreaks and floods) could negatively impact productivity. Finally, a fall in demand would result in
excess supply and depressed prices. This situation could force farmers to reduce their focus on some crops
or livestock enterprises and seek other sources of off-farm income.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank was requested by the GoT to take the lead and help mobilize donor agencies, align and
  harmonize their interventions, and strengthen capacities of rural institutions to achieve PNIASA
  implementation (PAD, paragraph 9). The project objectives were in line with the country priorities and the
  Bank’s strategies (see section 3 for more details). To prepare the project, “the Bank set up the team with
  the required expertise and enough specialists with extensive experience in the agricultural sector (ICR,
  paragraph 36).” The project design reflected complementarity with other projects implemented in the
  country, namely, Togo Rural Development Support Project (TRDSP), and West African Agricultural
  Productivity Program (WAAPP). Design reflected lessons learned from past Bank and non-Bank projects
  in Togo (including the ongoing Community Development Project) and value chain development projects
  in neighboring countries. These lessons related to: (i) successful value chain development required a
  market-oriented and private sector-led approach; (ii) technology adoption hinges on the availability of
  inputs, access to adequate agricultural finance and advisory services; (iii) selectivity of actions and
  commodity choices deriving from the most promising economic perspectives outlined in the Sources of
  Growth Study – Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) undertaken in FY09.


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



  The project's design featured clearly structured components with a consistent operational logic. It
  combined emergency activities for the recovery of the livestock sub-sector (small ruminants and poultry)
  with medium to long term structural actions to support other productive sub-sectors (e.g. strategic food
  and export crops, freshwater fisheries) through better organized food chains, processing and related
  market access, in addition to providing critical capacity building to the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
  and Water Resources. However, the costs for some activities were underestimated, which required
  reallocation of funds during implementation. Implementation arrangements included embedding the
  project in government implementing institutions. This facilitated streamlining and coordinating project
  activities and ensured ownership through including the project as an integral part of priority government
  programs (ICR, paragraph 56). According to the ICR (paragraph 56) the “financial management (FM)
  system was adequately designed” and “the environmental risks associated with project activities were
  clearly identified and mitigation measures understood before implementation.”

  Six risks were identified at appraisal, with the overall risk rated medium. These risks related to
  stakeholders, implementation agency and project-related risks such as design, social and environmental,
  program and donors, and delivery quality. While procurement was identified as part of the implementing
  agency risks, it proved to be more challenging and contributed to implementation delays. The ICR did not
  comment on risks that might have materialized during implementation nor on the suitability of the
  mitigation measures. Finally, M&E design was robust and included adequate indicators to monitor
  implementation progress as well as the progress toward the achievement of the project outcomes,
  specifically for PDO#1. However, tracking PDO#2 relied on a proxy indicator that did not provide a
  comprehensive assessment of the stated PDO (see section 9 a for more details).



  Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Bank support missions were conducted twice per year. According to the ICR (paragraph 57) “these
 missions mobilized the expertise required to support implementation of ASSP across all components as
 well as compliance with safeguards.” Implementation progress was reflected in the Periodic
 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) and aide-memoires and issues that needed attention were
 highlighted. The project benefited from “adequate budget and staff resources for effective project
 supervision and monitoring (ICR, paragraph 59).” Also, the low turnover of TTLs (two TTLs throughout the
 life of the project) facilitated smooth implementation. The ICR (paragraph 57) reported that financial
 management was adequate and the quality of financial reporting was satisfactory. However, procurement
 was challenging and contributed to implementation delays and replacing procurement specialists was
 difficult.



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



 The ICR (paragraph 68) described the Bank Supervision team support as “remarkable, driven by the need
 to foster team spirit, knowledge sharing, and the desire of the project team to showcase their results and
 improve performance.” The team’s close monitoring of implementation enabled the project to overcome
 delays and reach a 99% disbursement rate by project completion.

 Quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) as it was not required at appraisal. Nonetheless, the
 ICR (page 6) included one that clearly showed the links between the project inputs, outputs, outcomes and
 longer-term impacts. The ToC in the ICR also included the key assumptions that underpinned the
 achievement of the stated objectives. The PDO was to be assessed through the following four outcome -
 level indicators: (i) Farm output subject to project supported post-harvest value-adding schemes (rice,
 corn); (ii) Increase of crop (coffee, cocoa) and continental fisheries output, and of livestock population
 (small ruminants, poultry) among project beneficiaries; (iii) Rates of PNIASA financial execution (for ASSP,
 PADAT and WAAPP altogether), and (iv) number of direct beneficiaries of which 20% are women. The first
 two indicators related to PDO#1 (rehabilitate and reinforce productive capacities among targeted
 beneficiaries across selected value chains). These were clear, measurable with reasonable targets and
 directly linked to the stated PDO. However, only the second indicator had baseline data. The third indicator
 was a proxy to assess the achievement of PDO#2 (foster an enabling institutional environment for the
 development of the agricultural sector, in the recipient’s territory). While the indicator was measurable and
 easy to track, it did not provide a comprehensive assessment of the stated PDO. Finally, the fourth
 indicator was a count of the project beneficiaries against an appraisal target.

 The Results Framework (RF) included eleven intermediate outcome indicators to track the different
 activities supported by the project. Most of these indicators were quantitative and linked to the stated
 activities. Overall, the RF was consistent with the project’s ToC and included adequate indicators to
 monitor implementation progress as well as the progress toward the achievement of the project outcomes.
 Also, according to the ICR (paragraph 47) M&E design benefited from a well-thought-out M&E operations
 manual that clearly defined all key concepts and variables, including who was eligible to be counted as a
 beneficiary.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Water Resources’ institutional structures conducted the
  project’s M&E activities. According to the ICR (paragraph 48), the M&E system benefited from the
  project team's close attention and from deploying adequate human and financial resources to it.
  Implementation support missions discussed and vetted all reports on project implementation and
  achievements to ensure that reliable data were provided. Also, Bank field visits verified the reported
  progress through spot checks and verification. M&E activities included technical discussions and joint
  field missions with other PNIASA partners (IFAD, FAO, German Cooperation). This allowed the
  triangulation and vetting of the results reported by the project team. Also, the client closing evaluation
  reported final outcome figures, verification methodology, links to country reporting, and a beneficiary
  survey. According to the ICR (paragraph 48) the results reported in the final evaluation “were fully in line
  with reporting throughout the life of the project.” An assessment of the beneficiary satisfaction carried out
  by an independent consultant found out that the project led to substantial improvements in the incomes
  and living conditions of the beneficiaries. However, the ICR did not provide details on the survey
  methodology nor the sample size. M&E implementation also benefited from using GIS localization of
  project investments to monitor progress in implementation more closely as well as from filed visits and
  technical advice by the Central Monitoring Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture (ICR, paragraph 49).

  Overall, M&E implementation was successful in compiling reliable M&E data that were verified through
  different sources as discussed above.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 49) reported that the project data especially in the last two years of implementation
  were used for "decision making and to refine the implementation strategy of the project.” The M&E data
  enabled the project team and the Government to take timely and informed decisions on "project design,
  implementation issues, reallocation of funds, procurement, and financial management issues" (ICR,
  paragraph 49).”

  Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial. This rating reflects a robust design, strong
  implementation and impactful utilization of project M&E data to inform project management decisions
  during implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was Environmental Category B as no significant irreversible environmental and social impacts
   from proposed project activities were predicted. It triggered three safeguard policies: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).
   The overall environmental impact of the project was expected to be positive; however, some negative
   impacts might arise during project implementation, such as limited impacts on soil, air, water, noise

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



  environments, and surrounding communities, essentially during construction and/or production. These
  impacts were expected to be temporary and localized, and proper mitigation measures during construction
  and/or production could minimize or even eliminate them. The Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF), the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), and the Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF) were prepared, approved, and disclosed in Togo on November 17, 2010 and at the
  former Infoshop on December 22, 2010.

  The ICR (paragraph 53) stated that “the project complied with all applicable environmental and social
  safeguard policies.”

  Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The ICR (paragraph 51) stated that “the overall
  environmental safeguards compliance under ASSP was adequate.” Technical and institutional capacity in
  environmental safeguards benefited from training sessions that were conducted for decentralized technical
  services. Beneficiary groups also benefited from awareness raising and training activities. According to the
  ICR (paragraph 52) the “project successfully conducted environmental monitoring of activities in the field,
  based on established protocols and the systematic application of environmental and social screening for
  activities supported by the project, and mitigation measures were identified and recommended to the
  beneficiaries.”



  Compliance with Social Safeguards. A Resettlement Policy Framework was developed and publicly
  disclosed. A formal and functioning grievance redress mechanism GRM was established under the project,
  but with a delay, and complaints received were timely addressed. A study to assess compliance with the
  safeguard policies during the additional financing indicated that "in general, project activities were
  implemented according to World Bank standards for environmental and social safeguards (ICR, paragraph
  53).”




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The project developed a financial management plan to ensure that the
  project implementation unit (PIU) would have the capacity to implement the project. According to the ICR
  (paragraph 54) “the project complied with the relevant financial covenants and ensured regular and timely
  submission of financial reports and annual audits.” The 2019 audit report was received by the Bank and
  the auditors issued an unqualified opinion. The disbursement rate of the project reached 99.7 %, and “no
  ineligible expenditures were recorded during implementation (ICR, paragraph 54).”



  Procurement. Procurement implementation was challenging. These challenges often resulted in
  implementation delays and early termination of contracts (ICR, paragraph 55). The low capacity of local
  entrepreneurs and complexity of the national procurement system were key constraints that hindered
  procurement activities. Despite these challenges, the ICR (paragraph 55) stated that procurement activities
  were conducted in line with “agreed World Bank procedures.” Procurement capacity benefited from hiring a
  procurement consultant to support and coach the procurement counterparts.


                                                                                                 Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   “There were no significant unintended outcomes or impacts noted resulting from the project (ICR,
   paragraph 35).”




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included three lessons. The following lessons are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To ensure effective implementation of projects by government entities, the adequacy of
human resources in charge of project implementation need to be carefully assessed against
the required workload and combined with the provision of the appropriate incentives. Project
implementation by existing government entities fosters ownership, improves capacity building, and
lays the foundation for improved institutional capacity beyond the project lifecycle. The ASSP was
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and the capacity built remains within the Ministry so that it
can continue providing quality support, capacity building and advisory services to beneficiaries even
after project closing. To be effective, the right incentives (better working conditions, training and
attractive compensations) are needed to compensate the staff and retain them to prevent a high
turnover. The building up of capacities in institutions also needs to be based on a strategic vision
and resource commitment for continuous institutional improvements to be viable.

2. Implementing projects under weak procurement capacity and therefore high procurement
risk requires alternative solutions to be considered and embedded in project design to
mitigate procurement risks. The ASSP was implemented in a context of weak capacity of

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



government entities in the agricultural sector. External technical assistance was hired to support the
project team in procurement matters, but this assistance came too late. This situation was
complicated by delays in setting up the evaluation committees and in finalizing evaluation reports.
The impact of these delays was mitigated by stepping up capacity building, increasing the number of
evaluation committees, improving timelines for finalizing procurement processes and awarding
contracts, and closer monitoring by the Bank team, leading to improvements in the procurement
performance of the project. To mitigate the risk of procurement for future projects in
similar contexts, it is important to enlist technical assistance and appoint the required staff, train
them and set up an adequate number of evaluation committees soon after effectiveness for the
timely drafting of terms of reference or descriptions of works, the issue of invitations to bid, and all
the steps that follow in order to speed up the procurement process.



3. To restore the productive potential of depleted ecosystems, it is essential to
involve beneficiaries as stakeholders of depleted systems in restoration efforts combined
with the provision of alternative income-generating activities. The ASSP supported the
enforcement of a biological recovery period for fish stocks, the restocking of water bodies with fish,
the prohibition of harmful fishing practices coupled with the distribution of fishing nets that comply
with authorized standards, and the promotion of alternative income-generating activities. The project
experience showed that these measures led to an increase in the population of fish and volume of
fish captures contributing to sustainable fishing in the context of Togo, which was characterized by a
growing pressure on halieutic (art of fishing) resources. Also, organizing fishermen into groups that
help foster the understanding of their role in maintaining fisheries resources have better chances of
success than strict enforcement of regulations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. M&E design had a robust design that was combined with good implementation. This
provided reliable data to assess implementation progress and achievement of the final outcomes of the project.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking between evidence and findings and used the evidence
base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis in the ICR.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the first objective. It provided a well
balanced discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to the indicators and what
the project actually achieved on the ground. Discussion of the second objective was limited as it was tracked by
one proxy indicator.


                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG:Agricultural Sector Support Project (P118045)



Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify the assigned outcome
rating. Discussion of outcomes was comprehensive, and the efficiency analysis was robust.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and candidly
reported on shortcomings. There was enough clarity in the report’s messaging. The outputs in Annex 1 included
the expected end targets and the reporting on safeguards included an explicit statement on compliance with the
Bank's safeguard policies. Finally, the ICR could have elaborated more on the risks that materialized during
implementation and the adequacy of the mitigation measures. The ICR also lacked an Annex that listed the
Bank staff/Consultants who participated in the project.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some minor shortcomings.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 24
