     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022236

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P125127                                   MZ-Education Sector Support Program

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49300,IDA-51000,IDA-60750,IDA-        31-Jul-2015                                       363,139,851.12
 D0840,TF-99811,TF-A0429

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Apr-2011                               31-Dec-2019

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          71,000,000.00                                 147,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          365,853,113.04                                 145,870,000.00

 Actual                                      363,139,851.12                                 145,869,999.68




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Eduardo Fernandez           Joy Maria Behrens             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                             Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To support the Recipient's efforts to improve access to, and quality and equity of education.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



   The project objectives remained the same throughout the project period, however, targets for key indicators
   were revised for each of the project objectives (each at a different project restructuring) and therefore the split
   rating methodology is applied. The ICR (page 18) noted that the project was assessed according to two
   phases (project start to the July 2015 restructuring; July 2015 to project closing) "because of the changes
   made to the project scope and design, including the results framework and project components." However,
   IEG determined that these changes made to the project scope and design (including as reflected in key
   project indicators) warranted a split rating for each of the project restructurings in April 2012, July 2015, and
   May 2017.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-Apr-2012

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Improving Access to Education (Appraisal: US$ 52.4 million; AF1: n/a; AF2: n/a; AF3: n/a; Actual: US$
   52.4 million): This component aimed to increase the level of access to primary and secondary education
   through accelerated construction of classrooms and the recruitment of additional teachers. Classroom
   construction was to be accelerated through strengthened community involvement and the use of local
   contractors, relying on large national or international suppliers to take advantage of economies of scale.

   2. Improving the Quality of Education (Appraisal: US$ 89.1 million; AF1: n/a AF2: US$ 57.7 million; AF3:
   US$ 21.0 million; Actual: US$ 165.8 million) This component aimed to improve the quality of education
   through teacher training, provision of textbooks, school grants, and subsidies for adult literacy
   workers. Activities included: support to teacher training institutes to provide pre-service and in-service
   training, distribution of free textbooks (including identifying ways to reduced costs); reforms in primary and
   secondary education curriculum to focus on the development of basic skills in speaking, reading, writing and
   numeracy in the first years of school; support to the school grant program, which transfers per capita funds
   directly from the central level to schools for the purchase of basic materials to support teaching and
   learning; and subsidy payments to adult literacy workers.

   3. HIV/AIDS Prevention and Mitigation (Appraisal: US$ 3.7 million; AF1: n/a; AF2: n/a; AF3: n/a; Actual:
   US$ 3.7 million): This component aimed to respond to the 11.5% HIV prevalence rate among
   adults. Activities included mainstreaming HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation activities into existing school
   programs.

   4. Strengthening Management of the Education Sector Administrative System/ Local Governance and
   School-Based Management (Appraisal: US$ 15.8 million; AF1: n/a; AF2: US$ 50.2 million; AF3: US$ 27.0
   million; Actual: US$ 93.0 million): This component aimed to strengthen institutional capacity at all levels to

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



  improve management of the education sector administrative system. Activities included: integration of the
  education planning and monitoring system, including fiduciary systems; and upgrading of the education
  management information system.

  The following components were added through project restructurings:

  Supporting Community-Based Early Childhood Development (ECD) Activities (Appraisal: n/a; AF1: US$
  40.0 million; AF2: n/a; AF3: US$ 7.0 million; Actual: US$ 47.0 million): This component aimed to expand
  access to quality ECD programs among children under six years of age living in rural communities and to
  establish the foundations of a community-based ECD service delivery system. Activities included: provision
  of a package of basic ECD services through community-based programs implemented by a third-party
  provider (with payments disbursed to the third party providers according to a results-based disbursement
  framework); and strengthening of institutional capacity in the areas of policy, implementation capacity, and
  oversight (including an impact evaluation and a study of ECD models).

  Institutional Strengthening and Support of Strategic Thinking (Appraisal: n/a; AF1: n/a; AF2: n/a; AF3: US$
  4.0 million; Actual: US$ 4.0 million): This component aimed to support the Ministry in evaluating the impact
  of activities and informing future education sector strategy.

  Lastly, original components 1 (Improving Access to Education) and 3 (HIV/AIDS Prevention and Mitigation)
  were dropped during the 2015 project restructuring.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The total appraised project cost (original and additional financings) was US$ 367.9 million. The
         actual project cost was US$ 365.9 million.

  Financing

        The project was initially financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 71 million and an Education For All grant
         of US$ 90 million.
        Additional Financings in the form of IDA Credits were approved for US$ 40 million and US$ 59
         million and an IDA grant of US$ 50 million, and a Global Program for Education grant of US$ 57.9
         million.
        Project financing was channeled to the common donor fund called the Education Sector Support
         Fund (FASE), which supports the government's implementation of its education sector strategic plan
         through a sector wide approach. All FASE expenditures are agreed upon by the government and
         donors on an annual basis.

  Borrower contribution

        There was no planned Borrower contribution.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



   Dates

         April 2012: Additional Financing of US$ 40.0 million was approved to add a new component on Early
          Childhood Development (ECD). The key project indicator target for "primary completion rate" was
          revised downward from 60.8% to 54%, due to updated population data which showed that the
          number of primary school students had increased, and six new intermediate results indicators were
          added to measure the new ECD component.
         July 2015: Additional Financing of US$ 50.0 million (IDA grant) and US$ 57.9 million (Global
          Partnership for Education grant) was approved to continue support/ increase focus on early learning.
          The key project indicator target for "net enrollment rate of six-year olds in Grade 1" was revised
          downward from 86% to 83% (but later revised upward to 88%). The key project indicators on primary
          completion rate and increase transition rate were dropped, and Disbursement-Linked Indicators
          were introduced into the project. Components 1 (Improving Access) and 3 (HIV/AIDS Prevention
          and Mitigation) were dropped, the former was still being supported through the ECD and pre-service
          training activities. The project closing date was extended from July 2015 to December 2018.
         May 2017: Additional Financing of US$ 59.0 million was approved to add a new component
          on analytic and strategic development activities, as well as to sustain key activities that were
          threatened by the ongoing financial instability. The key project indicator target for "parity index of the
          retention rate until Grade 3 between the highest and lowest provinces" was revised downward from
          0.64 to 0.62. The project closing date was extended from December 2018 to June 2019.
         June 2019: The project closing date was extended from June 2019 to December 2019, as part of the
          emergency support from the Bank following two cyclones that hit Mozambique.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Mozambique emerged from a period of civil war and unrest that lasted until 1992, into a period marked by
overall macroeconomic stability, sound policy reforms, agricultural growth, post-war reconstruction and
economic expansion. These have led to decreases in the poverty head count index, although the country
still remains one of the poorest in the world, ranking 165th out of 169 countries on the 2010 Human
Development Index. Progress has been made in reducing child mortality and achieving universal primary
education, but the country still faces significant challenges in increasing access to and quality of basic
services, such as basic education, particularly in rural areas. At the time of project appraisal, net enrollment
in primary education had reached 95% (2010), with 70% net enrollment rate for 6-7 year olds, but the
completion rate to grade 7 was only 50.8%. Gender equality indicators were improving, with 47.3% of
students in primary schools that were girls.

The project objectives were highly consistent with the existing National Education Policy and related
Strategic Plan For Education and Culture (2006-2010/11), which focused on increasing access and
improving quality of primary education, as well as strengthening institutional capacity. An previous grant
from the Education For All (EFA) fund approved in FY09 (P112052) provided financing for implementation



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



               of the strategic plan, with the grant funds channeled through the Mozambique education sector donor
               funding pool (FASE).

               The project objectives were also highly consistent with the Bank's country strategies. The Country
               Partnership Strategy (FY 2012-15) at the time of appraisal identified a better educated, skilled and
               healthier workforce as a key outcome. The current Country Partnership Framework (FY17-21) includes
               "enhancing the skills base" as one of the objectives, which includes increasing access to preprimary
               education, reducing disparities in access to basic education, and improving learning outcomes. Key
               indicators include primary completion rate and parity index of retention rate until grade 3 between the
               highest and lowest provinces.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to education (original targets)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was overall sound. The project activities to construct classrooms, train
                             new teachers, and establish early childhood development programs in rural areas (under the Additional
                             Financing) were likely to contribute to the objective of increasing access to education, particularly at the
                             primary level.

                             Note: All project funds were channeled through the common donor sector fund FASE. In 2011, FASE
                             represented 59% of external funding in the education sector; in 2019, it represented 90%. According to the
                             project team, the FASE covered 90% of non-salary expenditures in the education sector and represented
                             almost all of external financing. 40-50% of total FASE spending, over the entire project period, was financed
                             by the Bank (IDA and GPE); hence the Bank was a significant contributor to the education sector.



                             Outputs

                                        Construction of 2,906 primary classrooms (target: 3,200) and 400 secondary classrooms (target:
                                         800). The ICR (page 19) noted that classroom construction was not continued as a project
                                         intervention following the 2015 Additional Financing, however, school construction still continued
                                         under FASE and led to construction of a total of 4,603 primary classrooms and 859 secondary
                                         classrooms by project closing. During this time, the Bank team continued in its oversight role over the
                                         quality of construction as it was still responsible for procurement and safeguards in FASE.

                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)




        Training of 44,734 new teachers (target: 44,000).



Outcomes

        The net enrollment rate for six-year olds in Grade One increased from 70% in 2011 to 93% in 2019.
         This surpassed the original target of 86%. See note above on contribution of Bank support to national
         education outcomes.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve access to education - NO CHANGE

Revised Rationale
n/a



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve access to education (revised target - July 2015)

Revised Rationale
In addition to the above outputs and outcomes:

Outputs

        Conducting of parenting information sessions on the importance and benefits of ECD. 49,551
         parents/caregivers enrolled in the sessions (target: 42,000).
        Establishment of 350 early childhood development centers in rural communities in five provinces, of
         which 100% were functional by project closing. This was designed as a pilot initiative with the 2015
         Additional Financing. The ECD centers offered a basic package of services, the key features of which
         included strong community involvement, teachers recruited at the community level, low cost
         technology, well-defined protocols, ongoing monitoring and training by the third-party providers,


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



         regular communication with parents and parenting classes, linkage with primary schools, and
         partnership with local authorities.

Outcomes

        50,742 children aged 3-5 years benefitted from the ECD centers over the project period (target:
         49,000). 90% of the schools had school attendance above 80 percent and the ratio of children per
         teacher was 15.1 to 1. According to the ICR (page 24), these project-supported ECD centers
         represented 46 percent of community preschools in the country and nearly one-fourth of all available
         preschool programs.
        The net enrollment rate for six-year olds in Grade One increased from 70% in 2011 to 93% in 2019.
         This surpassed the revised target of 83%, and also the second revised target (May 2017 restructuring)
         of 88%. See note above on contribution of Bank support to national education outcomes.
        The net intake rate for six-year olds in Grade One in ECD participating districts increased from 71% in
         2011 to 81% in 2014. This achieved the target of 80%. (Note: this indicator was no longer tracked
         following the 2015 restructuring). This outcome can be strongly attributed to Bank support as the
         project funded all aspects of ECD program including salaries.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To improve access to education - NO CHANGE

Revised Rationale
n/a



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve quality of education (original targets)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was overall sound. The project activities to train teachers (pre-service
and in-service), improve teaching practices, update the curriculum, increase availability of textbooks, and
improve local school management capacity and access to resources were likely to contribute to the objective
to improve quality of education, particularly at the primary level.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)




Outputs

     Piloting of new pre-service teacher training program at six institutes, with a new curriculum which
        included a stronger practicum component. The program increased from one to three years of pre-
        service training, with two years of theoretical content and one full year of teaching practice. A new
        12+3 teacher training model aimed at improving quality was rolled out. The ICR (page 26) noted that
        this was a critical reform in the education sector and a notable achievement of the project.
       Provision of school grants to all school nationwide, which were the main source of funding per student
        managed at the school level, used to purchase basic materials to support the learning process and
        student attendance.
       Establishment of a system for learning assessment at the primary level. While the learning
        assessments were administered, the system is not yet providing useful information for education
        policy and practice. A Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) survey was also conducted in 2018 on a
        sample basis, designed to ensure national representativeness and comparability with the previous SDI
        (2014).
       Development of a textbook strategy for provision of textbooks to primary schools, which addressed
        writing and printing of textbooks, copyright ownership of workbooks for grades 1 and 2, and the
        transition from negotiated purchase to competitive procurement of textbooks and teacher's guides for
        grades 3-7. Licenses for the Grades 1 and 2 books are now owned by the Ministry, reducing the unit
        cost of the books, as they are now printed on a competitive basis.
       Provision of adult literacy workers, who reached 1.3 million beneficiaries (target: 2.4 million)
       Revision of the curriculum, according to changes introduced by the Education System Law. Grade 1
        revisions were introduced in schools in 2017, Grades 2 and 3 revisions were introduced in 2018 and
        2019. Grades 4-6 revisions were being finalized. These included HIV/AIDS awareness and
        reproductive health modules into pre-service training programs, a social action plan to retain and/or
        reintegrate civil servants who were affected by HIV/AIDS, and implementation of a social assistance
        program that included the creation of HIV/AIDS committees in all districts, the creation of a new social
        assistance function, training for civil servants on HIV/AIDS prevention, and production of sensitization
        materials.
       Training of district supervisors on use of the school supervision manual, which included provision of
        tablets to collect and upload school data to the web-based school monitoring system. 6,153 primary
        school directors participated in management training (target: 3,500).
       Conducting of studies on the following: assessment of competencies of tenth graders, research on
        high failure rate in mathematics and natural sciences.

Outcomes

     The transition rate EP2/next level post primary rate increased from 79% in 2011 to 92% in 2014,
      although falling short of the target of 95%.
     The retention rate to Grade 3 increased from 69.8% in 2014 to 77% in 2019, achieving the target of
      75%.
     The dropout rate in primary education decreased from 7.8% in 2011 to 7.4% in 2014 and to 5.2% in
      2018. This achieved the target of 6.0%. For girls, the dropout rate decreased from 8.1% in 2011 to
      5.6% in 2018.

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)




      The availability of trained teachers increased, through training of 44,734 new qualified teachers
         (target: 44,000) and in-service training for 55,085 teachers in 1st cycle (grades 1 and 2) (target:
         27,500).
        The availability of school materials increased, through the purchase and distribution of approximately
         40 million textbooks. The percentage of Grades 1 and 2 students with Portuguese and math
         textbooks decreased from 86.2% in 2014 to 79.7% in 2019, falling short of the target of 92%.
         According to the ICR (page 26), between 2014 and 2018, the "indicator was being met"; however, in
         2018, the number of students entering grades 1 and 2 exceeded the expected enrollment, therefore
         the number of textbooks printed in 2017 was not enough to increase or maintain the ratio of textbooks
         per student. The 2019 estimation was expected to maintain the 1:1 textbook ratio, however, two
         cyclones hit the country which impacted the distribution of textbooks in the areas affected by the
         cyclones.
        The percentage of school grants disbursed according to school improvement plans increased from
         95% in 2011 to 100% in 2019, achieving the target of 99%. The percentage of primary schools
         with grants available before February 28 of each year (beginning of the school year) - a measure of
         the efficiency of grant disbursement - was 97% in 2019, achieving the target of 95%. The percentage
         of primary schools that comply with standards of transparency was 80% in 2019, achieving the target
         of 80%. This meant that 80% of primary schools have functioning school councils that comply with
         standards of transparency and accountability at the school level (i.e. school councils are elected
         according to the school council manual, there is an approved school development plan, information is
         public displayed).
        The percentage of primary schools supervised by the education district authorities was 85.1% in 2019,
         surpassing the target of 80%. According to the ICR (page 27), the project contributed to
         systematization of district school supervision, which correlated with lower teacher absenteeism.
        As reported in the ICR (page 22), the HIV/AIDS activities had been completely mainstreamed by the
         time of the 2015 AF and therefore, the component did not need to be continued.



However,

      The primary completion rate initially decreased from 47% in 2011 to 45% in 2014, then increased to
         48% in 2018. This fell short of the original target of 60.8%. The ICR (page 29) noted that the initial
         decrease was explained, in large part, by the fact that primary enrollments surpassed government's
         expectations (primary gross enrollment rates increased from 114.4% in 2011 to 135% in 2014) and
         that this contributed to challenges in improving completion rates because overaged children entered
         the school system leading to higher repetition and drop outs, which impacted the completion
         rate. This mid-course outcome contributed to the government's decision to re-focus the project and
         FASE primarily on early learning.



Achievement of this objective, under the original targets, is rated Modest due to evidence of increased
availability of textbooks, increased local governance of schools, and increased supervision of schools, which
likely contributed to the improved retention, drop out, and retention rates. However, there was a significant
shortcoming in achieving the target for improved primary completion rate.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve quality of education (revised targets - April 2012 restructuring)

Revised Rationale
Outputs

See outputs reported above

Outcomes

In addition the outcomes reported above:

        The primary completion rate initially decreased from 47% in 2011 to 45% in 2014, then increased to
         48% in 2018. This fell short of the revised target of 54%.



Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased availability of textbooks,
increased local governance of schools, and increased supervision of schools. While the key indicator -
 primary completion rate - only increased from 47% to 48% and still fell short of the target of 54%, the other
relevant outcomes reported above on retention rate, transition rate, and drop-out rate, point to overall
substantial improvements in the quality of education.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve quality of education - NO CHANGE

Revised Rationale
n/a



Revised Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)




OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To improve quality of education - NO CHANGE

Revised Rationale
n/a



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve equity of education (original targets)

Rationale
For this objective, the ICR (page 9) discussion of the theory of chain referred to disadvantaged or
vulnerable populations (rural areas, HIV/AIDS-affected). The project activities to train teachers on HIV/AIDS
education, improve local school management capacity and access to financial resources, and establish early
childhood development centers in rural areas were likely to contribute to the objective to improve equity
according to disadvantaged populations.



Outputs

        Establishment of 350 early childhood development centers in communities in five provinces.
        Provision of school grants, which were used to provide additional resources (i.e. uniforms, learning
         materials) for vulnerable districts to help retain disadvantaged students.

Outcomes

        The gender parity index improved from 0.90 in 2011 to 0.95 in 2014 and remaining at that level in
         2019. This achieved the target of 0.94. Note: This indicator was dropped at the July 2015
         restructuring.
        The gender parity index upon Grade 1 entry for project districts improved from 0.92 in 2011 to 0.95 in
         2018, achieving the original target of 0.94 but falling short of the revised target of 0.96.
        The parity index of the retention rate (until Grade 3) between the highest and lowest
         province decreased from 0.61 in 2014 to 0.51, falling short of the original target of 0.64. According to
         the ICR (page 28), although all provinces improved retention rates, the Southern provinces (with
         higher rates) showed a larger increase than the North and Central provinces (with lower rates), thus
         worsening the parity index.
        The number of districts with a pupil:teacher ratio over 80 decreased from 17 to 9 by project closing.
         However, the ICR (page 29) noted that this was largely due to the fact that the administrative division

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



         (or district lines) were re-drawn, which resulted in an increase of the baseline number of districts with
         high pupil: teacher ratios from the original 12 to revised 17.

Achievement under the original targets is rated Modest due to mixed evidence of improved equity, as gender
parity improved but other aspects of equity (disadvantaged areas) did not improve.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve equity of education - NO CHANGE

Revised Rationale
n/a



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve equity of education - NO CHANGE

Revised Rationale
n/a



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 3
Revised Objective
To improve equity of education (revised target - May 2017)

Revised Rationale
In addition to the outputs and outcomes reported above:

        The parity index of the retention rate (until Grade 3) between the highest and lowest
         province decreased from 0.61 in 2014 to 0.51, falling short of the revised target of 0.62.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



                              Achievement under the original targets is rated Modest due to shortcomings in improved equity in
                              disadvantaged areas.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy, under the original targets, is rated Modest due to Substantial efficacy of the first objective to
                            increase access to education, but Modest efficacy of the second and third objectives to improve quality and
                            equity of education.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                      Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Following the April 2012 restructuring, Overall Efficacy, under the revised targets, is rated Substantial due to
                            Substantial efficacy of the first and second objectives to increase access and improve quality of education,
                            but Modest efficacy of the third objective to improve equity of education.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            Following the July 2015 restructuring, Overall Efficacy, under the revised targets, is rated Substantial due to
                            Substantial efficacy of the first and second objectives to increase access and improve quality of education,
                            but Modest efficacy of the third objective to improve equity of education.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating


                                                                                                                                  Page 13 of 21
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



         Substantial

 OBJR3_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 3
         Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rationale
         Following the May 2017 restructuring, Overall Efficacy, under the revised targets, is rated Substantial due to
         Substantial efficacy of the first and second objectives to increase access and improve quality of education,
         but Modest efficacy of the third objective to improve equity of education.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 3 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
A cost benefit analysis was not prepared fort project appraisal. Instead, the PAD (pages 21-22) provided an
economic rationale for the project, which included the significant positive externalities that arise from investing in
primary education. Also, the private and social rates of returns to education were expected to be high, leading to
significant benefits in health, productivity and consumption.

A cost benefit analysis was conducted at project closing (ICR, Annex 4). Benefits were estimated according to
increased wage levels from completing primary education and higher labor earnings from higher quality of
primary education received. The number of students benefitting was estimated using project
administrative data. Costs were calculated according to project investment costs. The net present value was
estimated at US$ 196.0 million, with an internal rate of return at 13%. The ratio of benefits to costs was
calculated as 1.54.

Textbook unit costs decreased due to the government obtaining of licenses for grades 1-2 textbooks, which
reduced unit costs by 17% between 2011 and 2015. Unit costs per classroom were appraised at US$ 16,000,
while actual unit cost (based on actual number of classrooms constructed) was $15,850. Lastly, the ICR
suggested that the use of multiple Additional Financings (rather than new operations) contributed to overall
lower transaction costs.

However, there were some initial implementation delays due to funding structure (pooled donor fund) and
procurement problems. In 2013, classroom construction was slowed down due to funding delays from one of
the bilateral partners. In 2016, predictability of disbursements was negatively affected by hidden external
borrowing, which led to the suspension of budget support from donors. There were also procurement
challenges with the ECD activities, due to the unforeseen length of procurement procedures for high value
contracts, also contract reviews related to construction quality and durability, which led to delays in the pilot
program and thus a lower number of participating communities.




                                                                                                           Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               13.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall outcome is determined for each of the following project phases, and then weighted according to the
amount of the loan disbursed):

Project under original targets (April 2011 to April 2012) - Moderately Satisfactory; 0% disbursed

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country education strategy, and Bank
strategy. . Efficacy is rated Modest due to Substantial efficacy of the second objective to increase access to
education, but Modest efficacy of the second and third objectives to improve quality and equity of
education. Efficiency is rated Substantial for the entire project period, due to evidence of implementation
efficiency and substantial rate of return on investment, although there were some inefficiencies due to
implementation delays.

Project under first revised targets (April 2012 to July 2015) - Satisfactory; $104.02 million out of $363.14, or
28.6%, disbursed

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country education strategy, and Bank
strategy. . Efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial efficacy of the first and second objectives to increase
access and improve quality of education, but Modest efficacy of the third objective to improve equity of
education. Efficiency is rated Substantial for the entire project period, due to evidence of implementation
efficiency and substantial rate of return on investment, although there were some inefficiencies due to
implementation delays.

Project under second revised targets (July 2015 to May 2017) - Satisfactory; $30.0 million out of $363.14, or
8.3%, disbursed

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country education strategy, and Bank
strategy. . Efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial efficacy of the first and second objectives to increase
access and improve quality of education, but Modest efficacy of the third objective to improve equity of
education. Efficiency is rated Substantial for the entire project period, due to evidence of implementation

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



efficiency and substantial rate of return on investment, although there were some inefficiencies due to
implementation delays.

Project under third revised targets (May 2017 to December 2019) - Satisfactory; $229.12 million out of $363.14,
or 63.1%, disbursed

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country education strategy, and Bank
strategy. . Efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial efficacy of the first and second objectives to increase
access and improve quality of education, but Modest efficacy of the third objective to improve equity of
education. Efficiency is rated Substantial for the entire project period, due to evidence of implementation
efficiency and substantial rate of return on investment, although there were some inefficiencies due to
implementation delays.



Approval to April 2012                0% at MS (0 x 3)                     0
April 2012 to July 2015               28.6% at S (.286 x 4)                1.144
July 2015 to May 2017                 8.3% at S (.083 x 4)                 0.332
May 2017 to Closing                   63.1% at S (.631 x 4)                2.524
TOTAL                                                                      4.000 (Satisfactory)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Implementation capacity is likely to be sustained through the continuation of Bank operations that will deliver
similar interventions (for example, Emergency Resilient Recovery project, Disaster Risk Management and
Resilience project, and Improving Learning and Empowering Girls project). Legislation in support of critical
educational reforms, including ECD, will also help to sustain sector achievements. However,
macroeconomic challenges entail significant risk to development outcomes. The public fiscal situation is
precarious, with budget allocations below sector needs and modest prospects for economic growth in the
near term, particularly due to the COVID pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



  The project design was based on the government's education sector plan, which drew upon well-
  established interventions known to improve learning, and the project objectives were in full alignment
  with the government sector objectives. The pooled donor fund, FASE, further reflected the alignment
  with and coordination of donor efforts, including in monitoring and evaluation arrangements. According to
  the project team, as the Bank was the supervising entity for FASE, it played a strong role in ensuring
  alignment of activities and prioritization of activities according to the government sector strategy. This
  key role of the Bank also provided assurance to donors to participate in the FASE.

  The theory of change and results framework were overall sound, with appropriate and realistic targets
  given local capacity constraints. One shortcoming in the results framework was choice of the key
  indicator for the objective to "improve equity," which focused on gender parity although the theory of
  chain and project preparation document did not appear to include targeted interventions to increase girls'
  enrollment in school. The risk assessment identified low implementing agency capacity, in the area of
  fiduciary management, as a medium risk, and therefore included mitigation measures to support fiduciary
  functions at the local level. M&E arrangements were clearly delineated, in coordination with donors, and
  included both monitoring and evaluative activities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project supervision was marked by proactive engagement by the Bank team, in response to changing
 country conditions and sector priorities. The Bank team responded to the mid-term learning assessment
 results (at the time of the Mid-Term Review), which showed that learning outcomes were very low in the
 early grades, and thus adjusted the project design accordingly in line with the government's renewed focus
 on early learning. The Bank team also utilized the project restructurings to refine the results framework
 including revising targets (based on updated data) and wording of indicators to better capture intended
 outcomes. As noted in the ICR (page 35), the project restructurings were proactive responses to changes
 in the context and sector priorities, rather than any challenges with the original project design. The
 agreement to channel project funds through FASE facilitated donor coordination on sector activities and
 monitoring; however, it also led to unavoidable delays in project implementation progress when specific
 donors were delayed in disbursing funds. The Bank team was particularly integral in supporting fiduciary
 performance, given its lead role in this area for the FASE, by providing intensive supervision mission
 support including hiring of specialized staff (ECD, textbooks) and developing local capacity.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was robust for the first two objectives to "increase access" and "improve quality,"
 with key outputs identified that were likely to lead to the intended outcomes, monitorable indicators, and
 realistic targets. However, the results chain for the third objective to "improve equity" had some
 weaknesses, as the selected key indicator measured gender parity while project outputs did not appear to
 target female beneficiaries. The subsequent disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) related to that objective -
 number of districts with high pupil:teacher ratios - aimed to allocate existing resources more equitably and
 efficiently and was more relevant; however, the results framework still focused on gender
 parity. Monitoring arrangements included joint monitoring of sector-wide performance, with a sub-set of
 indicators tracked for the project. Evaluative activities included learning assessments and an ECD impact
 assessment.



b. M&E Implementation
  Monitoring of implementation progress and achievement of development objectives was regularly
  conducted. Annual joint reviews were also carried out as planned by the FASE donors and
  government. The results framework was revised on several occasions to refine indicators, both targets
  and definitions. Two Service Delivery Indicator surveys were completed (2014 and 2018) to assess
  learning outcomes, and a process evaluation of the ECD program was completed to inform future
  programs in the expanding ECD sub-sector. An impact evaluation of the ECD program was ongoing at
  the time of ICR preparation.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project indicator data were used on a regular basis to track project implementation progress, identify
  implementation bottlenecks, and measure progress towards achieving outcomes. These monitoring data
  were used to inform project decisions, in particular raising awareness of low learning outcomes in the
  early grades and shifting government prioritization on early grades and teacher absenteeism. The ICR
  (page 38) also noted that the results of the ECD process assessment contributed to the establishment of
  ECD as a sub-sector in education and highlighted key lessons that will be used to inform the next phase
  of the expansion of the preschool system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category "B" project due to potential environmental impacts from
   construction and rehabilitation of classrooms. Safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP


                                                                                                   Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



   4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) were triggered. An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework was prepared, including a pest management approach
   due to the potential need to purchase pesticides to control for termites. A grievance redress mechanism
   was also established.

   According to the ICR (page 39), safeguards were monitoring consistently during project implementation
   (including 11 joint safeguards supervision missions between 2015 and 2019), with ratings in the satisfactory
   range. The one exception in satisfactory ratings occurred in 2011 due to the fact that safeguards staff had
   not yet been hired and there was limited safeguards communication with contractors.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The Bank was responsible for all fiduciary functions for FASE, on behalf of all donors.

   Financial management: According to the ICR (page 39), financial management performance was rated
   satisfactory throughout the project period. Interim financial reports were submitted in a timely
   manner. Audits were also submitted regularly and opinions were unqualified. The final audit report was
   not yet submitted at the time of ICR preparation.

   Procurement: According to the ICR (page 39), procurement performance was rated moderately satisfactory
   throughout the project period. Despite training provided by Bank staff to implementing units to ensure
   compliance with procurement guidelines, local capacity and coordination amongst the various departments
   within the Ministry of Education remained a challenge and contributed to implementation delays. However,
   prior and post reviews of contracts did not reveal any procurement irregularities, according to the project
   team.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)



Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR, adapted by IEG:

        The sector-wide approach, while complex, can be an effective mechanism for support to an
         entire sector system. In the case of this project, there was strong coordination among
         donors to avoid overlap of interventions, clear alignment with sector strategy and priorities,
         clear monitoring arrangements to assess progress and make adjustments throughout the
         project period, and a strong supervising role of the Bank to ensure quality of implementation.
        Third-party (private) parties can play a critical implementation role in establishing new
         programs. In the case of this project, the third party providers introduced ECD interventions
         that represented a new sub-sector for the Ministry of Education, thereby ensuring effective
         implementation that achieved results, yet also supported capacity development such that
         ECD could become institutionalized as a sub-sector within the Ministry. The third-party
         providers enabled the Ministry to gain valuable experience in implementing ECD in rural
         communities, curriculum development, institutional structures, community mobilization, and
         ECD center construction.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-organized and results-oriented, despite a complex operation with a number of
restructurings. The theory of change was clear, particularly given the sector-wide approach, such that
contribution of the Bank support (IDA and GPE) could be well-established.

The ICR was concise and adhered to guidelines overall, although the approach to the split rating methodology
was incorrect. The ICR (page 18) noted that "the changes made at the time of the July 2015 AF are considered
substantial enough to view the project in two distinct phases and therefore, a split evaluation is judged to be
appropriate." However, the determination on whether to apply a split rating should have been based on the fact
that the key project indicator targets were revised downward (see IEG's application of the approach above).




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MZ-Education Sector Support Program (P125127)




                                                                             Page 21 of 21
