     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022664

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P120707                                   PNG - SME Access to Finance Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Papua New Guinea                          Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-49280                                 31-Dec-2024                                           6,553,579.36

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 03-May-2011                               30-Oct-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           21,910,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             8,285,944.18                                               0.00

 Actual                                         6,553,579.36                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Paul Holden                J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement of June 14, 2011, the objective of the Project was to facilitate access
   to sustainable credit for small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) and thus contribute to incremental
   growth of SME employment and income.

   The PDO can be deconstructed as:



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



   1. Facilitate access to sustainable credit to SMEs;

   2. Contribute to incremental growth of SME employment;

   3. Contribute to incremental growth of SME income.

   These three objectives will be referred to as Objectives 1, 2 and 3 in Section 4 of this review



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Risk Sharing Facility: The risk sharing facility would provide 50% partial credit guarantees
   in local currency to cover losses on the SME portfolios of participating financial intermediaries (PFIs).
   Appraisal amount: US$11.67 million; disbursed amount US$0.13 million. The PAD states that the total
   size of the PFI portfolio would by up to PGK 300 million (or US$116.7 million) at the prevailing exchange
   rates. This component provided a guarantee from the IFC to PFIs that covered 50% of the losses on their
   portfolio of new SME loans. According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), the IFC guarantee would
   cover up to PGK150 million (US$58.37 million) of losses. This would initially be paid by IFC, but IDA would
   provide a credit to the government of PNG funds with which to reimburse the IFC for the first 10% of the
   losses, up to PKG30 million (US$11.67 million), with the balance of PKG120 million (US$46.69 million) of
   losses being born by the IFC.

   These outcome targets were revised several times during the project although not officially. For example,
   the fourth Implementation and Status Report (ISR) reduced the outcome target to PKG 50 million of
   outstanding loans (US$14.25 million) or less than 10% of the original target. However, the outcome targets
   were increased in ISR 8 to PKG100 million (US$ 28.5 million) of outstanding loans. The target was
   increased further in ISR 12 to PKG250 million (US$71.2 million) of committed loans.

   Component 2: Performance-based technical assistance (TA) to one or more participating financial
   intermediaries (PFIs) to build and improve their capacity for SME banking operations through the provision
   of TA. Appraisal amount: PKG3.93 million (US$1.53 million); disbursed amount US$1.15 million.

   Component 3: Provision of capacity building for participating SMEs. Appraisal amount PKG 13.2
   million (US$5.15 million); disbursed amount US$2.93 million. This was to be achieved through: (i)
   training of SMEs; (ii) mentoring and coaching; (iii) targeted training for women entrepreneurs; (iv) training of
   provincial governments.

   Component 4: Capacity building for the Department of Commerce and Industry (DCI): Appraisal
   amount: PKG9.15 million ($3.56 million); disbursed amount US$2.02 million. This was to be achieved
   through the provision of TA to the DCI to enhance its capacity to: (i) manage and coordinate the ongoing




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



   implementation of the project; (ii) undertake SME surveys to develop baseline performance indicators; (iii)
   develop and SME policy and Strategy; and (iv) support the operations of the Project Steering Committee.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was to be financed through IDA (US$21.91 million), but the 2020 restructuring
   reduced the cost to IDA to US$8,285,000.

   Financing. The IFC through a guarantee to the Government of PNG (up to US$46.4 million), the
   Government of PNG (US$4.6 million) and the PFIs (US$58 million). The actual financing by IDA recorded in
   the Data Sheet in the ICR was US$6,553,579. The IFC did not pay out under the guarantee.

   Dates. The Risk Sharing Facility was envisaged to remain in effect for 14 years for both IFC and IDA
   financing. The World Bank Group Board approved the project on May 3, 2011 and it became effective on
   September 15, 2011. It was originally scheduled to close on December 31, 2024. The actual closing date
   was on October 30, 2020, although the Bank South Pacific (BSP) had already withdrawn from the project in
   September 2017 after which few project activities were implemented.

   Restructuring. While indicators were dropped and added without formal restructuring (see ICR, paragraph
   14 and Table 4), IEG assessed the changes and concluded that there had been no discernible change in
   the project’s level of ambition and hence a split rating of objectives was not justified




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was aligned with the policy priorities of the government as articulated in its PNG Vision 2050
(2010) and Long-Term Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030 (2010). An important component relevant
to each was the need to promote SMEs, which are the largest source of employment in the country. The
strategies embodied in these documents were that the SME sector would be a major contributor towards
PNG becoming a middle-income country by 2030 and a high-income country by 2050.

A key constraint to businesses in PNG was extremely limited access to finance. Numerous pieces of
analytical work and surveys confirmed that financing for firms was a binding constraint. In 2010 the ratio of
private sector credit to GDP, a key indicator of financial market development was 21%, indicating significant
financial repression. At the same time, the capital adequacy ratios of the commercial banks were high,
exceeding 30%, with the loan to deposit ratio less than 45% even though bank reserves of the commercial
banks were high, indicating a reluctance to lend because of the perceived level of risk on the part of
lenders.

The World Bank Country Assistance Strategy 2007 (CAS) had as one of its two pillars, “improving the
livelihoods and service delivery, especially for rural poor.” The PAD states (para 16) “Support under the
second pillar would include, inter alia, support to private sector development. Development of the SME
sector will serve to boost income-earning opportunities.” However, the Systematic Country Diagnostic
(2018) does not prioritize support to SMEs. Nevertheless, the Country Partnership Framework FY19-FY23

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



               has as a Focus Area Objective 3.1, to improve MSME Competitiveness and Access to Financial Services.
               The project was therefore largely consistent with the objectives of the CAS at appraisal, and consistent with
               the Country Partnership Framework at closing.

               However, the measurability of the extent to which the objectives (“facilitate access to sustainable credit” and
               “contribute to incremental growth of SME employment and income”) were achieved raises serious
               questions regarding the way that the PDO indicators were framed. The flow of credit indicator and the loans
               to businesses owned by women indicator have problems with attribution. This issue is compounded with
               respect to the other indicators, namely an increase in the number of formal sector SMEs and the
               incremental employment generated by SMEs (see ICR, Table 1). Attributing changes in either of these
               variables to the project is not possible since many factors other than credit determine the number of
               businesses started and the number of employees they hire.

                A further issue was, as the ICR points out (para 21), that the CPF FY19-FY23 treats the project as closed,
               since it is not listed as contributing to the achievement of any of the indicators. However, the project
               appeared in the Completion and Learning Review (CLR) of the previous CPF (FY2012-FY2018).

               In conclusion, the project’s objective was highly relevant to both government and World Bank development
               strategies for PNG. However, the relevance of project's objectives is undermined by proposed PDO
               indicators which measure outcomes that cannot be attributed solely to the project. The relevance of the
               project's objectives is therefore rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Facilitate access to sustainable credit to SMEs

                             Rationale
                             The ICR states (para 4) that “at the time the program was being designed, Risk Sharing Facilities (RSFs)
                             were emerging as a new World Bank Group instrument for catalyzing SME lending, through partnerships
                             between the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), and
                             national governments.” Partial credit guarantees were seen as an instrument to incentivize commercial banks
                             to lend to riskier clients by guaranteeing to reimburse a portion of any losses that might occur. The model
                             used in PNG was a portfolio guarantee, rather than a guarantee of individual loans.

                             Theory of Change. The results chain for this objective was based on the assumption that the partial credit
                             guarantee program would lead to the participating commercial banks lending more to SMEs. It was seen as a
                             way to overcome what was described as market failures in the credit market. However, whether this was in

                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



fact a market failure in PNG is open to question. Firms in PNG, especially smaller ones, had no way of
offering collateral to banks, since there was no secured transactions framework that could be used to secure
lending. Unsecured lending, especially to SMEs, is risky even in well-developed financial markets.

The design of the RSF for this project envisaged participation of the Bank of the South Pacific (BSP), a PNG-
owned financial institution, plus two or three of the other commercial banks, which were foreign owned. Under
the original design, BSP would be allocated 50% of the RSF, with other PFIs also being allocated 50%
between them. In the event, the other financial institutions began to downsize their presence in the country.
Although they had initially expressed interest, it turned out that the private commercial banks were ultimately
unwilling to participate in the RSF despite a sustained effort on the part of World Bank staff to encourage
them to do so - as reported by the Bank project team to IEG. Consequently, only BSP participated in the
program.

Outputs

The original target for the amount of credit to PNG SMEs was PKG550 million, compared with a 2011
baseline of PKG300 million. The cumulative value of SME loans guaranteed by the RSF at the end of
December 2017 was PKG114.6 million. The data were specified for this date because at the end of 2017,
BSP withdrew from the RSF. Figure 2 in the ICR shows that there was considerable fluctuation in the value of
guaranteed loans over the period of the project.

However, as Table 8 and Annex 6 in the ICR show, the indicator changed during implementation, from a
Committed Loans outcome target in the PAD of PKG550 million, to Outstanding Loans in ISR4 and ISR 8,
and then back to Committed Loans in ISR12 and ISR16. The final target in ISR 16 was a target of PKG250
million in committed loans. As noted already, the actual amount disbursed was PGK114.6 million.

Outcomes

The actual target outcome for the number of loans to women-owned businesses was not specified in the
PAD. This was developed during implementation through the ISRs. The outcome target for the number of
loans to women was set at 400 (ICR, Annex 1) compared with a baseline of 0, and the target value of loans to
women-owned businesses was PKG100 compared with a baseline of 0. Based on ISR 18 in February 2020,
the ICR concluded that the final outcome was 262 guaranteed new loans to women-owned businesses out of
a total of 1,471 loans (paragraph 51). However, once BSP withdrew from the RSF at the end of December
2017, the guarantees expired.

Over the course of the project, the ratio of private sector credit to GDP in PNG declined from 21% to 19%.
While many factors contribute to determining this ratio, it is difficult to discern a positive impact on financial
market development in PNG as a result of the project. In terms of potential impact on access to credit in PNG,
the ICR (para. 28) points out that even if the RSF had fully met its target, it would increase the ratio of private
sector credit to GDP by less than 0.5%. “While lending to SMEs would comprise only a portion of overall
private sector credit, the scale of the RSF seems unlikely to have moved the needle on credit to SMEs”.

While the number of SMEs accessing sustained credit cannot be attributed directly to this project because
that access is dependent on many factors other than a source of financing through PFIs, there is no evidence
provided in this ICR that the project was able to facilitate access to sustainable credit to SMEs. Therefore the
extent to which Objective 1 was achieved is rated modest.


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Contribute to incremental growth of SME employment

Rationale
Theory of Change. The causal chain leading to this objective was that greater access to finance among the
group of SMEs that was receiving credit guarantees would result in growth in the number of employees. The
PAD projected a 5% annual rise in employment for the beneficiaries. Although this is not an unreasonable
figure, there is no discernable analytical basis for the choice of the projection, nor for attribution.

The ICR reports (para 33) that indicators in the ISRs showed that employment rose from a baseline of 500 in
2012 to 2,149 in 2016, which represented a more than fourfold increase. The basis for the increase, however,
is unconvincing, since it was obtained from a survey in 2015 of recipients of credit guarantees, who before the
loans were utilized were asked how many additional employees they would hire because of the loans they
were receiving. Furthermore, the 500-employee baseline was suspect since it was based on an “expert-
estimate” during appraisal which was not verified and could not be compared with the sample of borrowers in
2016. In addition, firms hire for many reasons, and for this group their access to the credit guarantees would
be only one factor in their hiring decisions.

The ICR states (para. 35) that additional information was available from a 2019 survey of 437 SME borrowers
from BSP who received RSF guaranteed loans between 2012 and 2015. They reported a 240% increase in
employment. However, the ICR noted methodological issue with the survey because it was conducted more
than 5 years after the loans were disbursed and recall of historical information would have been a
challenge. In addition, there were problems with the responses to the survey because some SMEs declined
to be interviewed and others refused to divulge financial information both of which may have biased the
results. The employment increases also occurred during the boom that arose from the construction of the
US$18 billion natural gas pipeline by Exxon Mobile, which generated economic opportunities for SMEs in
PNG. Assessing the counterfactual regarding what would have been the increase in employment without the
guarantees was, as the ICR noted, also not straightforward.

Because of the lack of evidence attributing higher employment by firms to those receiving credit guarantees
provided by the project, the extent to which Objective 2 was achieved is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Contribute to incremental growth of SME income

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)




                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change. The causal chain associated with the relationship between SME income and receiving
                            guaranteed loans is also plausible – the loans could have been used to enhance productivity through the
                            installation of better systems, the purchase of capital equipment and the training of employees.

                            However, obtaining accurate information on income growth was as problematic as obtaining information on
                            employment, and had the same deficiencies. The same survey that asked questions about employment
                            growth, also asked for information on profit growth. The results indicated that firms reported a 5-year growth
                            of 66%, which could certainly be described as “incremental”. However, the ICR reports (para 35) that several
                            firms refused to answer questions relating to financial data, which raised the same potential bias issues as
                            the employment data.

                             Because of the lack of evidence attributing higher incomes generated by firms to those provided with credit
                            guarantees by the project, the extent to which Objective 3 was achieved is rated modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            All three objectives are rated modest. The overall efficacy rating is therefore also modest. The credit
                            guarantee scheme failed to achieve its targets, although if BSP had remained in the RSF and the other
                            commercial banks had joined, it is possible that better results could have been achieved. The inability to be
                            able to attribute employment growth and income growth to the RSF resulted in the achievement of the second
                            and third objectives being rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis. The net present value (NPV) of the project was calculated at appraisal, to assess returns
   to the RSF. The calculation resulted in a financial NPV of US$608.4 million. However, as the ICR points out
   (para 39), there was a fundamental error in the calculation caused by adding expenses of the project to its
   revenues. If expenses had been deducted from revenues, the project would have yielded a negative NPV of
   US$100.8 million.

   The ICR (paras 40-41) points out that there were additional problems with the calculations of the NPV in the
   PAD. Assumptions regarding the ratio of the amount of the guarantee relative to the value of guaranteed loans


                                                                                                                             Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



was over optimistic. There were also errors in calculating investment income; the PAD assumed that it would
earn income on the total amount of the guarantees rather than only the IDA portion that was placed in a trust
fund.

The ICR team recomputed the NPV based on actual data from reports submitted to IFC by BSP up to the time
when BSP withdrew from the RSF. The calculations show a small loss of US$0.4 million for the RSF component
of the project, although the basis for the calculation was not included in the ICR. No NPV was calculated for the
other components.

Administrative Efficiency. There were several issues associated with implementation. The ICR, (paras 43
onwards) describes issues associated with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in hiring and retaining well
qualified staff. Since this was the first World Bank project to be implemented by the Department of Commerce
and Industry (DCI), the PIU had been expected to offset the lack of experience and capacity in the Department
of Commerce and Industry in administering World Bank projects and to provide training and technical expertise.
However, the possibility of DCI staff assuming a more substantive role in the latter portion of the 13-year project
was not incorporated into project design. Furthermore, the PIU failed to raise efficiency in project implementation
over time; while the RSF commenced activities in the first year of the program, the implementation of
Components two, three and four were severely delayed. The mentorship portion of Component 3 never occurred
because of procurement issues, the survey to establish the Baselines for the project was not completed, nor
was the Government Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme feasibility study.

The implementation of the RSF came to a halt when BSP withdrew from the scheme. The ICR (footnote 21)
reports that motivating factors in BSP’s withdrawal were burdensome reporting requirements and delays in
processing claims for loan losses.

In summary, the calculations of a potential rate of return at appraisal contained fundamental errors, which if
corrected might have resulted in the project not being approved. This ICR estimated a NPV for the project for
the BSP activities as implemented which showed a small loss. Finally, administrative costs associated with the
project were 14% of total actual costs which is high considering that the PSB undertook most of the burden and
cost of implementation. This review therefore has assessed the project's efficiency as negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)




6. Outcome

With a substantial rating for relevance, a modest rating for efficacy and a negligible rating for efficiency, the
project had major shortcomings in its efficiency. The project's overall outcome is therefore rated unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR states that “there does not appear to be a material risk that development outcomes…will not be
maintained.” (para 84). This judgment is based on BSP continuing to lend to SMEs and the use of RSF type
lending to SMEs by the government. However, this conclusion is unconvincing. There are no data in the
ICR on loan losses by the government on its RSFs. Furthermore, in arriving at its conclusion on the risk to
development outcomes, the ICR does not consider the other components of the project. Before the RSF, the
BSP was already lending to SMEs. The conclusion from this review is that significant development outcome
risks exist on the grounds that even with external guarantees, lending by BSP fell far short of the target.
While BSP indicated that it had learned from the project, there are no grounds to assume that it would
significantly expand SME lending beyond levels achieved before RSF in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the RSF portion of the project was based on the need to increase access to finance for
  PNG’s SMEs, which had been identified in numerous surveys as a binding constraint to SME growth. In
  the event, only one financial institution participated, which suggests that the Bank team was overly
  optimistic regarding interest of the two Australian commercial banks in PNG. Supposedly they expressed
  initial interest but ultimately declined to join the RSF. Although Bank staff consulted with their head offices
  in Australia (interview with the TTL), in the event, they decided not to participate. The result was that only
  the locally owned BSP became part of the RSF, which immediately reduced its potential impact by half.
  When BSP withdrew, it meant, essentially that the RSF portion of the project was closed.

  In addition, calculations of the NPV of this component contained basic errors, that showed that the project
  would generate a large positive rate of return. However, if the calculations had been done correctly, they
  would have showed a large negative return. It is not possible to determine whether, if the calculations had
  been accurate, the project would not have gone ahead or would have been redesigned. However, the
  size of the miscalculations suggests a deficient quality at entry for this component.

  The other portions of the project were aimed at improving the capacity of SMEs, promoting ownership
  and entrepreneurship, increasing the number of women owned SMEs, and raising the capacity of the

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



  Department of Commerce and Industry to implement WBG projects through technical assistance. With
  all of these, there were significant problems with identifying potential pitfalls because of failing to
  adequately deal with major capacity issues on the part of PNG counterparts as well as operating in the
  difficult security environment of the country. The limitations arising from the low capacity of Department of
  Commerce and Industry (DCI) staff, which constituted a major constraint throughout the project and an
  ongoing risk to development outcome. This is a factor that should have been identified during project
  preparation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There were regular bi-annual consultations that took place on schedule (ICR para 81). The ICR indicates
 that although the TTLs were dedicated, changes to the project’s results framework were not always fully
 documented and the project could have benefitted from a restructuring when the mid-term review was done
 in 2016. The PNG country managers recommended bi-weekly meetings with BSP and the PIU to bolster
 the latter’s’ limited capacity and to speed up progress with the project. However, this did not occur.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 A significant drawback in the design of the M&E framework was the complexity of the data that PFIs had to
 report. For example, BSP was required to collect data on baseline and current revenue and employment of
 participating borrowers. This raised the transactions costs of the RSF and was apparently one of the
 motives for BSP withdrawing from the project.

 A further issue was that as the project progressed, there were numerous changes to the definition of
 indicators and to targets but which were not formally changed in a restructuring. In most cases ISRs did not
 contain justifications for the changes. The ICR reports (para 74) that “the changes to project indicators
 seem to have caused confusion for the task team themselves on which figures to report".




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



 Furthermore, the Government of PNG, through the DCI was also expected to conduct surveys, but
 procurement issues so delayed these surveys that the data collected were not of use in monitoring project
 progress.



b. M&E Implementation
  Inconsistencies in both data monitoring and evaluation were widespread. There was no regular
  monitoring of borrowers under the RSF nor of beneficiaries under the other components of the project.
  According to the ICR, BSP officials noted the gap between the data gathering requirements on the one
  hand and the failure of the project to provide useful analysis of the data. Furthermore, the Government of
  PNG, through the DCI, was also expected to conduct surveys but procurement issues so delayed these
  surveys that the data collected were not of use in monitoring project progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data on indicators were collected sporadically and appear not to have been used for project
  management. The ICR (para 76) indicates that the M&E system of the project was not used to track
  progress, nor for making changes to the project management structure.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The ICR reports (para 78) that the project triggered three safeguard policies at preparation, namely OP4.01,
   and environment assessment, OP4.10 indigenous peoples and OP4.12 involuntary resettlement. BSP
   generated an Environmental and Social Management Framework and a process to screen loans that
   covered all three of the Ops. Environmental and Social safeguard ratings were moderately satisfactory
   during implementation and no waivers were requested nor did any compliance issues arise.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Initially, following teething issues in the early stages of the project, financial management was satisfactory
   as the PIU developed capacity and familiarity with both government and World Bank systems. However,
   the ICR states that once it became clear that the project would not continue, staff qualified in financial
   management left the PIU. As a result, the earlier high standards of financial management deteriorated.
   Submission deadlines were missed, and timely documentation was not submitted. Since documentation




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



   was not submitted regarding information on the balance in the Designated Account, the project has been
   classified as a Lapsed Loan.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The IFC developed expertise in PNG’s financial sector, including increasing its investment in BSP.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   With a substantial relevance, a
                                Moderately                                         modest efficacy, and a negligible
Outcome                                                Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                     efficiency the outcome rating is
                                                                                   unsatisfactory.
                                                                                   Both the quality at entry and the
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Unsatisfactory              quality of supervision were
                                Unsatisfactory
                                                                                   deficient.
Quality of M&E                  Negligible             Negligible
                                                                                   High quality analysis and
Quality of ICR                  ---                    High                        presentation of the evolution of
                                                                                   the project

12. Lessons

The ICR contains the following lessons which IEG presents with some modification

 Changes in project indicators need to be made formally to be credible. While project
indicators may change over time because of changes in circumstances, these require full
documentation so that the logic of why the changes occurred can be analyzed. In the case of this
project, inadequate discussion and documentation of the changes in the ISRs made the rationale for
changes impossible to follow.

Institutions required to provide data deserve feedback. If implementing institutions are required
to provide data on their operations, it is important that they receive feedback from the analysis of the
data they provide. In the case of this project, failure to provide BSP with a meaningful feedback on




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)



the data submitted was at least partly responsible for its withdrawal from the RSF and possibly
limited what it might have learned from the project.

Transfer of knowledge from consultants to local staff enhances capacity building. For
decades it has been agreed that using highly qualified consultants to initially staff PIUs in low-
capacity environments is warranted, but over time local capacity requires strengthening for benefits
to be sustainable. In the case of this project, little knowledge transfer occurred so that when BSP
withdrew from the RSF, the consultants departed, and the project essentially came to a halt because
of lack of an understanding of the project on the part of PNG counterparts.

When designing a credit guarantee program that also provides training, implementing the
training program after SMEs have qualified for loan guarantees reduces the possibility that
participants in the training program will not be part of the lending program. In PNG, the
opposite sequencing occurred. As a result, only six percent of training beneficiaries managed to
access loans.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This is a high quality ICR that sets out the issues clearly and undertakes in-depth analysis of the issues and
problems with this project. Where there were gaps in project preparation and analysis, they were filled by the
ICR. A good example was the identification of errors in calculating the NPV of the project. The ICR calculated
what it would have been at project preparation and what it turned out to be at project closing. The discussion is
generally clear and thoughtful, and the analysis of important is of high quality.

In addition, the ICR follows OPCS guidelines, is concise, internally consistent, results-focused and provides
lessons based on analysis in the ICR. A hallmark of this ICR is its presentation of an interesting story line with
relevant and informative footnotes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PNG - SME Access to Finance Project (P120707)




                                                                             Page 14 of 14
