     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022614

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P108654                                   Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77780                                30-Nov-2015                                         190,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jan-2010                               30-Mar-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          190,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           190,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       190,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Wendy Schreiber Ayres      Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective, as stated in the Financing Agreement dated March 18, 2010 (page 6),
   was to improve sustainable water supply and sanitation services for the population residing in the Capibaribe
   River Basin and the MRR. (The MRR is the Metropolitan Region of Recife.)

   The Project Development Objective as stated in the PAD (page 7) was identical to that in the Financing
   Agreement.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Sep-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project is comprised of four components (PAD pages 7 to 10):

   Component 1. Water Sector Management and Institutional Development (cost at appraisal: US$29
   million, actual cost: US$41.51 million). This component aimed to contribute to the Government of
   Pernambuco’s goal of long-term water security by strengthening the sector’s institutional and regulatory
   frameworks as well as the state’s capacity for integrated sector planning, policy and management. The
   component comprised the following three sub-components:

   (A) Integrated water resources management (WRM). This subcomponent aimed at strengthening the
   Borrower’s water sector institutional and regulatory frameworks as well as its capacity for integrated water
   sector planning, policy and management through eight activities. These included (a) establishing the State
   Water and Climate Agency (APAC); (b) establishing new river basin committees, strengthening existing
   ones, and establishing water users associations and councils; (c) preparing and disseminating water
   resource plans; (d) carrying out studies aimed at improving the efficiency and sustainability of groundwater
   use; (e) carrying out studies to improve water use regulations; (f) modernizing and expanding the hydro-
   meteorological and water quality monitoring network; (g) carrying out environmental rehabilitation activities;
   and (h) carrying out other relevant activities.

   (B) Water Services and Infrastructure. This subcomponent aimed at strengthening the Borrower’s policy,
   regulatory framework, and institutional models for improving management and efficiency operation of water
   supply, sewerage and irrigated agriculture’s infrastructure and services through four activities, including (a)
   developing a water supply and sewerage services strategy for rural and small towns; (b) implementing pilot
   projects to test the models developed; (c) improving the Borrower’s water supply and sewerage regulation;
   and (d) carrying out of engineering, technical, social, environmental, finance, economic and legal studies
   and developing related instruments to allow for private sector participation in the construction, operation,
   and maintenance of the Sertão Pernambucano canal and its irrigated perimeter. In addition, this
   subcomponent aimed at developing rural water supply and sewerage strategies for the Agreste and Sertão
   regions as well as operational plans for pilot implementation in selected areas.

   (C) Project Management. This subcomponent aimed at strengthening the Borrower’s capacity for overall
   project implementation and monitoring including support to the implementation of the Environmental


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



Management Plan, project information and communication activities, support to build capacity of the State
Secretariat of Water Resource for internal control of projects implemented, among others.

Revised Component 1. All actions related to the Sertão Pernambucano Canal were removed because the
federal government was financing several studies to expand irrigation in the São Francisco River basin, and
the state government of Pernambuco and the federal government agreed that these studies will be
undertaken and financed by federal government. Two new activities, aimed at studying the potential of
water use of Pernambuco’s semi-arid region water reservoirs, including irrigation, were added. These were
(a) carrying out of technical studies to evaluate the potential of multiple use of water in water infrastructure
in the State Borrower’s territory, and (b) staff training and dissemination activities and carrying out of
selected studies. Subcomponent 1C was changed to reflect the replacement of the implementing agency,
the Secretary of Water Resources, by the State Secretariat for Economic Development (SDEC), and to
include strengthening of COMPESA and SDEC in overall project implementation and monitoring, including
support on implementation of the environmental management plan, project information and communication
activities, and support for strengthening capacity for internal project control. The remaining staff training and
dissemination activities were transferred to subcomponent 1B.

Component 2. Improving Efficiency in the Provision of Water Supply and Sanitation Services (cost at
appraisal: US$52 million, actual cost: US$87.29 million). This component aimed at increasing COMPESA’s
operational and economic performance and improving its corporate governance and management. The two
main subcomponents were:

    a. Non-revenue Water (NRW) Activities. This subcomponent was designed to support the reduction
       of technical and commercial water losses and improve COMPESA’s services, sales, and operational
       efficiency in selected areas of the MRR.
    b. Corporate Development. This subcomponent aimed at providing technical assistance to support
       the implementation of selected activities of COMPESA’s strategic plan, with a focus on activities that
       could improve the utility’s financial equilibrium and overall customer satisfaction, among others.

Revised Component 2. Subcomponent 2B was revised to provide technical assistance to COMPESA to
improve its management and operational activities and to carry out studies.

Component 3. Water Supply and Sanitation Service Expansion (cost at appraisal: US$320 million,
actual cost US$303.81). This component intended to implement activities aimed at increasing the volume of
water supplied to Project areas, expanding sewerage services in the cities located upstream of the main
water supply reservoirs in the Capibaribe river basin, and improving the State’s capacity to leverage future
investments by reviewing and preparing engineering designs for future priority water supply and sewerage
systems. The component was divided into the following two subcomponents:

    a. Pirapama Water Supply System. This subcomponent aimed at supporting the expansion and
       integration of the Pirapama Water Supply System through the construction of different elements of
       the system, such as a pumping station near the Pirapama dam, a bulk water pipeline, water
       reservoirs, among others.
    b. Expansion of Services. This subcomponent aimed at supporting activities to protect and optimize
       the Tapacurá, Carpina and Jucazinho water reservoirs through the reduction of water pollution and
       investments in the construction of priority sewerage systems as well as the preparation of master
       plans and engineering designs for priority water supply and wastewater systems.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



  Revised Component 3. Activities under subcomponent 3A were changed to include construction and
  supervision of works of sewerage systems for the cities of Santa Cruz do Capibaribe and Surubim,
  improvements in the distribution of water in the MRR and River Basin Capibaribe, and works to support the
  government’s emergency response following devastating floods in 2010/2011. Activities under
  subcomponent 3B were modified due to major delays in contracting the engineering designs for the initially
  agreed sewerage systems, namely Toritama, Limoeiro, Paudalho and Salgadinho. As such, these project
  locations were replaced by Santa Cruz do Capibaribe and Surubim that had wastewater treatment plants
  (WWTPs) engineering designs ready for bidding and implementation. Finally, this subcomponent also
  included preparation of engineering designs of sewerage systems in the urban areas of the municipalities of
  Limoeiro, Paudalho, Salgadinho, Vitória de Santo Antão, and others.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original estimated project cost was US$410.0 million. The actual cost at completion was
  US$433.08 million. Counterpart funds increased from US$220 million to US$243 million at closing to
  accommodate the additional costs of completed works, which were higher than estimated at appraisal.

  Financing: The project’s cost was partly financed through an IBRD loan of US$190 million equivalent.

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower’s contribution at project approval was US$220 million in local
  currency financing. The actual contribution of the Borrower at project closing was US$243.08 million.

  Restructuring:

  First Restructuring. The project was restructured on September 17, 2015, and its closing date was extended
  to September 30, 2017 to allow for completion of several major project activities due to unforeseen
  implementation delays and the need for adjustments to the project scope and activities, as described
  above. Other changes included: (a) revisions to the project implementation institutions, to take into account
  changes in the state government structure that had occurred since appraisal and removal of one
  implementing agency that will no longer participate in the project; (b)[KM1] corresponding reallocation of
  funds among disbursement categories and components[KM2] ; and (c) revisions to the results framework to
  align with the new activities and modify indicator target dates to take into account the extension in the
  closing date.

  Second Restructuring. A second restructuring on September 5, 2017 further extended the closing date to
  March 30, 2019 to allow time to complete works.

  Third Restructuring. A third restructuring on February 14, 2019 extended the closing date to March 30,
  2020, to allow for the satisfactory completion of important activities essential for achieving the Project
  Development Objective. Other changes included (a) revisions to the results framework to reflect the
  extended implementation period and to add an intermediate indicator, “State water regulatory agency
  (APAC) is fully operational” to the list of PDO indicators; and (b) changes in the implementation schedule.

  Dates: The project was approved on January 14, 2010 and became effective on June 15, 2010. The project
  closed on March 30, 2020, four years and four months after the original closing date of November 30, 2015,
  as discussed above under restructuring.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



   Split Rating. Since the target values of the major PDO outcome indicators were modified during project
   restructuring; efficacy is assessed against both the original targets and the revised targets. Therefore, the
   review will conduct split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context:

Pernambuco is one of the driest states in Brazil with a per capita freshwater availability of 1,320 m3
per year on average, equivalent to 3.5 percent of the national average per capita availability. The
hydrological regime of the State is highly variable with the presence of mostly intermittent rivers in the driest
areas of the State (Sertão and Agreste), where droughts associated with El Niño conditions are common. In
fact, while these semi-arid areas represent 89 percent of the State’s territory, they only count on about 20
percent of the water available for the State, with per capita water availability ranging from 400 cubic meters
to 800 cubic meters per year, respectively. The low water availability in the semi-arid regions of the State
coupled with the high rate of urbanization and economic activity in the coastal regions placed the State’s
available water resources under stress.

At appraisal, despite high levels of coverage with about 91 percent of urban households connected
to the public water supply network, service was unreliable and intermittent. Of the 170 municipalities
that were served by the Pernambuco State Water Supply and Sanitation Company (COMPESA), only 30
received water 24 hours per day. Rationing was commonplace, even in the MRR, where residents on
average alternated between 24 hours with water supply and 28 hours without service.

In terms of sanitation, as of 2010, of the 170 municipalities served by COMPESA, only 20 had
sewerage networks with an average coverage of about 20 percent, well below national and most
regional averages. This affected not only the unserved population, presenting risks to public health, but
also indirectly to those connected to the sewerage system, as untreated wastewater contributed to the
pollution of water resources. Some of the most important state water sources, located in the Capibaribe
river basin and providing water to about 2.6 million people, were receiving increasing biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD) pollution loads due to discharge of untreated domestic sewage.

Alignment with Pernambuco State Development Plan. Given the negative impact water scarcity and
unreliable water supply and sanitation services have on the economic performance and social development
in the state, the government of Pernambuco had selected the water sector as a priority and an important
element of its state development plan. It developed a strategy for the sector with the following ambitious
objectives: (a) improve state water resources development and management policies and practices in order
to allow for the expansion of access to safe and reliable water for human consumption and productive uses,
and (b) reach universal access to water supply and sanitation in urban areas by 2014 and 2018,
respectively. It estimated that investments of about US$1.7 billion would be needed during the next three to
five years to achieve its established short- to medium-term goals of improvement in service provision.

At appraisal, the project’s objectives were consistent with the state government’s water sector strategy. It
offered more than 25 percent of the required financing to meet the medium-term goals. In addition, the

                                                                                                       Page 5 of 20
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



investments in water supply and sanitation expansion and efficiency would support the government’s goals
for improvements in economic growth and in social indicators. The project remained aligned with the state
water sector strategy at closing.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy The project fit within the World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Strategy 2008–2011 (Report number 42677-BR) discussed by the Bank’s Board on May
1, 2008. This highlighted the need for infrastructure development for sustainable growth, shifted Bank
support to states, and moved to a more comprehensive approach to the water sector.

The project’s objectives were also consistent with the CPS for 2012–2015, which made up part of
the Bank’s larger strategy of increased engagement with Brazil’s northeast, the nation’s poorest
region. The CPS, which lists water infrastructure and management as top concerns, includes “expanding
access to improved basic sanitation” as a priority under Objective 3: Promoting regional economic
development. The project also supported other CPS focal areas, including (a) supporting the strengthening
of government capacity to perform regulatory and policymaking functions, (b) helping to develop an
integrated approach to water resources management and water supply and sanitation and supporting
efficiency improvements and promoting the use of innovative technologies and service delivery models
(such as results-based contracts).

Finally, the project aligns with Objective 3.2 of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for fiscal
2018–2023, which aims at providing sustainable urban services. The Bank is committed to support the
Government of Brazil in seeking new models to support investment and improve the quality of urban
infrastructure and improve the efficiency of service delivery, which includes continued investments in WSS
to foster resilience against the increased variability of water supply. In addition, under the same objective,
the CPF highlights the challenges that many cities face in reducing water pollution and the need to improve
the quality of the urban environment. Therefore, the CPF aims at continuing the engagement in providing
more inclusive and sustainable urban services, as well as continue to support the consolidation of existing
efforts through a mix of ongoing and new investments at the municipal level.

Previous World Bank Experience. The World Bank has been engaged in the water sector in Brazil and
the state of Pernambuco for many years. In 1993, the Bank financed the Federal Water Supply and
Sanitation Sector Modernization Project, which covered Pernambuco. It financed a follow-on project in
1997. Notable achievements of these projects included (a) the establishment of the national water supply
and sanitation information system, (b) the dissemination of modern approaches to services operation, and
(c) the development of state regulatory frameworks and agencies, including to the establishment of the
2007 Federal Guidelines Law for Basic Sanitation. In 1998, the Bank financed the Federal Water
Resources Management Project (Proagua), which supported activities aimed at improving water resources
management in all states in the northeast region, including Pernambuco. This project aims to strengthen
sector institutions.

Development Problem. The project would improve water resources management and water supply and
sanitation service delivery. Also, the project would help the state in laying a foundation for moving towards a
performance-based sector wide approach.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               OBJECTIVE 1

               Objective 1: “Improve sustainable water supply services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river
               basin and the MRR.”


               Rationale
               Theory of Change

               A fairly direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes.
               The activities consisted of (a) integrated WRM and the establishment of the State Water Regulatory Agency,
               APAC (Agência Pernambucana de Água e Clima; and (b) efficiency improvements and institutional
               strengthening of the Pernambuco State Water Supply and Sanitation Company, COMPESA. The theory of
               change (ToC) discussion in the ICR appropriately presents the activities, outputs, and intermediate outcomes
               that would be expected to achieve objective 1.

               The key assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) the construction of a water supply conveyance
               system, establishment, and isolation of hydraulic areas and metering districts, and the reduction of NRW
               would lead to increased availability of water and reduction of population subject to rationing; and (b) the
               establishment of the State Water Regulatory Agency (Agência Pernambucana de Água e Clima, APAC)
               would improve WRM.

               Outputs

               Eleven reservoir management councils for three critical river basins were established, matching the target. In
               addition, two river basin committees were established and three were strengthened.

               Legislation was drafted, which the ICR states is contributing to integrated WRM, through better planning of
               water withdrawals, water quality monitoring, and improved planning and allocation during extreme events.
               These are expected to improve WRM, which in turn would increase the sustainability of access to water
               supply services. According to the Bank team (e-mail dated August 21, 2021) the legislation has yet to be
               adopted and the discussions with the relevant agencies are ongoing.

               Metering improved through the installation of micro- and macro-meters, which led to an increase in the MRR
               in macro-metering (from 66.13 percent of district metered areas in 2010 to 95.25 percent in 2019), as well as
               in micro-metering (from 74.65 percent in 2010 to 86.80 percent in 2019), according to the project team in an
               e-mail dated August 21, 2021. The primary distribution mains have been restructured, which is bringing an
               additional 5.13 cubic meters per second of water to the MRR with the Pirapama system. In addition,
               distribution zones have been established in selected areas of the MRR. These in turn are expected to


                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



improve COMPESA’s efficiency in providing water supply services, and therefore reduce the need for
rationing.

Most targets for outputs were achieved:

        The target to reduce water losses was almost achieved, reaching 94 percent of the revised target.
        The target for cash flow sufficiency of funds was nearly achieved, reaching 97% of the revised target.
        The target for the number of utilities to be supported was met.
        The target on implementation of bulk water charges was not achieved. However, the tariff studies and
         proposals have been completed and currently pending approval by the State Assembly.

Outcomes

Compared against the original target

PDO Indicator 1 was partially achieved. Some 49.5 percent of people in the MRR were subject to water
rationing at project closure, compared with the target of 10 percent.

In sum, the PDO indicator target was partially achieved. The efficacy of this objective is modest.

Rating:

Modest

Based on the partial achievement of objective 1, efficacy is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 1: “Improve sustainable water supply services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river
basin and the MRR.”

Revised Rationale
OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1

Revised Objective

Improve sustainable water supply services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river basin and the
MRR

Revised Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



Theory of Change (ToC). The ToC remained unchanged. Outcome targets were revised.

Outputs

The same as those reported under original objective.

Outcomes

Compared against the revised target set at the February 2019 restructuring.

PDO Indicator 1 was partially achieved. Some 49.5 percent of people in the MRR were subject to water
rationing at project closure, compared with the revised target of 35 percent (71 percent of the revised target).
The inability to reach the target was due primarily to recurrent droughts in the Agreste’s subregion during
project implementation that reduced the water production capacity of the Agreste’s associated water system
from 1.10 cubic meters per second to 0.55 cubic meters per second. This affected nearly 350,000 people in
the city of Caruaru. A large portion of the project funds earmarked for NRW reduction were used instead to
increase the capacity of another transmission system (Prata) from 0.60 cubic meters per second to 0.97 cubic
meters per second, making up for some of the shortfall arising from the recurrent droughts in the Jucazinho
system.

Although nearly half the households in the MRR are still subject to rationing, water availability has significantly
increased, with most neighborhoods having 24-hour water supply at least 3 to 4 days, compared to the
before-project situation of six to 12 hours every three to four days, with extreme cases (households at higher
altitude) of six hours per week.

PDO Indicator 2 (added during 2019 restructuring) was achieved. At project completion, APAC had been
established and was operating, contributing to integrated WRM in the state, including evaluating water
resources management policies and instruments; and putting into operation a state-of-the art
hydrometeorological monitoring and forecasting system, including a flood early warning system. By the end of
the project, APAC was fully carrying out its responsibilities: including (a) implementing state policies on WRM
and national policies on dam safety; (b) monitoring hydrometeorological and weather forecast and climate at
the state level; and (c) adopting measure to prevent, mitigate, and adapt to extreme climate change related
events. APAC was also carrying out its responsibilities related to dam safety.

Gender. Although not noted in the results framework, about 1.2 million women in the project area benefited
from reduced time required to fetch water during days of water rationing. In addition, about 30 percent of the
members of basin and users’ committees are women and their contribution has been perceived as
fundamental in conflict resolution and in the management of the committees.

Based on the partial achievement of objective 1, efficacy is rated Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)




Objective
OBJECTIVE 2

Objective 2: “Improve sanitation services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river basin and the
MRR.”


Rationale
Theory of Change

A direct causal link can be drawn between the project’s original activities and the expected outcomes. The
activities consisted of constructing two wastewater treatment plants, constructing sewerage networks, and
connecting households to the network. These in turn would be expected to lead to a reduction in the
biological oxygen demand discharged, the PDO outcome for this objective. The key assumption leading to
this objective was that the construction of wastewater systems for collection and treatment of wastewater in
the project area would lead to the reduction of BOD discharged into the environment and protection of water
quality.

Outputs

Two wastewater treatment plants were constructed, and sewerage networks laid.

Some 20,600 new connections to the sewerage network were made, bringing the total number of households
connected to 28,769, which were benefiting a total of 70,020 additional people. This falls short however of the
revised target of 44,411 new connections presented in the 2015 restructuring paper (54 percent) and the
original target of 24,891 set at appraisal (83 percent).

Twenty-two engineering designs for municipal water supply and for wastewater systems were prepared. This
exceeds the target set at appraisal of 14 and the revised target of 21 set in the 2015 restructuring paper.

An additional 5.13 cubic meters per second have been supplied to the MRR from the Pirapama Water Supply
System, matching the original target.

Outcomes

Compared against the original target

PDO Indicator 2 was partially achieved. About 1,164 metric tons of BOD were being removed by the
WWTPs financed under the project, compared with the target of 3,160.

Based on the partial achievement of objective 2, efficacy is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)




                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Objective 2: “Improve sanitation services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river basin and the
                            MRR.”

                            Revised Rationale
                            Compared against the revised target set at February 2019 restructuring

                            PDO Indicator 3 (formerly 2) was partially achieved. At project completion, the Surubim and Santa Cruz
                            do Capibaribe sewerage networks and WWTPs had been completed and were fully operational, however
                            collecting and treating a lower amount of wastewater from those municipalities than initially planned. Due to
                            the project, discharges of untreated sewage into the environment fell by 1,164 metric tons BOD per year. This
                            is below the revised target of 2,939 tons of BOD per year presented in the 2019 restructuring paper, and
                            below the target of 3,160 tons of BOD per year set at appraisal. The lower than envisaged outcome is due to
                            lower household connections than anticipated, and thus lower flows of sewage to the wastewater treatment
                            plants.

                            The ICR notes that the treatment plants are operating at high levels of efficiency in terms of BOD removal,
                            with 98.0 percent in Santa Cruz do Capibaribe and 95.2 percent in Surubim, largely surpassing the Federal
                            Government’s requirements. At project closing, COMPESA had developed a household connection plan that
                            is intended to increase connections to 34,750, which would result in a reduction of BOD of 2,215 tons per
                            year 2022. It should be noted that reducing discharges of BOD contributes to the sustainability of water
                            resources, considering that they were discharged into water bodies that serve as the source of drinking water
                            for municipalities within the MRR.

                            Based on the partial achievement of objective 2, efficacy is rated Modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective of improving sustainable water supply services for the population residing in the Capibaribe
                            river basin and the MRR was partially achieved and is rated modest, while that of improving sanitation
                            services for the population residing in the Capibaribe river basin and the MRR was partially achieved and is
                            rated modest. Overall efficacy is rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Low achievement



                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

An economic analysis of the project was conducted at appraisal, comparing the costs and benefits of two types
of investments. The first relates to investments to reduce NRW, which would allow for expansion of services and
therefore increases in water sales, and for reduction in operating and maintenance costs of delivering a unit of
water, and reduction in costs incurred by households to cope with water rationing, such as purchase of storage
tanks or buying water from private vendors. This generated an economic rate of return (ERR) of 39 percent
(using a discount rate of 10 percent), and a net present value (NPV) of US$743 million.

The second involves investments in sewage collection and treatment, which would allow for increases in
revenues and reductions in the costs of households’ use of onsite sanitation solutions, such as septic tanks.
This generated an ERR of 19 percent, and an NPV of US$23 million. The overall ERR for the two types of
investments was 37 percent and the NPV was US$766.

At completion, the ERR was 9.4 percent (using a discount rate of 6 percent), substantially lower than the
appraisal estimate.

For the investments in NRW, the ERR at project closing, as estimated in the ICR, was 10 percent and the NPV
was US$211. The Bank team clarified in an e-mail dated August 21, 2021 that the lower-than-expected
reductions in NRW “was due to pressure management and sectorization efforts falling below expectations.
These shortcomings would have been difficult to “revert” due to the recurrent droughts which obligated the gains
made in reducing NRW in certain areas to be transferred to areas suffering from water shortages.” For the
investments in the sewage system, the ERR at project closing was 7 percent, and the NPV was US$6 million.
The Bank team clarified in the above-mentioned e-mail that the lower-than-expected ERR and NPV for the
investments in the sewage system was due to lower revenues from lower than expected new connections. The
team also noted that delays in finalizing the wastewater collection and treatment infrastructure also reduced the
benefits associated with providing a cheaper sanitation solution (network connection with a tariff versus an
individual solution requiring sludge emptying) to the population. The ERR for the two components was 9 percent
and the NPV was US$217. The ERR declined to 8 percent over two sensitivity-analysis scenarios.

The ERR for the two components was 9 percent and the NPV was US$217. The ERR declined to 8 percent,
over two sensitivity-analysis scenarios.

The ICRR assessed the project as a whole to be marginally financially viable with a financial (FIRR) of 6.4
percent. Water supply investments are assessed to be marginally financially viable with an FIRR of 6.5 percent,
while sewerage investments are not financially viable at closing with a 2.6 percent FIRR.

Design and implementation efficiency

Design and implementation efficiency was modest. The project’s closing date was extended by five years from
that set at approval. Delays in implementation arose for several reasons. First, technical challenges for handling
the integration of north-south into one single water supply system seem to have been underestimated at
appraisal. Second, the detailed engineering designs for implementation of the wastewater systems in four
municipalities had not been completed when implementation started, causing significant implementation delays
and eventual change of location of the sewerage system. Time overruns detract from efficiency, given the
opportunity cost of capital and the service fee that borrowers continue to pay on Bank loans.


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



Most activities were completed, and the loan was fully disbursed.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 37.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              9.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives were highly relevant to the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework for
fiscal 2018–23. Overall efficacy was Modest for the project’s original targets, and Modest for its revised targets,
with 88 percent of the project’s funds having been disbursed prior to the 2019 restructuring and 12 percent post-
restructuring. Efficiency was found to be Modest. Overall outcome is based on a split evaluation, whereby
outcome pre-restructuring is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (rated 3 on a six-point scale, where 1 is Highly
Unsatisfactory and 6 is Highly Satisfactory) and post-restructuring, is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (3, on the
same six-point scale). The overall outcome rating is the average of the weighted value of outcome ratings, that
is, (US$167.75 million x 0.88) + (US$22.25 million x 0.12) = 2.65 + 0.36 = 3.01, which translates to Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. Sustainability of water supply service delivery is at risk due to the incomplete
implementation of dam safety measures in the Pirapama system’s dam and reservoirs. The COMPESA has
agreed to complete the remaining six activities. A post-closing safeguards action plan has been agreed with
the Borrower. The Bank team will continue to monitor its implementation. In addition, APAC will also continue
to closely follow and enforce the implementation of this action plan.

The non-achievement of NRW targets may lead to an increase in the proportion of the population subject to
water rationing. To mitigate this risk, the smart urban water trust-funded program, an activity funded by the

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



United Kingdom Prosperity Fund is being implemented in the MRR, and includes innovative approaches,
such as research on water and sanitation customer behavior focus on operational efficiency. This program
will be implemented from 2020 to 2022 and is expected to result in an increase in COMPESA’s capacity to
further reduce NRW.

Government ownership/commitment risk. Delays in approval of the bulk tariff charges for abstraction of
raw water in the water basin threaten financial sustainability. The tariff study has been completed and was
ready for submission for the State Assembly’s approval, but the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic halted
meetings of the State Assembly. Although APAC and the basin committees receive funds from the state
government, apart from supporting the control of water abstraction and use, the additional funds would
further support the activities implemented by APAC and, most importantly, the users and basins committees
that have been established.

Economic risk. The limited increase in cashflow indicator due to droughts and the economic disruption due
to the Covid-19 pandemic reduced COMPESA’s cash flow by 20.3 percent, and its operating and net profit
by 37 percent. COMPESA is expected to fully recover from these Covid-19-related impacts by the end of
2021.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team supported the delivery of a substantially relevant and technically sound project, which
  closely aligned with the Government of Pernambuco policies and strategies, and with the CPF. The Bank
  ensured that a team of specialists was mobilized to address all relevant project aspects, including
  technical aspects, social and environmental safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). Moreover,
  the Bank team considered the lessons learned from previous projects in designing the project. For
  example, it included measures to help poor households connect to the water supply and sewerage
  networks, such as participatory approaches, subsidies and social tariffs targeting the poor, financing
  connections, and introducing bulk water charges with low charges for a specified level of use. These
  mechanisms allowed the project to simultaneously target the needs of the poor and to reach watershed
  management objectives. In addition, the project supported a more comprehensive and participatory
  process of watershed planning, a new institutional arrangement, and a broader range of planning tools,
  incorporating land use and water resources together with other aspects of spatial planning, aimed at
  ensuring that activities upstream did not negatively affect downstream users. The project also supported
  the state government in implementing a much-improved M&E system to provide the scientific and
  economic knowledge for adequate watershed management.

  The Bank team prepared all safeguards and fiduciary documents prior to project approval. It ensured that
  for the Pirapama water system, a social analysis, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a
  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared. Recognizing that COMPESA and the other implementing
  agencies had no experience with Bank procedures, the Bank team conducted trainings for the
  implementing agencies to ensure they had had adequate knowledge and resources to successfully
  implement the project.



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



  The Bank team, however, could have supported the client in selecting systems that didn’t require
  preparation of detailed engineering designs, which significantly delayed implementation. In addition, the
  Bank team could have included this risk and the hydrological risk, among the project risks and
  recommended mitigation measures. Finally, there were weaknesses in the design of the results
  framework as noted in the section on M&E below.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted regular implementation support missions and provided timely technical
 guidance to the local and the central implementing agencies. The Bank team regularly visited all project
 sites. Recognizing the limited capacity of the implementing agencies, the World Bank team supported the
 client with procurement, fiduciary, and safeguards implementation through continued trainings and hands-
 on capacity building support. In addition, the project had only two task team leaders from preparation to
 closing.

 The Bank team carried out three project restructurings that aimed not only to extend the project closing
 date, but also at adjusting the results framework. However, given the severity of the drought in the MRR,
 the Bank team could have restructured the project to take account of the climate challenges and
 hydrological risks that the region was facing and revise the project outcomes and targets to reflect these
 challenges. In addition, with the major delays in the construction of the wastewater treatment plants and
 the limited ability to increase the number of sewerage connections, the team could have reduced the target
 for BOD to be removed to reflect the lower-than-expected flows through the plants. Project restructurings
 thus had limited scope, apart from time extensions.

 The safeguards team closely supported the Borrower and COMPESA, particularly on the dam safety
 issues that were identified at initial stages of project implementation. The team regularly visited project
 sites and spent considerable time ensuring that safeguards issues were addressed.

 However, at the time of the project’s closing, there were unresolved environmental, resettlement, and dam
 safety issues, meaning that the project was not in compliance with the Bank’s policies at closing.
 Therefore, the Bank team agreed with the government on a detailed action plan for implementation by the
 Borrower and COMPESA after closing.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system was aligned to project objectives and the results chain, which contained indicators to
 track the project’s achievements and impact. However, additional indicators could have been included to
 assess the sustainability of water supply services, improvement in WRM, and progress with construction of
 the wastewater treatment plants. The data collection methods, and responsibilities were clearly defined.

 However, given that the project included dimensions of sustainability and integrated WRM, associated
 outcome and intermediate indicators could have been included, such as volume of wastewater collected,
 quality of effluent from WWTP compared to the standards, and number of people benefiting from
 investments under the project in water supply. On WRM, indicators such as the number of meteorological
 stations installed and functioning, flood and drought alert system installed and operational, and number or
 percentage of people trained and capable of communicating with the population when there is a flood and
 drought alert, could have been used. Moreover, the results framework lacked the Bank’s core indicator of
 “Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage),” or the Bank’s core indicator at the
 time for the water sector, “People provided with access to “Improved Water Sources” under the project
 (number).”



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of the M&E system was adequate. The semi-annual progress reports that COMPESA
  submitted to the Bank prior to each supervision mission contained data on the reduction of water
  rationing and on progress made on the number of connections to the sewerage system. These were
  verified by the Bank team during site visits.

  As noted above, during the restructuring approved In February 2017 and the restructuring of February
  2019, targets were revised to more reflect what was likely to be achieved during the extended
  implementation period.



c. M&E Utilization
  A reliable flow of M&E information during the project implementation enabled the Bank team to assess
  the performance of project components and their potential sustainability. The information also led to
  decisions to restructure the project, aimed at ensuring the project achieved its objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



  The project was assigned Environmental category “A” and six safeguard policies were triggered:
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Physical
  Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); and Safety of Dams (OP/BP
  4.37).

  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The ICR reports (para 95
  and 96) that at project closing, no significant environmental impact had occurred in consequence of project
  activities. Environmental safeguards performance ratings varied between Satisfactory and Moderately
  Satisfactory throughout implementation, but was downgraded to Unsatisfactory at project closing due to: (a)
  the pending implementation of six of the eight recommendations from the Dam Safety Panel for the
  Pirapama Dam; and (b) unresolved issues related to the highly eroded slopes of the hills above the five
  water reservoirs constructed in Olinda, which represent significant risk to reservoir stability in the medium to
  long-term.

  A post-closing, a Safeguards Action Plan was agreed upon with the Borrower to resolve all pending issues.
  The hiring of a Dam Safety Panel to provide advice both for Pirapama and the four flood contention dams is
  part of the Action Plan. The Bank is closely monitoring the implementation of the agreed actions through
  monthly meetings with the client. The Bank team clarified through an e-mail dated August 21, 2021 that "of
  the eight actions presented in the ICR (Annex 6) on the Action Plan, one is completed (erosion prevention
  in Jordão Reservoir) and the rest are all either under contract, ongoing or about to be completed. Some
  actions remain to be completed more in the long term (such as those related to the corrective works for
  Pirapama dam and the flood contention dams), and will continue to be monitored by the Bank in the
  monthly meetings.”

  Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04. The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The ICR does not report on compliance with this safeguard.

  IEG asked the Bank team to clarify compliance with these Safeguards. The Bank team explained in an e-
  mail dated August 21, 2021 that “the Project was compliant with Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical
  Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and there were no incidents or deviations to
  report.”

  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The ICR reports (para 97) that social safeguards ratings remained
  in the satisfactory range for most of the project’s implementation period, but were downgraded at project
  closing to Moderately Unsatisfactory due to pending issues related to the documentation of the payment of
  easement fees for 20 landholders affected by the works of the Pirangi-Camevô water main and the Surubim
  sanitation system.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. The project’s implementing agencies generally complied with the Bank’s fiduciary
  policies. Financial management was rated Satisfactory and Moderately Satisfactory throughout project life.
  The internal control arrangements identified in the Financial Management Assessment were strengthened

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



   as its associated action plan suggested, including the assignment of a dedicated financial management
   Specialist in the implementing agency. The control risk at closing was rated as Moderate, the same rating
   as at appraisal, and E-FISCO, Pernambuco’s Financial Management Information System, proved to be
   appropriate to account for project execution. All audit reports expressed unqualified/unmodified audit
   opinions. All Interim Financial Reports received during the life of the project were considered acceptable by
   the World Bank and were received on a relatively timely basis. No cases of ineligible expenditures were
   identified or alleged cases of fraud and corruption during project implementation were recorded.

   Procurement. Procurement compliance was considered to be Moderately Satisfactory overall.
   Procurement systems and the implementing agencies’ arrangements functioned reasonably well during
   implementation. During implementation, the government agencies had a well-functioning procurement
   team, with the relevant experience in procuring goods and services using Brazil law and rules on
   procurement, however with limited experience with Bank guidelines and no prior experience with
   processes to hire consulting services.

   Despite initial challenges in applying the Bank’s policy, procurement had no major issues throughout the
   project and the Bank’s procurement rules were fully complied with. The application of the Bank’s guidelines
   in the selection of consultants and firms seems to have had a positive impact on the quality of the service
   providers. Overall, the policy advice and technical assistance provided by the World Bank team helped to
   strengthen institutional capacity.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

Project implementation should focus on ensuring that sewerage household connections are
installed in parallel to the construction of the wastewater treatment plants. The installation of

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



wastewater household connections was designed to start after the construction of the wastewater
treatment plants was complete. Connections should take place during the construction of the
sewerage network to ensure that treatment plants receive sufficient wastewater flows.

Innovative approaches to design and build WSS systems efficiently should be incentivized to
accelerate project implementation, ensuring that set outcomes are met. The Bank and
COMPESA found innovative solutions for the construction of water supply and wastewater systems
which were time and cost effective, including through design-build-operate contracts and
performance-based contracts. The design-build-operate contracting approach was tested with the
Santa Cruz do Capibaribe sewerage system. This allowed COMPESA to complete the project in a
timely manner, with fewer contract amendments than through the traditional approach of bidding for
works with basic engineering designs. COMPESA plans are to adopt the design-build-operate
approach for a number of upcoming water supply and sewerage works packages. Similarly, the
performance-based contracting approach used for the first time with the Olinda NRW reduction
program is now being replicated and expanded to other municipalities under COMPESA’s
management.

Vulnerabilities to climate change and other non-climatic stresses and shocks should be
incorporated into project design and implementation support plans for water and sanitation
investments. The identification of the vulnerability of water systems to climate and other non-
climatic uncertainties during project design should be accompanied by appropriate planning and
project management mechanisms to enhance preparedness and response, but also to set realistic
targets for project objectives, particularly in areas known to suffer from natural disasters such as
droughts and floods. Techniques for assessing the vulnerability of water systems to climate change
and other non-climatic uncertainties should be integrated into implementation support tools to inform
in a timely manner the need for restructuring and for adjusting targets as well as infrastructure
component designs. In addition, taking into account the hydrological risk associated with recurrent
droughts into the design of infrastructure could for example lead to more flexible, robust, progressive
and resilient approaches to planning and building water and wastewater systems, thus minimizing
the impacts of reduced water or wastewater flows on their operation and on the costs (both capital
and operating expenses) associated with these assets.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clearly written and consistent with guidelines. It provides adequate details of the project’s activities,
including detailed annex summarizing the efficiency analysis. Its analysis is broadly evidence-based. The ICR,
however, could have provided information on compliance with safeguards, covenants, and the condition of
disbursement.




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Brazil Pernambuco Sustainable Water (P108654)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                               Page 20 of 20
