     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022604

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P126974                                       African Centers of Excellence

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Western Africa                                Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54120,IDA-54150,IDA-54190,IDA-            31-Dec-2018                                       143,402,620.68
 54200,IDA-54210,IDA-54220,IDA-
 54230,IDA-54240,IDA-57330,IDA-
 H9300,IDA-H9320

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Apr-2014                                   30-Sep-2020

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              158,150,557.91                                              0.00

 Actual                                          143,402,620.68                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb                Joy Maria Behrens             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreements (Schedule 1) for the regional facilitation agency and each recipient
   country, and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8), the project objectives were as follows:



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



   To promote regional specialization among participating universities in areas that address regional
   challenges and strengthen the capacities of these universities to deliver quality training and applied
   research.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Note: The project costs reported below reflect the IDA portions and Additional Financing (AF) only.

   Component 1: Strengthening Africa Centers of Excellence (Appraisal: US$ 140.8 million; Appraisal + AF:
   US$ 155.8 million; Actual: US$ 137.1 million): This component aimed to support 19 Africa Centers of
   Excellence (ACEs) hosted by higher education institutes, in the key sectors of agriculture, health and
   STEM. The ACEs were selected through a competitive proposal process and awarded grants of up to US$
   8 million. The following countries participated in the project: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire,
   Ghana, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo. Examples of ACEs specializations included: Applied Mathematics,
   Environment and Water Engineering, Information Technology, Crop Science and Plant Breeders, Cell
   Biology of Infectious Diseases, Oil Chemical Engineering, Neglected Tropical Diseases, and Phytomedicine
   Science.

   Component 2: Enhancing Regional Capacity; Evaluation and Collaboration (Appraisal: US$ 9.2 million;
   Appraisal + AF: US$ 9.2 million; Actual: US$ 8.9 million): This component aimed to support coordination at
   the regional level. Activities included: a regional IDA grant to the Association of African Universities to
   support capacity building and knowledge sharing among ACEs; monitoring and evaluation; project
   implementation support to the National Universities Commission in Nigeria (due to the high number of ACEs
   awarded funding in Nigeria); and the purchase of ACE services by faculty and students of The Gambia, a
   small country without existing capacity to host its own ACE.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$ 305.8 million. The amount was later
          revised to US$ 316.3 million, due to additional financing.
         The actual amount at closing was US$ 286.8 million, primarily due to an exchange rate loss of US$
          13.9 million and a partial cancellation.
         At project restructurings, funds were reallocated among ACEs within two of the recipient countries,
          due to variable performance among the ACEs.

   Financing



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



         The project was financed by several IDA grants and credits to multiple recipient governments,
          totaling US$ 165.0 million. The amount was later revised to US$ 158.15 million. The actual amount
          disbursed was US$ 143.4 million.
         Additional financing in the amount of US$ 15.0 million was approved in September 2015.
         SDR 1.4 million was cancelled from the Cameroon grant due to low fund utilization.

   Borrower contribution

         The participating governments were expected to contribute US$ 140.8 million, by way of Eligible
           Expenditure Programs. The actual amount contributed was US$ 143.4. million.

   Dates

         September 2015: Additional Financing of US$ 15.0 million was approved to establish ACEs in Cote
          d'Ivoire. At the time of project appraisal, Cote d'Ivoire was not able to participate in the project due
          to lack of IDA fund availability and the country's recent emergence from a prolonged crisis.
         September 2018: Project funds were reallocated among some of the ACEs due to variable
          performance. In addition, the project closing date was extended from December 2018 to March
          2020, due to initial delays in project effectiveness and other operational challenges.
         April 2019: Unallocated funds from Additional Financing were allocated across the three ACEs in
          Cote d'Ivoire. In addition, the project closing date for the Additional Financing was extended from
          December 2019 to September 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The West Africa region has been experiencing economic growth due to increasing macroeconomic stability,
economic reforms, and a rapid increase in global demand for natural resource-based
commodities. However, significant development challenges remain, including an undiversified production
structure, lack of new competitive sectors, poor health status of the population, lack of food security, and
low agricultural productivity. The West African countries' capacity to effectively respond to these challenges
is weak due to a shortage of specialized skills, particularly in key growth sectors of extractive industries,
energy, water, infrastructure, health, and information and communication technologies. The region's higher
education institutions have inadequate capacity to train graduates at higher competencies and
specialization, including in higher numbers. Specialized positions are largely filled by expatriates, while
local talent migrates out of the region to pursue better quality education and professional
opportunities. Moreover, current university programs do not offer courses and/or degrees that are relevant
to market demand nor development needs. This project responds to these challenges by aiming to
increase the quantity and quality of university graduates through investments in facilities, curricula, and
human resources in key priority sectors.

The particular focus on regional specialization is also highly relevant given the limited financial and human
resources within each individual country to develop and sustain higher education programs. The regional
approach, with the coordination of investments, will enable the concentration of qualified faculty into a

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



               critical mass to ensure impact, support sustainable institutions and programs, and encourage the flow of
               knowledge and students across countries.

               The project objectives are relevant to the Bank's Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy
               (FY18-23), which supports regional skills development initiatives as a sub-objective (including an "increase
               in trained graduates" as an outcome and indicator).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To promote regional specialization among participating universities in areas that address regional challenges

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was overall sound. A key development challenge was identified as
                             a lack of homegrown specialized expertise, including low productivity and growth in priority sectors. Activities
                             to increase the availability and quality of learning resources and facilities, updating and creation of new
                             curricula, and faculty training were likely to lead to the intended outcome to increase the number of
                             specialized academic programs in priority sectors relevant to market and industry demands. The priority
                             sectors were identified as agricultural sciences, health sciences, and science, technology, engineering and
                             math (STEM). As part of project preparation, 22 Africa Centers of Excellence (ACEs) in 21 host universities
                             in eight countries were selected through an open, merit-based proposal process, with the aim to ensure
                             reasonably equitable distribution across countries, language groups, and academic disciplines. The selected
                             ACEs entered into Performance and Funding Contracts with their respective national governments, with funds
                             disbursed according to the achievement of Disbursement-Linked Indicators.


                             Outputs

                                        Provision of grants (ranging from US$ 4.0 million to US$ 8.0 million) to 22 Africa Centers of
                                         Excellence (ACEs). The grants funded activities focusing on five elements: enhancing capacity to
                                         deliver regional high-quality training; enhancing capacity to deliver applied research; building
                                         industry/sector partnerships; building academic partnerships; and enhancing governance. Activities
                                         funded through the grants included: curricula updates; accreditation processes; delivery of short-term
                                         training courses for professionals; delivery of Masters and PhD degrees; faculty training; internships;
                                         learning equipment; facilities upgrading; industry and academic partnerships; and research.
                                        Revision/ creation of 231 curricula for specialized courses offered by ACEs (target: 60). According to
                                         the ICR (page 15), several programs had never been offered in West Africa before which had required


                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



         students to leave the region. Examples of new offerings are a post-graduate program in
         biotechnology with a focus on Neglected Tropical Diseases and a post-graduate program in Crop
         Seed and Science Technology.



Outcomes

      The number of national students enrolled in new specialized short-term courses, Masters or PhD
         programs in priority sectors (in ACEs within their own country) increased from 1,580 students at
         project start to 21,341 students, surpassing the target of 15,600 students. This included 12,000
         Master students and 2,300 PhD students.
        The number of regional students enrolled in the new specialized programs (in ACEs outside their own
         country) increased from 987 students at project start to 9,480 students, surpassing the target of 8,900
         students.
        The number of national faculty trained by ACEs increased from 73 faculty at project start to 2,926
         faculty, surpassing the target of 565 faculty. Of these, 741 were female. The number of regional
         faculty trained by ACEs increased from 27 faculty at project start to 657 faculty, surpassing the target
         of 335. Of these, 185 were female faculty.
        25% of all project beneficiaries were female. Several strategies were employed to encourage female
         participation, including providing flexibility to female students for reasons of pregnancy or childbirth,
         sending a caravan to girls' secondary schools to provide information to girls and women on available
         training courses, and offering free refresher courses and laptops to female students who register for
         the engineering level courses.
        For the academic year 2017/18, ACEs in Ghana, Nigeria, and Senegal represented more than 20
         percent of postgraduate enrollment in the key fields of studies, indicating the proportion of the new
         qualified students attributable to the project.
        124 university faculty members from The Gambia participated in training in different ACEs across the
         region, through project support which enabled them to purchase education services from ACEs. For
         small countries like The Gambia, the project demonstrated that they could still benefit even without a
         ACE within their own country. In the follow-up Bank operation (P164546), The Gambia will establish
         an Emerging Center of Excellence.

Notably, the regional ACE model introduced by the project has since been expanded to cover all of Sub-
Saharan Africa through follow-on projects (ACE Impact I and 2). According to the ICR (page 22), the model
"has been recognized for its success in creating high-quality higher education programs that are contributing
to developing the competencies of the region's workforce necessary to develop, adapt, and apply solutions to
key sectoral challenges in Africa, such as supporting industries in producing higher value-added products and
services."

There is evidence that the quantity of high-level, trained graduates has increased in new programs or higher
education expansion areas. But there were shortcomings in addressing regional needs and challenges,
namely in regional student outreach and in university-industry linkages (2018 Restructuring Paper, Report No.
RES31639, p. 8). Hence, the achievement of the objective is considered to be almost fully achieved.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   African Centers of Excellence (P126974)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacities of these universities to deliver quality training and applied research

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. Activities to meet international benchmarks for quality
education, delivery of training courses, and development of industry and academic partnerships were all likely
to contribute to the intended outcome to strengthen capacity of universities to deliver quality and relevant
training and research. The ICR (page 28) noted that "the selection of beneficiary institutions on a competitive
basis and the reliance on merit for fund allocation set an important precedent for the region and for all the
countries that participated" and that the results-based approach helped to incentivize performance (although
the latter was an unfamiliar funding instrument and therefore led to some initial delays).

Outputs

      Provision of grants (ranging from US$ 4.0 million to US$ 8.0 million) to 22 Africa Centers of
       Excellences . The grants funded activities focusing on five elements: enhancing capacity to deliver
       regional high-quality training; enhancing capacity to deliver applied research; building industry/sector
       partnerships; building academic partnerships; and enhancing governance. Activities funded through
       the grants included: curricula updates; accreditation processes; delivery of short-term training courses
       for professionals; delivery of Masters and PhD degrees; faculty training; internships; learning
       equipment; facilities upgrading; industry and academic partnerships; and research.
      Regional monitoring and evaluation activities, including monitoring of ACE performance, graduate
       tracer studies and technical audits.
      Fiduciary training for project implementing entities.



Outcomes

      The number of faculty trained by ACEs increased from 100 faculty at project start to 3,583 faculty,
       surpassing the target of 900. The content of training included issues related to pedagogy, curriculum
       development, and supervision. According to the ICR (page 17), a survey conducted for the ICR
       indicated that 94% of faculty agreed that their teaching improved as a result of the project
       interventions.
      The number of accredited programs in priority sectors increased from three programs at project start
       to 61 programs, surpassing the target of 15. Elements of accreditation included caliber of scientific
       leadership and research staff, research ethics, pedagogy quality, relationships between faculty and
       staff, and proper documentation. The ICR (page 17) also noted that the project had wider impact in
       Nigeria, as the emphasis on meeting widely accepted benchmarks of quality led to the country
       pursuing accreditation for all of its postgraduate programs, not just project-supported programs.
      The number of students and faculty with at least one-month internships in a company or local
       institution relevant to their field increased from 1,037 at project start to 6,257, achieving the target of

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



       5,900. According to the ICR (page 18), the graduate tracer survey indicated that 70% of ACE
       respondents participated in an internship or some form of industry collaboration. Reported benefits
       included better understanding how scientific work translated in the field, learning about rural
       communities, creating impetus for completing thesis, and developing close mentorships and
       networks.
      The number of partnerships between ACEs and partner institutions increased from 48 partnerships at
       project start to 447 partnerships, surpassing the target of 170. The nature of the partnerships included
       delivery of content, collaboration on curriculum review, assessing quality of laboratories, and
       supervision of graduates. The ICR (page 17) noted that partner institutions were heavily involved in
       the development and delivery of academic programs, and helped overcome limitations in the time and
       expertise of faculty members of ACEs.
      The number of internationally-recognized research publications by the ACEs increased from 1,098
       publications at project start to 2,559 publications, surpassing the target of 1,331. 53% of publications
       involved international collaboration. Evidence of the quality of the research publications included the
       finding that 19% of ACE publications were in the top ten percent of cited journals, compared to 13%
       average for Africans and 14% for Asians (although below the 29% average for the Americas and 24%
       for Europe). The ICR (page 19) noted faculty qualitative feedback that improved technology,
       equipment and infrastructure funded by the project were primary causes for improved quality, as well
       as strengthened networks, training opportunities, grant funding, and stronger/larger cohorts of
       students.
      The amount of external revenue generated by ACEs increased from US$ 976,877 at project start to
       US$ 51,655,311, surpassing the target of US$ 8,000,000, with all ACEs achieving individual targets.
       According to the ICR (page 18), revenue generation has been key for sustainability of ACEs by
       ensuring funds for investing in training, equipment, facilities, partnerships, and outreach events. The
       ACEs with the highest revenue generated indicated that success factors were having autonomy to
       establish partnerships, effective communication systems such as well-developed websites, and
       dedicated focal persons responsible for partnerships.

In addition to the outcomes reported above, the following examples provide anecdotal evidence of the
contribution of ACE graduates (either by teaching new cohorts of students at home universities or by working
in public agencies or private sector companies in the priority areas):

      Gene sequencing work and virus rapid testing kits at Africa Center of Excellence for Genomics of
         Infectious Diseases (ACEGID) in Nigeria.
        COVID-19 testing at Africa Center of Excellence on Neglected Tropical Diseases and Forensic
         Biotechnology (ACENTDFB) in Nigeria.
        Maternal health care at the Center of Excellence in Maternal Health in Senegal.
        Water filtering techniques at Institut International d’Ingénierie de l’Eau et de l’Environnement (2iE) in
         Burkina Faso.
        90 improved crop varieties at West Africa Center of Excellence for Crop Improvement (WACCI) in
         Ghana.

Achievement of this objective is rated High due to evidence of increased capacity, both in quantity and
quality, to deliver quality training, including surpassing of targets, and due to the amount of research
publications and citations in internationally recognized journals, where citations are commonly used as a
surrogate measure of quality.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                African Centers of Excellence (P126974)




                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial due to substantial achievement of the first objective to promote regional
                            specialization to address regional challenges and high achievement of the second objective to strengthen
                            capacity of participating universities to deliver quality training and applied research.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At project appraisal (PAD, Annex 6), a cost-benefit analysis was conducted for Component 1 (which directly
   financed activities at each ACE). Benefits were estimated based on higher earnings (resulting from higher
   education) and also external revenue generated by each ACE; however, the analysis did not include social
   returns to education such as improved quality of life, mobility, etc. Costs are total project cost for component
   1. Expected internal rate of return (IRR) varied by country, ranging from 3% in Burkina-Faso, 30% in Cameroon,
   28% in Ghana, and 15% in Nigeria.

   At project closing (see ICR, Annex 4), the updated cost-benefit analysis estimated that for every US$1 invested
   there is a return of US$2.03, therefore the estimated IRR was 3% in Burkina-Faso, 32% in Cameroon, and 18%
   in Nigeria (none reported for Ghana), all similar to those estimated at appraisal. The present discounted value of
   benefits for the overall project was estimated at US$158.2 million and the corresponding NPV of project benefits
   is US$49.5 million. The IRR associated with this NPV is 32%. These figures indicate substantial efficiency of
   investments. The analysis did not calculate the reduced need/cost of traveling abroad to receive education,
   which was a key rationale for the project and assumed to be an area of improved efficiency in training qualified
   workers. The cost for supporting regional mobility of students was noted as a potential challenge for ACEs.

   The ICR also provided cost comparisons with two PhD programs at public universities - PASET-RSIF and the
   RUFORUM programs. The annual PhD unit cost of the PASET – RSIF programs is $28,558. The RUFORUM
   annual PhD unit cost is $21,666.67. On average, the ACE PhD unit cost is $7,668.20 ($6,339.12 for national
   students and $8,997.28 for regional).

   The project documents (Project Paper, September 2018) noted that there were some ACEs that experienced
   "significant implementation bottlenecks... with cumbersome procedures and challenges of daily implementation"

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



and that "a few centers were consistently behind on implementation despite [targeted efforts]. If the project were
to be extended by one year … it is still not expected that these centers will be able to fully utilize their funds."
These implementation challenges at these ACEs led to fund reallocations. The project funds were almost fully
disbursed, albeit after the abovementioned reallocations and two project extensions.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      96.00
 ICR Estimate                                               32.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to high relevance to country conditions and Bank regional
strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as the objectives were almost fully met. Efficiency is rated Substantial
due to favorable internal rates of return and cost comparisons with other higher education programs, but with
shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial sustainability of the ACEs is likely to continue due to the strengthened ability of ACEs to generate
external revenue that complements government financial support (which comprises only a small fraction of
total public expenditure on higher education), although not all ACEs were generating the same levels of
external revenue. Maintenance of acquired equipment and infrastructure is expected to require only limited
recurrent financing. The ICR (page 37) identified one area of risk, namely the ability to support regional
mobility of students, noting that it is often expensive for regional students to pursue higher education outside
their country without support in the form of scholarships or other sources of financing. To meet project
targets, ACEs did offer financial support to regional students but it is unclear whether that will be continued.



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     African Centers of Excellence (P126974)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project approach was strategic and relevant, particularly notable in its innovative regional approach
  to strengthen higher education. As it was deemed costly and difficult for all countries in the region to
  increase capacity of higher education institutes in a range of specialty areas at the same time, the
  regional approach was designed, assuming mobility across countries so all countries and participants
  could benefit from access to quality higher education in key sectors. The theory of change and results
  frameworks were overall sound. The project preparation period included a rigorous selection process to
  identify the 22 ACEs in 21 host institutions across eight countries. The ICR (page 35) noted that the
  "high credibility of the process and results" helped to get the project off to a smooth start. The use of
  disbursement-linked indicators, which were common across all ACEs, provided appropriate incentives,
  thus ensuring focus on the key results. The regional-level implementing agency was to be a key source
  of technical and implementation support (including fiduciary), given that the ACEs were being developed
  from the ground up. Monitoring and data collection arrangements were clearly established, including with
  a verification mechanism to ensure quality of data, and evaluative studies were planned to assess project
  impact both during and after the project period.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The results-based financing approach helped maintain focus on outcomes, although lack of experience
 with the approach by most of the participant countries led to delays. The ICR (page 35) noted that the Bank
 team, through continuity in regional task team leadership alongside country-level co-task team
 leaders, played an important role in filling knowledge gaps and providing detailed hands-on support
 to individual countries. There were frequent site visits to ACEs as part of regional supervision
 workshops. Monitoring data was used to make mid-course adjustments, including reallocating funds to
 better-performance ACEs. The results framework/DLIs were revised as needed. The ICR reported ACE
 survey results on Bank support, which rated education and technical advice of the Bank team at 4.06 out of
 5 (on a scale of 1-5 with 5 being the highest). Responsiveness to queries and timely and adequate
 information was also rated at 4 and above. The lowest rating for the Bank team was on procurement
 support with a rating of 3.8.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was robust, as it clearly linked the project activities to intended outcomes as
 identified in the theory of change. The use of Disbursement-Linked Indicators, which were common across
 all ACEs and directly linked to the outcome indicators with clear data collection mechanisms, helped to
 ensure focus on project outcomes. However, as noted in the ICR (page 32), there were some shortcomings
 in the definitions of DLIs and clarification for individual ACEs was needed to improve quality of data
 collected. The verification system by a third party was included to support quality of data, particularly as
 ACEs would be newly formed with only limited capacity for M&E. Evaluative activities were also planned,
 including student satisfaction surveys, tracer studies, and technical audits.



b. M&E Implementation
  ACEs capacity for monitoring was initially limited, and early rounds of data submitted were of insufficient
  quality. The verification process also experienced challenges due to language barriers, and the time
  lapse between the end of training and verification (particularly for the short-term courses) which led to
  issues with tracking beneficiaries in a timely manner. These issues of quality of data reported by ACEs
  and the timeliness of verification processes were subsequently improved. These adjustments were
  critical given the reliance on disbursement linked indicators. Several evaluations were conducted,
  including student satisfaction surveys in 2017 and 2018, a tracer survey of master's programs graduates
  in March 2019, evaluation questionnaires from ACE regional meetings, bibliometric analysis of research
  outputs from ACEs from 2011 to 2018, and a review of training and research quality prepared by AAU in
  February 2020.



c. M&E Utilization
  The use of disbursement-linked indicators ensured that M&E data was utilized to inform project
  implementation and provided accountability for ACEs according to the performance agreements they
  had each signed. Performance data were also used to inform decisions at regional meetings on
  reallocating project funds among ACEs and/or providing additional support to specific ACEs. The ICR
  (page 33) also noted that the evaluations provided useful information with respect to the project's
  contribution in achieving both immediate and longer-term objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to rehabilitation/expansion of
   facilities, thus triggering the safeguard for Environmental Assessment (BP/OP 4.01). Environmental and
   Safeguard Management Plans were prepared by each participating university that intended to pursue civil
   works. According to the ICR (page 33), each ACE that undertook civil works applied a checklist of actions
   during construction and the safeguard rating was maintained at Satisfactory throughout the project
   period. No safeguard issues were raised during the site visits by the verification agency.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: According to the ICR (page 34), financial management performance was
   satisfactory. Interim financial reports and audit reports of generally acceptable quality were submitted
   according to project covenants, albeit with some delays. The project featured disbursement-linked
   indicators, some of which were related to financial management performance, such as timely submission
   of interim financial reports, financial web transparency, functioning audit committee, and internal
   auditing. According to the ICR (page 34), these DLIs were mostly achieved by all of the ACEs. The ICR
   does not report on findings on audit reports, namely whether there were any qualifications, although the
   task team subsequently confirmed there were no qualifications.

   Procurement: According to the ICR (page 34), procurement performance was moderately satisfactory.
   Each ACE prepared a procurement manual and the project staffing included dedicated procurement
   officers, who were well supported by regional staff. Again, disbursement-linked indicators related to
   procurement were included, such as timely procurement and timely post procurement audits. The ICR
   does not report on whether there were any procurement irregularities, although the task team subsequently
   confirmed there were none.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                            ICR               IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                            Satisfactory     Satisfactory


                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 37-39):

        Strong institutional ownership and leadership are essential components for a successful
         Center of Excellence. In the case of this project, there appeared to be a reasonable
         correlation between an ACE’s success and the institutional support it received, pointing to
         the need for ensuring adequate incentives for institutions to provide an enabling
         environment. Moreover, the strength of ACE leaders was an essential variable. In cases
         where there was slow implementation at an ACE, change in center leadership alone led
         to notable improvements in performance. This experience highlighted the need to
         incorporate leadership development in future project designs.
        Strong linkages between ACEs and their respective national governments can increase
         impact on the higher education sector. In the case of this project, ACEs operated under the
         authority of their national governments, with National Review Committees established to
         supervise ACE performance at the country level and to ensure alignment with the national
         government’s strategic agendas. Support at this high level allowed for lessons from the
         development of ACEs to impact the broader higher education institutions and systems in
         their country.
        Capacity to engage the private sector is essential to ensure knowledge transfer. In the case
         of this project, collaborative knowledge partnerships with private-sector entities included
         participation of industry representatives on curricula boards and ACE advisory committees,
         research consultancies and internship placements and partnership with visiting faculty from
         industry. However, while there was some success in placing master’s and Doctoral students
         in internships in private sector settings, overall this was the biggest challenge for many of the
         ACEs. This experience highlighted the need to incorporate capacity building on engagement
         with the private sector in future project designs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well-organized and results-oriented. The quality of evidence was substantial, drawing upon the
significant amount of data collected for the disbursement-linked indicators. The theory of change was well-
established with regards to the immediate project-level outcomes of increased regional specialization and


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      African Centers of Excellence (P126974)



increased enrollments/graduates. Although the rationale for and innovative nature of the regional approach
were well-articulated, it is not clear whether costs of regional mobility (i.e., expenses for students to receive
training outside their own country) make this a cost-efficient approach overall. Lessons were clearly drawn
from project experience and well-formulated to enable future learning in higher education projects.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 14
