     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0022601

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P107350                                  MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                               Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50110,IDA-53070                      15-Dec-2017                                        86,914,725.92

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Sep-2011                              30-Jun-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           96,958,920.05                                              0.00

 Actual                                       86,914,725.92                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Hassan Wally               Dileep M. Wagle             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Water Resources Development Project (NWRDP) as
   articulated in the Project Appraisal Document (paragraph 16) was identical to the one stated in the
   Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) and aimed to:

   "strengthen the development and management of national water resources and increase the yield of
   the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area (GMMA)."


                                                                                               Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



   The outcome of this project will be assessed based on a split rating because the target values of two outcome
   indicators were reduced as part of two restructurings.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:

   1. Water Resources Management (estimated cost at appraisal: US$15.00 million, actual cost:
   US$16.15 million). This component aimed to enhance capacity at the national and regional level to
   address the challenges of water resources management in Mozambique and strengthen the framework for
   water resources development. The component would provide support to: (a) enhance water resources
   planning to enable the development of a national management system; (b) increase the capacity for
   negotiations, monitoring and compliance with international waters instruments; (c) strengthen the capacity
   of the Recipient’s regional water authorities to develop strategies and studies to ensure the sustainable and
   equitable development of water resources in the Recipient’s river basins, including, but not limited to, the
   Zambezi river; (d) develop and implement mechanisms to facilitate comprehensive water allocation,
   licensing, revenue and compliance with monitoring measures; and (e) develop a hydro-climatic information
   management system and related technical assistance. These activities would be supported through the
   provision of: i) consultants services and technical assistance; ii) goods and equipment, including hydro-
   climatic and water quality equipment, bulk meters, computers, vehicles and office equipment; iii) works to
   establish hydro-meteorological stations; iv) carrying out of training and capacity building activities to the
   sector; and, v) incremental operating costs to support DNA and the ARAs. It also includes support for the
   Panel of Experts for Dam Safety and Environmental and Social aspects through provision of Consultants
   Services.

   2. Corumana Dam Completion (estimated cost at appraisal: US$42.00 million, actual cost: US$39.21
   million). This component aimed to support completion of the Corumana Dam, through, inter alia the: (a)
   installation of spillway gates with repair works of concrete pillars/abutments; (b) construction of a saddle
   dam with an emergency spillway; (c) development of a monitoring system; (d) provision of safety
   equipment; and (e) adoption of dam safety measures. This would be achieved through the provision of: i)
   consulting services for detailed design and supervision and technical assistance within ARA-Sul to assist
   with implementation; ii) works required for completion of the Corumana Dam; and, iii) goods needed to
   support implementation.

   3. Corumana Environmental and Social (estimated cost at appraisal: US$5.50 million, actual cost:
   US$4.02 million). This component aimed to ensure that completion of the Corumana Dam was compliant
   with the project safeguard instruments prepared by the Borrower and cleared by the Bank through
   implementation of: (a) the Environmental Management Plan; and (b) the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP),

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



  including a Community Livelihood Plan. These would be supported through the provision of: i) consulting
  services and technical assistance; ii) works, including a water supply and sanitation program and
  community development measures in the vicinity of the Corumana Dam; and, iii) goods, equipment and
  incremental operating costs would be provided to assist with monitoring, stakeholder consultations and
  implementation. The Government would directly finance all cash compensation and land acquisition as part
  of the RAP.

  4. Water Resources Development (estimated cost at appraisal: US$35.00 million, actual cost:
  US$27.53 million). This component aimed to address the infrastructure deficit through support to: (a)
  prepare feasibility studies, tender designs, strategic assessments and river basin plans and develop a
  pipeline of future water resource investments in the Recipient’s territory; and (b) prepare environmental and
  social assessments for future potential water sector related investments in the Recipient’s territory. This
  would be supported through the provision of: i) consulting services and technical assistance for the detailed
  design of water resources infrastructure, water supply networks and distribution systems, along with the
  preparation of environmental and social safeguards instruments; and, ii) operating expenses associated
  with workshops, training and capacity enhancement initiatives.

  Revised Components. The 2013 Additional Financing (AF) for US$32 million increased the scope of the
  project. Specifically, Components 1 and 4 included the following new activities:

  1. Water Resources Management (US$4.00 million). New activities included integrated flood management
  and mitigation studies for the Limpopo River basin in Mozambique to inform longer-term infrastructure
  investments and planning.
  4. Water Resources Development (US$28.00 million). New activities included: (i) emergency civil works to
  rehabilitate and reconstruct prioritized dykes and levees; (ii) rehabilitation of the Macarretane Barrage on
  the Limpopo River, including hydro-mechanical works, gate control system, reinforcement of foundations,
  and the rehabilitation of office buildings; (iii) TA and supervision associated with the emergency civil works;
  and, (iv) other improvements to the existing infrastructure of dykes and levees.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated to be US$83.75 million, including US$4.50 million
  contingencies (PAD, page 7, Table 1). This amount was revised upwards to US$115.75 million after the
  project received additional IDA financing worth US$32 million in 2013 (see below for details). The actual
  cost according to the ICR Data sheet was US$86.91 million, which was about US$28 million lower than the
  anticipated cost. According to the ICR (paragraph 15), part of the difference stemmed from the forgoing of
  the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR-which became a standalone project) financing (worth
  US$10 million). Also, counterpart funding for RAP implementation did not materialize. Furthermore, the
  November 2019 restructuring cancelled US$5 million, in addition to which the exchange rate depreciation
  which led to a significant reduction in IDA funding.

  Financing. The project was financed through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) comprising an International
  Development Association (IDA) Credit of US$70.00 million Special Drawing Rights (SDR) equivalent, to be
  implemented over six years. According to the PAD (paragraph 24) "selection of the SIL was premised on
  the flexibility and its suitability to incorporate financing for a broad range of activities including a number of
  specific investments across the country, technical assistance and capacity enhancement measures." In
  2013, the project received an Additional Financing (AF) from IDA resources for US$32 million. The total IDA

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



financing was US$102 million. This amount was revised down to US$96.96 million. The actual disbursed
amount according to the ICR Data Sheet was US$86.91 million (89.6 percent of the revised amount). As
mentioned above, the difference stemmed from the cancellation of US$5.00 million as part of the November
2019 restructuring, combined with significant exchange rate depreciation (ICR, paragraph 15).

Dates. The project was approved on September 15, 2011 and became effective four and half months later
on January 31, 2012. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on December 15, 2014. The PAD did
not state a date for the MTR. That said, conducting the MTR after three years into implementation was
reasonable given that the original anticipated implementation period was six years. The project closed on
June 30, 2020, which was about thirty months (2.5 years) later than the original closing date on December
15, 2017. The extension of the closing date allowed more time to implement the ESIA and the RAP and
accommodated delays in procurement for the Corumana Dam (ICR, paragraph 59). It is worth noting that in
2013, the project received US$32 million as additional financing “to finance the costs of emergency
rehabilitation of civil works (e.g., dykes and levees) following the extreme flooding in southern Mozambique
(ICR, paragraph 10).”

The project was restructured three times, all Level Two restructurings, as follows:

1. On September 27, 2013, when the amount disbursed was US$5.38 million , as part of an Additional
Financing (AF) from IDA resources for US$32 million, equivalent, to finance the costs of emergency
rehabilitation of civil works (e.g., dykes and levees) following the extreme flooding in southern Mozambique,
along with longer-term interventions for improved flood management and mitigation. The restructuring
included changes to the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework to reflect the introduction of new
project activities, changes in components and cost, reallocation between disbursement categories, change
in disbursements arrangements, and change in Legal Covenants.

2. On December 8, 2017, when the amount disbursed was US$40.09 million, primarily to extend the closing
date by 23 months, from December 15, 2017 to November 14, 2019, and to adjust an outcome-level target
and several intermediate indicators., change in the implementation schedule, and changes in components
and cost.

3. On November 12, 2019, when the amount disbursed was US$68.39 million, in order to further extend the
closing date by 7.5 months to June 30, 2020 and adjust the target of another PDO indicator. Also, changes
were made to components and cost, and implementation schedule, reallocation between disbursement
categories, and US$5.00 of IDA funds were cancelled.

This review is in agreement with the argument reported in the ICR (paragraph 18) which stated that the
changes in the three restructurings "had mixed implications on the theory of change." On one hand, the AF
supported the project’s objective of strengthening water resources management, improving water security,
and improving resilience to climate change by rehabilitating hydraulic infrastructure destroyed in the 2013
floods and by improving longer-term flood management and mitigation. On the other hand, the preparation
of the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience project as a standalone operation meant that the NWRDP made
very little direct contribution to improving the country’s hydro-climatic monitoring system and its associated
long-term goals of improved economic planning and climate change preparedness. In addition, dropping the
national water allocation and revenue management system reduced the project’s scope to affect
sustainable management of water resources.




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Mozambique is one of the world's poorest countries and its achievements in poverty
reduction mask significant regional variations, and persistent, high levels of absolute poverty and
malnutrition. It ranks third amongst the African countries most exposed to risks from multiple weather-
related hazards and major floods, cyclones and droughts have a significant impact on the country’s
economy. Access to improved water and sanitation services remains low, despite the success of recent
reforms which have helped to strengthen sector institutions and the regulatory framework. Seventy
five percent of the current production capacity for water supply serves the Greater Maputo Metropolitan
Area (GMMA), almost exclusively from the Pequenos Libombos Dam on the Umbeluzi River. However, this
is now fully committed and there is already an existing water deficit, requiring development of alternative
source to secure a reliable supply for the city of Maputo and surrounding metropolitan areas. The project
aimed to strengthen the development and management of national water resources and increase the yield
of the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for the Greater Maputo Metropolitan Area.

Previous Bank Experience. The Bank was engaged in the water sector in Mozambique since 1998. A
Country Water Resources Assistance Strategy (CWRAS) was prepared by the Bank in 2007. This provided
an analysis of the changing socio-economic circumstances to assist in the identification of a prioritized set
of interventions directed toward the sustainable development and management of water resources. The
CWRAS also directed the Bank’s support in water resources to maximize the impact on long-term poverty
reduction and economic growth within the context of the approach and priorities of the FY08-11 CPS. It was
also used to identify the Bank’s specific strengths with respect to other development partners and, at the
same time, promote donor coordination and cooperation in the water resources sector in the identified
priority areas of interventions. Experience also included the IDA-financed National Water Development
Project 1 and 2 (PNDA - Programa Nacional de Desenvolvimento de Águas). The Bank also implemented
similar projects regionally as well as in other areas in the world.

Consistency with Government Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Government of
Mozambique's (GoM) National Water Resources Development Program. This includes a number of critical
interventions to support implementation of measures envisaged under the Water Policy, the National Water
Resources Management Strategy and the Regulations for Licenses and Concessions. The PDO was also in
line with the Water Policy (Politica de Ãguas - PA) which was based on an integrated approach to water
resources management embedded within the principles of sustainable use. The goals of the PA included
satisfying the basic needs of water supply for human consumption, improving sanitation, efficient use of
water for the economic development, water for environmental conservation, reducing vulnerability to floods
and droughts and promoting peace and regional integration while also guaranteeing water resources for the
development of Mozambique.

At completion, the PDO remained in line with the GoM’s national and sectoral priorities. The PDO was in
line with Mozambique's 2015-2035 National Development Strategy. Specifically, it was in line with the pillars
on infrastructure development to support the sustainable management of water resources, and innovation
and technological development to support the management of natural resources. The PDO was also in line
with the Government’s Five-Year Program for 2020-2024 (Proposta do Programa Quinquenal do Governo)
which emphasized inclusive and sustainable growth, social and economic stability, economic productivity
and competitiveness, and climate change as its main priorities. The project directly supported the program’s

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



strategic objectives of infrastructure development, which specifically referenced the rehabilitation and
development of dams and other hydraulic infrastructure, the strengthening of natural resources
management, and the need to reduce climate-related risks. The PDO was also in line with the 2013-2025
National Strategy for Adaptation and Mitigation to Climate Change, which proposed priority actions to
reduce climate risk and strengthen early warning systems; and (ii) the Master Plan for Water Resources
Management in Mozambique, which highlighted the Corumana Dam for priority rehabilitation and analyzed
national water resources and proposed the rehabilitation and development of hydraulic infrastructure,
ground water resources, and drainage of inland rainwater.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's strategy for Africa
(Africa's Regional Strategy-2011) that sought to close Africa's infrastructure gap to drive productive
development of urban growth poles and to build resilience to climate change and natural
disasters. Specifically, with the regional strategy's two pillars: (i) Competitiveness and Employment, and (ii)
Vulnerability and Resilience. The PDO was also in line with the Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS-
FY2007-FY2011), Pillar II of the CPS “Equitable access to key services”, through Result Area #3:
“Improved government effectiveness in the provision of services”, via Outcome 8: “Increased access to
potable water”-by providing upstream infrastructure for bulk water supply, and Pillar III: “Sustainable and
Broad-based Growth” of the CPS-through contributing directly to Result Area #5: “Strengthened economic
growth potential”, specifically Outcome 17: “Improved sustainable management of water resources”
and Outcome 18: “Enhanced capacity to respond to disasters”.

At completion, the PDO remained in line with Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY17-21. The
CPS highlighted the key ongoing challenges of developing and managing the country’s water resources
including: addressing the country’s infrastructure deficit; improving basic services such as access to safe
water, sanitation, and hygiene; and reducing the country's vulnerability to weather-related shocks. The
project directly supported Pillar III of the CPS, “Enhancing Sustainability and Resilience” which identifies
adequate access to infrastructure resources and services as a key driver of growth and poverty alleviation.
The project also contributed to two Focus Areas of “Promoting Diversified Growth and Enhanced
Productivity” and “Investment in Human Capital”, given the role water resources play in productivity and
human development. Finally, the PDO was in line with the CPS objectives of improving management of
climate risks and natural resources, improving access to water and sanitation, promoting inclusive
urbanization and decentralization.

Relevance of Objectives is rated Substantial. The PDO statement was clear and focused, but lacked a
specific connection to higher level objectives, namely, ensuring equitable and efficient utilization of water
supply services, disaster preparedness and building climate resiliency. The downstream intake, water
treatment, and conveyance system to supply water to Greater Maputo would be supported by the Greater
Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project (GMWSEP).

This Review is in agreement with the ICR that the "PDO was challenging, but not overly ambitious
(paragraph 19)." The Bank has had extensive experience in the country backed by a water sector portfolio
which amounts to more than US$700 million. The PDO reflected the GoM’s priorities with regards to water
security and natural disaster response and was in line with the Bank's CPFs both at appraisal and
completion.




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Objective 1. To strengthen the management of national water resources.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The NWRDP sought to build water resource management capacity at the regional
                             and national levels. This would be achieved through building capacity to manage international waterways,
                             installing hydroclimatic stations and signing and implementing international waterways agreements. To
                             develop water resources the project would develop river basins plans, rehabilitate existing hydro-
                             infrastructure and develop studies for additional dam projects. These activities were expected to result in
                             strengthening the development and management of national water resources. Anticipated long-term impacts
                             included: ensuring equitable and efficient utilization of water supply services, availability of water for
                             productive purposes, disaster preparedness and building climate resiliency.

                             The achievement of the stated PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. The Pilot Program for
                             Climate Resilience (PPCR)-hydro-met project was approved to co-finance NWRDP; 2. Timely undertaking of
                             procurement activities; 3. Timely completion of physical and mechanical works to allow time for testing,
                             impoundment and commissioning of works; and 4. Sustained capacity at the national and regional levels to
                             manage water resources.

                             The activities included in the ToC were directly linked to the stated PDO in a valid causal chain. The ToC
                             delineated the key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO. However, the preparation of
                             the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience project as a standalone operation meant the NWRDP had very little
                             contribution to improving the country’s hydro-climatic monitoring system and its associated long-term goals of
                             improved economic planning and climate change preparedness. In addition, dropping the national water
                             allocation and revenue management system reduced the project’s scope to affect sustainable management of
                             water resources.

                             Outputs

                             The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise:

                             1. Strengthening the management of national water resources

                                        Training was provided on international water law, negotiations, mediation, water conflict management.
                                        The project financed the development of the National Strategic Action Plan to Monitor the Compliance
                                         of International Shared Watercourse Agreements.



                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)




      Two new irrigation canals in the Limpopo Valley. The ICR reported this as an output, but no further
       information was given.
      Integrated flood management plan for the Limpopo developed to help manage flooding.
      Training, capacity building, institutional strengthening activities



Outcome

The scope of this objective was reduced after the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) did not co-
finance the project to modernize the country’s hydro-meteorological system, but instead PPCR was approved
as separate stand-clone project (ICR, paragraph 24). Therefore, none of the outcomes stemming from the
work on the hydro-meteorological system could be attributed to the NWRDP. Despite that, the associated
outcome indicator “percent of hydroclimatic stations operating and reporting” was not dropped from the
RF; as such, it did not provide a complete account of all the anticipated outcomes under this objective.

According to the ICR (paragraph 24), five outcomes/intermediate outcomes were used to assess the
achievement of this objective as follows:

(a) Improved capacity to negotiate and comply with international waters instruments. The project
provided support for the Government of Mozambique to collaborate with other riparian countries to review and
update two agreements on international waters, namely the Interim IncoMaputo Agreement between
Mozambique, Eswatini and South Africa, and the Púngue and Búzios Watercourses Agreement between
Mozambique and Zimbabwe. Both agreements were signed by all riparians, which exceeded the target of
reviewing one agreement and updating another. The project also financed the development of the National
Strategic Action Plan to Monitor the Compliance of international Shared Watercourses Agreements.
According to the ICR (paragraph 26) "the action plan gives the GoM a much-needed road map to monitor,
negotiate, and enforce international river agreements."

(b) Informed sustainable and equitable management of priority river basins through strategies and
studies. The project financed three river basin plans to improve sustainable, equitable and participatory
management of water resources in the Zambezi, Lúrio, and Limpopo river basins. According to the ICR
(paragraph 27), "these plans contained a comprehensive monograph of land use, water availability, current
and planned water demand, socio-economic conditions, environmental and water quality, and legal and
institutional framework. Moreover, the plans analyzed the mandate, core functions, technical and
management capacity to meet institutions’ goals, mission, and functions of river basin authorities."

(c) Informed long-term infrastructure investment planning in the Limpopo River basin through an
integrated flood management and mitigation study. The integrated flood management study included
structural and nonstructural measures to help prevent and manage flooding in one of the most flood-prone
areas in the country. It sets out structural and non-structural measures on flood management. Also, the
plan outlined the role of state and non-state actors across several sectors at the local, provincial, and national
levels. The plan called for strengthening and management of the flood early warning system and the
information and communication management systems for national emergencies, and introduction of drought-
resistant crops (ICR, paragraph 29). Through this study, the project contributed to better flood management
and prevention.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



(d) Informed flood management preparedness through a decision support system (DSS). The DSS was
expected to integrate multiple decision making criteria, a collection of methodologies, such as remote
sensing, geographic information system, hydrologic models, and real-time flood information systems; to
compare, select, or rank multiple alternatives to elicit and model flood preferences of stakeholders; and
improve the coordination across agencies, organizations and affected citizens. According to the ICR
(paragraph 30) "the DSS is operating effectively and informing decision making."

(e) Improved capacity through extensive capacity building. According to the ICR (paragraph 31) the
training improved technical and managerial capacity of the Regional Water Administration (ARA) staff who
demonstrated the ability to process and analyze data of hydrological reports, as opposed to just collecting
and storing data before the project. Also, the project-provided training improved management systems of
National Directorate for Water Resources Management (DNGRH) and ARA.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, it is plausible to assume that the achievement of these results
on aggregate strengthened water resources management, despite dropping the work on the hydro-
meteorological system.

On this basis, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Objective 2. To strengthen the development of national water resources.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The NWRDP sought to strengthen the development of national water resources
through developing river basins plans, rehabilitating existing hydro-infrastructure and developing studies for
additional dam projects. These activities were expected to result in strengthening the development of national
water resources. Anticipated long-term impacts included: ensuring equitable and efficient utilization of water
supply services, availability of water for productive purposes, disaster preparedness and building climate
resiliency.

The achievement of the stated PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. Timely undertaking of
procurement activities; 2. Timely completion of physical and mechanical works to allow time for testing,
impoundment and commissioning of works; and 3. Sustained capacity at the national and regional levels to
manage water resources.

The activities included in the ToC were directly linked to the stated PDO in a valid causal chain. The ToC
clearly delineated the key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO.

Outputs



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1), unless referenced otherwise:

      Technical designs for three small dams and associated water supply networks and distribution
         systems completed (target achieved).
        Environmental and social impact assessments completed to allow the dams to go to tender completed
         (target achieved).
        River basin plans for the Limpopo, Zambezi, and Lurio river basins.
        Rehabilitated dykes, levees, 50 kilometers (km) of dyke system were rehabilitated under the project,
         protecting a population of about 287,100 people and 45,000 hectares (ha) of agricultural fields (ICR,
         paragraph 36).
        Rehabilitated Macarretane barrage. The rehabilitation works focused on three main activities: the
         hydromechanical works, the gate control system and reinforcement of the foundation (ICR, paragraph
         37)

Outcome

This objective, which aimed to help address Mozambique’s infrastructure deficit in the water sector, was to be
assessed through the outcome indicator measuring the number of river basins plans. The project only
financed three out of an original target of nineteen plans (about 16% achievement rate) including those for the
Limpopo, Zambezi, and Lúrio (ICR, paragraph 33). The ICR attributed this shortcoming on achieving the
target to "budget constraints (paragraph 33)." The three river basin plans prepared by the project contained
river basin development scenarios and strategic investment plans. The plans entailed critical investments in
the order of US$2 billion for the Limpopo River Basin, US$1.8 billion for the Zambezi River Basin, and
US$570 million for the Lúrio River Basin (ICR, paragraph 34). The implementation of these plans was
expected to be long-term over 25 years (2020-2045). The ICR did not clarify whether implementation started
nor what sources of funding would be used to fund the afore-mentioned plans. The ICR (table 3) stated that
the project "leveraged financing from GoM and development partners to finance an additional 4 (plans)."
According to the ICR (paragraph 33) "all plans were based off similar terms of references and followed the
same template with similar content."

Other project achievements included:

1. Financing the detailed technical designs, including for water supply networks, distribution systems, and
environmental and social impact assessments for the Gorongosa, Metuchira and Ressano Garcia dams.
According to the ICR (paragraph 35) "the achievement exceeded expectations as the original plan was to only
undertake feasibility studies. Based on these outputs, the three dams were immediately ready for tendering."

2. Rehabilitating flood protection dikes and other hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River basin following
the 2013 floods. The Bank used Additional Financing to fund civil works, TA, and supervision to reconstruct
dikes, weirs, and levees in communities along the Limpopo River, in one of the country’s most significant
agricultural areas. However, the works rehabilitated the dikes to sustain a one in 20-year flood event rather
than a one in 50-year flood. The ICR (paragraph 36) attributed this shortcoming to the requirement to build
"a much larger system, which was beyond the scope, budget, and timeframe of the project."

3. Rehabilitation of the Macarretane dam which was part of a multifunctional infrastructure system providing
flood protection, all-season water supply, irrigation, and transportation. According to the ICR (paragraph 37)
"completion of these works has had an important economic impact, given the role the Chokwe irrigation

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



system plays in one of the main irrigated areas in the country, which the Government recently declared as a
Special Economic Zone. The inauguration of the rehabilitated dam took place in September 2020 and the
dam is once again supplying water to about 12,000 producers across 35,000 hectares in Chokwe."

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the project fell short on achieving its main outcome indicators
"number of river basins plans".

On aggregate, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 2. To strengthen the development of national water resources.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The same ToC applies as the objective was not changed, but there was a revision
in the outcome indicator. The target value for “river basins covered with management plans” decreased from
19 to 12 to better align with the project budget.

Outputs

same as above

Outcome

The project rehabilitated flood protection dikes and other hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River basin
following the 2013 floods. The Bank used Additional Financing to fund civil works, TA, and supervision to
reconstruct dikes, weirs, and levees in communities along the Limpopo River, in one of the country’s most
significant agricultural areas. While the rehabilitation of the dikes was done to sustain a one in 20-year flood
event rather than a one in 50-year flood as envisioned, this rehabilitation returned the dikes to their pre-2013
floods status. The ICR (paragraph 36) attributed this shortcoming to the requirement to build "a much larger
system, which was beyond the scope, budget, and timeframe of the project."

The Macarretane dam, which was part of a multifunctional infrastructure system providing flood protection, all-
season water supply, irrigation, and transportation, was also rehabilitated. The rehabilitation works focused
on three main activities: the hydromechanical works, the gate control system and reinforcement of the
foundation. According to the ICR (paragraph 37) "completion of these works has had an important economic
impact, given the role the Chokwe irrigation system plays in one of the main irrigated areas in the country,
which the Government recently declared as a Special Economic Zone. The inauguration of the rehabilitated
dam took place in September 2020 and the dam was once again supplying water to about 12,000 producers
across 35,000 hectares in Chokwe."



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



As mentioned above, the project financed three out of the revised target of twelve plans (baseline was five
plans) including those for the Limpopo, Zambezi, and Lúrio rivers (ICR, paragraph 33). The project leveraged
financing from the GoM and other development partners to finance four more plans that followed the same
template with similar content.

Overall, the project achieved notable outcomes including: the rehabilitation of the flood protection dikes and
other hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River basin, the rehabilitation of the Macarretane dam,
completing the technical designs of three dams, and completing seven river basin plans, which in addition to
five existing plans (baseline) meant that the project achieved its revised outcome target of 12 river basin
plans.

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial
despite some shortcomings.




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Objective 3. To increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for GMMA

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To increase the yield of the Corumana Dam, the project sought to complete the
Dam itself, which was left without spillway gates and other features when constructed in 1989, thereby
resulting in increased reservoir capacity, dam yield, bulk water supply, and climate resilience. The project
financed the design, supervision, and the hydromechanical works, the completion of which increased
reservoir capacity, dam yield, bulk water supply, and improved climate resilience. A separate Bank-financed
project, the Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project (GMWSEP), will allow for the actual abstraction,
treatment, conveyance, and distribution of water to households in the GMMA. The GMWSEP was set to close
in September 2021 with the water treatment plant already commissioned and with the project on track to
distributing 60,000 m3/day to the GMMA (ICR, paragraph 38).

The achievement of the stated PDO was underpinned by the following assumptions: 1. Timely undertaking of
procurement activities; 3. Timely completion of physical and mechanical works to allow time for testing,
impoundment and commissioning of works; and 3. Sustained capacity at the national and regional levels to
manage water resources.

The activities included in the ToC were directly linked to the first part of the PDO (to increase the yield of the
Corumana Dam) in a valid causal chain. The ToC delineated the key assumptions that underpinned the
achievement of the PDO. However, the second part of the PDO (to augment water supply for GMMA) was
addressed by a separate stand-alone bank-financed project.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



Outputs

The following outputs were reported in the ICR (Annex 1) unless referenced otherwise:

      Completion of the Corumana Dam with new spillway gates, saddle dam, repairs to concrete pillars,
       installation of hydro-mechanical and control equipment, control room.
      New dam safety monitoring system, including pressure relief wells, v-notch outlet structures, toe drain.
      New O&M manual.
      New Emergency Preparedness Plan.
      Consultations with local authorities, basin management committees, disaster management personnel,
       first responders.
      Training, capacity building, institutional development activities.

Outcome

The completion of the Corumana Dam works increased the dam’s Full Supply Level (FSL) from from
111meters above sea level (mASL) to 114 mASL compared to an original target of 117 mASL, and increased
the reservoir storage capacity from 720 million cubic meters (Mm3) to 960 Mm3 compared to an original
target of 1240 Mm3. These changes, in turn, increased the dam’s yield from 299.8 Mm3/year (yr) to 311.4
Mm3/yr compared to an original target of 322.1 Mm3/yr, resulting in an incremental yield of 11.6 Mm3/yr
compared to an original target of 22.3 Mm3/yr at a 98% confidence interval. As a result, bulk water supply
available from Corumana to the GMMA was estimated to increase from 69 Mm3/yr to 81 Mm3/yr compared to
an original target of 86 Mm3/yr. The ICR (paragraph 44) explained that "the incremental yield of 16.8 Mm3/yr
was reduced to 11.6 Mm3/yr due to hydrological studies and new regulations, which necessitated a redesign
of the dam, including a new auxiliary spillway in the left embankment (to be completed under a separate
project) to ensure safe discharge during maximum flood events."

Based on the above-mentioned information, the project fell short on achieving all its targets regarding the
dam yield, incremental yield and bulk water supply available to GMMA. Therefore, efficacy of achieving this
objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 3. To increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for GMMA

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). Same as above. The PDO was not changed, but the dam was redesigned in 2017.
However, outcome targets for the incremental reservoir yield available from Corumana Dam for GMMAas and
the storage Capacity Corumana Dam shown were revised downwards (as shown below) as part of the
November 2019 restructuring.


                                                                                                Page 13 of 28
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



                            According to the Restructuring Paper (2019, paragraph 6) "the reservoir yield target for Corumana Dam was
                            based on the original design of the project which included the installation of six spillway gates and a saddle
                            dam with an earth fuse plug to act as an emergency spillway. However, during project implementation, it
                            became clear that the fuse-plug on the saddle dam could no longer play the role of an emergency spillway as
                            the downstream area of this saddle dam, free of people during project preparation, was now
                            inhabited by hundreds of people who would be in harm’s way if the fuse-plug were activated. Based on advice
                            from the Panel of Experts (PoE), it was decided in February 2016 that, instead of equipping the saddle dam
                            with the fuse plug element, an auxiliary spillway would be constructed in the left embankment of the dam. The
                            construction of the auxiliary spillway, estimated at around US$40 million, would be undertaken through a
                            separate project. Until the auxiliary spillway is constructed, the FSL is restricted to 114 m (instead of 117 m),
                            which corresponds to a reservoir yield of 960 Mm3. Consequently, the incremental reservoir yield available
                            from Corumana Dam for GMMA will be reduced from 16.8 Mm3/year to 11.6 Mm3/year."



                            Outputs

                            same as above

                            Outcome

                            The completion of the Corumana Dam increased reservoir capacity, dam yield, bulk water supply,
                            and improved climate resilience. The completion of the hydromechanical works financed by the
                            project allowed the dam’s FSL to rise from 111 mASL to 114 mASL and to increase the reservoir storage
                            capacity from 720 million cubic meters (Mm3) to a revised target of 960 Mm3 (targets achieved). These
                            changes, in turn, increased the dam’s yield from 299.8 Mm3/year (yr) to 311.4 Mm3/yr, resulting in an
                            incremental yield of 11.6 Mm3/yr (both targets achieved) at a 98% confidence interval. As a result, bulk water
                            supply available from Corumana to the GMMA was estimated to have increased from 69 Mm3/yr to 81
                            Mm3/yr (target achieved). However, fully achieving this objective "is dependent on completion of remaining
                            finishing works, dam safety measures, dam impoundment and commissioning, as well as pending RAP and
                            LRP activities (ICR, paragraph 84)."

                            Based on the above-mentioned information, the project achieved all of its revised targets.

                            On this basis, the efficacy of achieving this objective is rated Substantial.




                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                                                                                                                              Page 14 of 28
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



        Pre-restructuring. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in strengthening water
        resources management (objective 1), despite dropping the work on the hydro-meteorological system.
        However, the project achieved mixed results on strengthening the development of national water resources
        (Objective 2). It fell short on achieving the main outcome indicators "number of river basins plans" and fell
        short on rehabilitating the hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River to the expected level of one in 50-year
        flood. On the other hand, the project succeeded in the rehabilitation of the Macarretane dam and in financing
        and completing the technical designs of three dams. Finally, to increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to
        augment water supply for GMMA (objective 3), the project fell short on achieving all its targets regarding the
        dam yield, incremental yield and bulk water supply available to GMMA.

        Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the overall efficacy is rated Modest.



        Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
        Modest                                                    Low achievement
OBJR1_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
        2017 Restructuring. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in strengthening
        water resources management (objective 1), despite dropping the work on the hydro-meteorological system.
        The project achieved notable results on strengthening the development of national water resources (Objective
        2). In total seven comprehensive river basin plans were developed. The project
        also rehabilitated the hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River and the Macarretane dam; and financed
        and completed the technical designs of three dams. Finally, to increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to
        augment water supply for GMMA (objective 3), the project fell short on achieving all its targets regarding the
        dam yield, incremental yield and bulk water supply available to GMMA.

        On balance, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial despite
        shortcomings.



        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
        Substantial

OBJR2_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
        Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
        2019 Restructuring. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in strengthening
        water resources management (objective 1), despite dropping the work on the hydro-meteorological system.
        The project achieved notable results on strengthening the development of national water resources (Objective
        2). In total seven comprehensive river basin plans were developed. The project
        also rehabilitated the hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River and the Macarretane dam; and financed
        and completed the technical designs of three dams. Finally, to increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to



                                                                                                           Page 15 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



  augment water supply for GMMA (objective 3), the project achieved all of its its targets regarding the dam
  yield, incremental yield and bulk water supply available to GMMA.

  Therefore, and based on the above-mentioned assessment, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Efficiency

ex-ante

The economic and financial analysis (EFA) at appraisal estimated the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR)
at 12.3%. The EIRR estimation was based on a 45-year period at the opportunity costs of capital at 12%. An
economic cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was carried out to assess the economic viability of the project. The
primary benefits from completing the Corumana Dam were expected to accrue from the increase of water
available to supply the GMMA. The sensitivity analysis demonstrated low sensitivity to increases in the water
conveyance costs, withstanding an increase up to 20% in the conveyance costs for any of the options assessed.

ex-post

The EFA at completion estimated the EIRR at 9.9% compared to 12.3% at appraisal. A 45-year project life
period and O&M cost at 0.3% per year against capital expenditure were assumed. Following the Bank guidance
issued in 2016, a revised discount rate of 6% was used instead of the 12% used at appraisal (ICR, paragraph
48). The costs and benefits were converted to 2011 prices in order to compare them against what was projected
at appraisal. Benefits accrued from the Corumana dam completion were estimated using the same approach as
that done at
appraisal. Assumptions included i) household benefits by increased water supply; ii) reduced flood damage; iii)
increased hydropower generation and iv) increased catch of local fisheries. The benefit from increased water
supply comprised the majority (90+ percent) of total benefits.

Efficiency was negatively impacted by two main factors:

1. Delayed implementation as major civil works relating to the Corumana dam contract did not begin until 2017,
about five years after effectiveness.

 2. The revision of the Corumana dam design in 2016, which included the cancellation of the fuse plug at the
saddle dam and the addition of an auxiliary spillway would require two years to build and would have an
estimated cost at US$40 million. This meant that until the auxiliary spillway was built and operational, the
Corumana dam reservoir needs to operate at a Full Supply Level (FSL) of 114 mASL, compared to the original
design at FSL of 117 mASL, resulting in an incremental water yield of 11.6 Mm3/yr, compared to the original
target of 16.8 Mm3/yr.


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



As a result of the afore-mentioned reasons, there would be a delay in benefit yield, since the Corumana dam
reservoir needs to be operated at 114 mASL, instead of the original target of 117 mASL, until the completion of
auxiliary spillway. The 2019 Restructuring Paper (paragraph 20, table 2) stated that "the Economic Internal Rate
of Return is estimated at 12%, with a dam operating constantly at an FSL of 114.00 m."

Administrative and Institutional Efficiency

The project closed thirty months beyond the original closing date. This delay was expected to negatively impact
the benefit streams from the project investments. The project suffered from extensive implementation delays
related to the dam construction. Also, procurement bottlenecks resulted in a two-year delay to start contracts.
Further, "delays in procurement for the Corumana Dam had a cascading effect on non-dam related contracts
(ICR, paragraph 59)."

Efficiency is rated Modest. The ex-post ERR was lower than the expected ERR at appraisal (9.9% compared to
12.3% at appraisal), and the project suffered from extensive delays that were expected to negatively impact the
benefit streams from the project investments.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                12.30
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             9.90
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall efficacy was rated Modest. The evidence
provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in strengthening water resources management (objective
1), despite dropping the work on the hydro-meteorological system. However, the project achieved mixed results
on strengthening the development of national water resources (Objective 2). It fell short on achieving the main
outcome indicators "number of river basins plans" and fell short on rehabilitating the hydraulic infrastructure of
the Limpopo River to the expected level of one in 50-year flood. On the other hand, the project succeeded in the
rehabilitation of the Macarretane dam and in financing and completing the technical designs of three dams.
Finally, to increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for GMMA (objective 3), the project
fell short on achieving all its targets regarding the dam yield, incremental yield and bulk water supply available



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



to GMMA. Efficiency was rated Modest due to lower ex post ERR compared to appraisal and significant
implementation delays.

Based on a High rating for Relevance of Objectives, and Modest rating for both Efficacy and Efficiency,
Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



2017 Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The
evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in strengthening water resources management
(objective 1), despite dropping the work on the hydro-meteorological system. The project achieved notable
results on strengthening the development of national water resources (Objective 2). In total seven
comprehensive river basin plans were developed (Objective 2). The project also rehabilitated the hydraulic
infrastructure of the Limpopo River and the Macarretane dam; and financed and completed the technical
designs of three dams. Finally, to increase the yield of the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for GMMA
(objective 3), the project fell short on achieving all its targets regarding the dam yield, incremental yield and bulk
water supply available to GMMA. Efficiency was rated Modest due to lower ex post ERR compared to appraisal
and significant implementation delays.

Based on a High rating for Relevance of Objectives, and Substantial rating for Efficacy and a Modest rating
for Efficiency, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



2019 Restructuring. Relevance of Objectives was rated High. The evidence provided in the ICR point to the
success of the project in strengthening water resources management (objective 1), despite dropping the work
on the hydro-meteorological system. The project achieved notable results on strengthening the development of
national water resources (Objective 2). In total seven comprehensive river basin plans were developed
(Objective 2). The project also rehabilitated the hydraulic infrastructure of the Limpopo River and the
Macarretane dam; and financed and completed the technical designs of three dams. Finally, to increase the
yield of the Corumana Dam to augment water supply for GMMA (objective 3), the project achieved all of its
revised targets regarding the dam yield, incremental yield and bulk water supply available to GMMA. Efficiency
was rated Modest due to lower ex post ERR compared to appraisal and significant implementation delays.

Based on a High rating for Relevance of Objectives, a Substantial rating for Efficacy, and Modest rating for
Efficiency, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Split Rating

                                 Pre-          2017                 2019
                                 Restructuring Restructuring        Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives          High          High                 High
Efficacy (PDO):
1.Strengthen the management
                            Substantial         Substantial         Substantial
of national water resources


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



2. Strengthen the development
                                Modest         Substantial        Substantial
of national water resources
3. Increase the yield of the
Corumana Dam to augment         Modest         Modest             Substantial
water supply
Efficiency                      Modest         Modest             Modest
Outcome ratings                 MU             MS                 MS
Numerical value of the
                                3              4                  4
outcome rating
                                US$40.09
Disbursement                                   US$28.12 million US$18.7 million
                                million
Share of Disbursement           46%             32%                 21.5%
Weighted value of the outcome
                                 1.38           1.3                 0.86
rating
Final Outcome rating             MS (1.38 + 1.3 + 0.852 = 3.53)
Note: Highly Unsatisfactory (1); Unsatisfactory (2); Moderately Unsatisfactory (3);
Moderately Satisfactory (4); Satisfactory (5); Highly Satisfactory (6)

Based on the split rating above, the final weighted outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the ICR (paragraph 84) the project's overall risk to the development outcome was substantial.
The sustainability of the objective related to the Corumana Dam is dependent on completion of remaining
works, implementing dam safety measures, dam impoundment and commissioning, as well as pending RAP
and LRP activities. The treatment and distribution of water from the dam to households in Greater Maputo
Metropolitan Area is also dependent on the completion of the Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion
Project (GMWSEP). The Bank sought to mitigate the risks of closing the project with remaining activities by
having the Emergency Resilient Recovery Project and GMWSEP finance the Panel of Experts, the
supervising engineering firm, and the Project Administration and Management Team.

The following risks were discussed by the ICR:

1. The risk stemming from financial sustainability. The Corumana Dam and Macarretane Barrage are
owned by the government and operated by the Incomáti and Limpopo watershed management units,
respectively, within ARA-Sul. ARA-Sul receives 44% of its expenses through the State Budget, while O&M
expenses are covered through revenue generated by its activities. According to the ICR (paragraph 85)
"ARA-Sul does not have an updated business plan that reflects and communicates the objectives, resources

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



and management strategies for business development, and that integrates the emerging challenges of
operating the investments made." While revenues are expected to increase from the new functionality of the
Corumana Dam and the broader Greater Maputo water supply expansion program will increase revenues,
ARA-Sul needs to improve its commercial focus by ensuring periodic tariffs adjustments with the state
regulator, improving billing, improving collections and improving other sources of revenue. ARA-Sul also
should have a liquidity plan that demonstrates that it will achieve a positive cash balance in the future and
that the State's contribution to the operating expense will be reduced over time.

2. The risk related to the environment. Mozambique is vulnerable to the threats posed by climate change.
Recurrent cycles of severe drought and torrential rains and floods will directly affect dam operations and
yield to the GMMA. Regional climate change scenarios in the Sabíe River catchment indicate higher mean
annual precipitation in the immediate future. However, higher temperatures could also increase evaporation
rates of the reservoir as well as an increased demand for downstream irrigation. The reservoir operation will
require the balancing of flood control with the objective of maximizing yield. Water abstraction in South Africa
from the Incomáti River also affects flows into the reservoir and available yield to the GMMA. The project
contributed to updating of the Interim IncoMaputo Agreement, and to the the development of the National
Strategic Action Plan to Monitor Compliance with International Shared Watercourses Agreements. The latter
recommended strengthening the Department of International Rivers from three senior staff to 15
professionals to more effectively manage the country’s nine transboundary rivers and to ensure the GoM can
represent the country’s interests on shared basins at the SADC level. The GoM has signaled its commitment
to this priority as negotiations with South Africa are underway to establish the Joint Commission for the
Incomáti and Maputo Rivers.

3. The risk related to funding availability. Three river basin development plans were completed in 2019
and their implementation is at an early phase. Despite that the river basin development plans were prepared
in close collaboration by the local basin authorities, the on-going internal financial crisis resulted in relatively
few investments in large hydraulic infrastructure. More investments have been directed to small excavated
reservoirs scattered throughout the country.

This Review highlights the following additional risk:

The risk related to challenging security conditions in northern Mozambique. In recent years northern
Mozambique has been targeted by terrorist attacks. These attacks resulted in population migration and
displacement. If such conditions extend to further areas of the country, the sustainability of the development
outcome of the project will be in doubt.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Government of Mozambique (GoM) viewed the NWRDP as part of the first phase of a broader multi-
  donor program to carry out the country’s water sector policies, strategy, regulations, and investments.
  The main objective of the project was the completion of the Corumana Dam to augment bulk water
  supply, while the downstream intake, water treatment, and conveyance system would be supported by

                                                                                                         Page 20 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



the Bank-funded Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project (GMWSEP). Objectives were in line
with the Government priorities for the water sector and with the Bank’s regional and country strategies
(see section 3 for more details).

Project preparation benefited from solid analytic underpinnings including a tripartite study by
Mozambique, South Africa and Swaziland on the “Augmentation of Water Supply to the City of Maputo
and its Metropolitan Area” in October 2009 and the 2011 “Master Plan for the Greater Maputo Water
Supply System”. These studies helped identify water sources and priority investments to improve bulk
water supply for the GMMA (ICR, paragraph 52). Design benefited from the Bank's experience in the
country and lessons learned from the engagement in the water sector. The project preparation process
drew on lessons derived from the implementation of the Bank’s 2003 Water Resources Sector Strategy
(WRSS) as well as the recommendations of the IEG report on water and development (ICR, paragraph
53). Notable lessons included "the importance of properly aligning the implementation of environmental
and
social measures during the early stages in design of complex water resources development projects, the
need to consider interventions within an integrated basin-wide management framework that explicitly
considers the cumulative impacts of all developments, not only of the specific project (ICR, paragraph
53)." Lessons from the Bank-financed National Water Development Program project included: the need
for a comprehensive M&E system, the need to ensure strategic TA in place early to strengthen
management and leadership during the initial phase, and the need to strengthen contract management.

Despite the preparatory work, "detailed designs were not done until after project approval, which severely
affected implementation timeline, project management, and M&E (ICR, paragraph 54)." Also,
implementation arrangements did not account for bureaucratic constraints and lacked clear incentives
(ICR, paragraph 79). Implementation suffered from the failure to launch the strategic TA program at entry,
which was expected to improve implementation capacity. A notable design shortcoming was "the
decision to defer the detailed technical designs of the Corumana Dam to implementation (ICR, paragraph
79)." This had a cascading effect that resulted in severe implementation delays (ICR, paragraph 79).

Identification of risks and mitigation measures suffered from shortcomings (ICR, paragraph 55). Overall
risk was rated medium despite that the project involved a complex set of activities the including large
works contracts, ESS issues, and institutional capacity. While the risk related to fiduciary capacity was
assessed as medium, procurement was challenging and contributed to implementation delays.

M&E suffered from design weaknesses, namely, the results framework included intermediate and
outcome indicators that could not be effectively used to monitor and evaluate achievement of the
objectives (see section 9 for details).

Based on the above-mentioned assessment, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This
rating reflected significant shortcomings related to design, implementation readiness, risk assessment
and M&E design.



Quality-at-Entry Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                 Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 15 formal implementation support missions over an implementation period of 8 years.
 According to the ICR (paragraph 80) "there were frequent technical discussions and the task team provided
 just-in-time support, problem solved, visited project sites, implemented trainings, and participated in
 consultations." Most team members were field based, which facilitated a swift response to the 2013 floods
 and proved useful during the last two years of implementation when intense supervision was needed. The
 Bank team also provided technical and administrative support to augment the constrained implementation
 capacity.

 The ICR (paragraph 81) reported that there were "actions, decisions, and processes that adversely
 affected implementation." These included: taking six years to process the main contracts and begin works
 on the Corumana Dam (almost the entire time-frame of the project); a protracted process of finalizing and
 approving the updated ESIA and RAP which resulted in delays and unfinished activities by project
 completion; the cancellation of US$5.00 million for the 2019 cyclone response compounded the already
 constrained project budget; closing of the project in June 2020 as scheduled despite COVID-19 restrictions
 and pending works and safeguards rather than having another extension; and the Bank team could have
 made better use of the restructurings to ensure alignment between project scope and the outcome
 indicators to enable a more accurate assessment of project outcomes. While these were notable
 shortcomings, they were not fully under the Bank's control.

 Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall Bank Performance rating is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD did not include a Theory of Change as it was not mandated at appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR
 (page 8, figure 1) included one which reflected the relation between the planned project activities, its
 outputs, outcomes and long-term impacts. According to the ICR (paragraph 4) "the NWRDP’s flagship
 activity was the completion of the Corumana Dam to augment bulk water supply."

 The achievement of the PDO was to be assessed through three PDO level results indicators: 1. Percent of
 the river basins covered by water resources management plans (target: 19 out of 27 basins, baseline:5), 2.
 Percent of hydro-climatic stations operational and reporting (target: 300 out of 650, baseline: 150),
 3. Incremental reservoir yield available from Corumana Dam for GMMA (target: 16.8 million cubic meter per
 year (Mm3/year), no baseline). While the three outcome-level indicators remained the same, target values

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



 were adjusted for two of them. The target value for “river basins covered with management plans”
 decreased from 19 to 12 to better align with the project budget, while the target value for “incremental
 reservoir yield available from Corumana Dam for GMMA” was reduced from 16.8 Mm3/year to 11.6
 Mm3/year, to reflect temporary restrictions on the dam’s FSL until an auxiliary spillway was built.

 The first two indicators were pitched at the intermediate outcome/output level rather than the outcome
 level. Further, this Review is in agreement with the ICR (paragraph 67) that outcome indicators 1 and
 2 were designed to measure results that could not be fully attributable to the project, since the
 achievement of their respective targets involved parallel financing through other stand-alone projects. While
 for the third indicator the definition and the methodology to calculate incremental yield in relation to the
 storage capacity were both not clear in the design.

 The results framework originally included 12 intermediate outcome indicators that were later increased to
 17 during implementation. These indicators were measurable and directly related to the financed activities.
 However, some intermediate indicators were program-oriented including: the national water storage
 capacity and the upgrading of hydro-met stations in the Limpopo, as these aimed to measure broader
 program performance with targets that relied on other projects.

 Overall, M&E design was poor and lacked the depth and comprehensiveness to capture the achievements
 of broad targets such as “strengthening water resources management and development.” Such a broad
 objective could have benefited from multiple indicators to cover various aspects and facilitate assessing
 and evaluating the project achievements. Also, the indicator related to the Corumana dam "incremental
 yield" lacked a clear definition.



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation was overseen by the National Directorate of Water (DNA). According to the ICR
  (paragraph 71) M&E implementation was mixed. Semi-annual reports were submitted to the
  Bank reflecting progress on project-specific indicators, and the MTR was conducted and the GoM’s
  completion report was undertaken. However, "the lack of proactivity on the part of the Bank to ensure
  consistency between the M&E framework and the project scope severely hampered the final evaluation
  of the project’s objectives (ICR, paragraph 71)."

  Restructurings and changes to the M&E framework. One intermediate indicator "Improved cost
  recovery of ARAs" was dropped because it was determined to be unachievable within the project scope
  as "it required substantially more support including legal and institutional reform, investments and
  capacity building for water licensing and monitoring systems (ICR, Annex 6)." Also, six new intermediate
  indicators were added to monitor outputs related to the AF which focused on rehabilitation of dykes and
  levees and the Macarretane Barrage on the Limpopo River. These changes were necessary in light of
  new activities under the AF. However, the intermediate indicator relating to the hydro-meteorological
  stations should have been dropped, but this did not happen.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (paragraph 72) the "M&E framework helped inform project management and
  decision-making." Supervision discussed the achievement of project indicators and any bottlenecks

                                                                                                   Page 23 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



  impending the achievement of the desired results. Overall, the ICR provided limited evidence on
  utilization.

  On balance, M&E Quality is rated as Modest. This rating reflects a poor design that lacked the depth and
  comprehensiveness to assess the stated objectives, in addition to mixed implementation and limited
  utilization. This Review is in agreement with the ICR's conclusion that "the lack of proactivity on the
  Bank’s side to ensure congruence between project scope and outcome indicators represent significant
  shortcomings in the system’s design and implementation (ICR, paragraph 73)." These shortcomings
  undermined the assessment of the final outcome of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was screened and classified Category A project requiring a full assessment because of the
   concerns that completion of the Corumana Dam could result in inundation of areas upstream of the
   reservoir in the Kruger National Park, an internationally acclaimed wilderness area with formal protection
   status in South Africa. Consequently, the following safeguard policies were triggered: OP/BP 4.01
   Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, OP/BP
   4.37 Safety of Dams, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, and OP/BP 7.50 International Waterways.

   An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
   (ESIA) were prepared to ensure that (i) any negative environmental and social impacts as a result of the
   completion of the Corumana Dam are avoided or mitigated to an acceptable degree and (ii) any positive
   environmental impacts are enhanced where feasible. Also, a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and a
   Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared for the completion of the Corumana Dam. The ESIA and the
   SIA were disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop, both on April 11, while the EMP and the RAP were
   disclosed on April 28 and May 11, respectively.

   There were significant delays related to updating the environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA)
   and the RAP, which took four years to complete and were finally approved by GoM in April 2018, seven and
   a half years after project effectiveness. The ICR (paragraph 66) noted that it took an additional six months
   for the Bank to approve the RAP after GoM’s approval in April 2018. These delays made the
   implementation of the ESIA and RAP related activities challenging and eventually resulted in a number of
   activities that were left pending at project closure (ICR, paragraph 60).

   Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. The project design included a standalone component to
   ensure compliance with Bank safeguards requirements as well as applicable national regulations. The ESIA
   and the RAP were updated to reflect "more demanding GoM regulations on resettlement and economic
   impact assessments (ICR, paragraph 75)." However, this process took four years. According to the ICR
   paragraph 76) "the construction works caused limited and largely temporary adverse environmental
   impacts, with deviations from the ESMP, mainly concerning housekeeping and waste management, and
   initially poor OHS performance, which was corrected in later months through penalties, training, stringent


                                                                                                 Page 24 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



  monitoring and ongoing corrective action." Major construction ended and all rehabilitation around the works
  was completed by the time of the ICR. A final environmental audit was expected to be undertaken towards
  the end of the construction liability period (ICR, Annex 7).

  Compliance with Social Safeguards. As mentioned above, it took four years to update the RAP.
  According to the ICR (paragraph 76) "the project financed the construction of high quality
  resettlement housing, including access roads, integrated water system, and electricity, as well as the
  resettlement of PAPs." However, the project closed with pending safeguards measures, including some
  compensation and allowances, several LRP activities, and social and environmental audits. The
  ICR (paragraph 76) explained the afore-mentioned pending activities were on-going post completion and
  were to be financed by GoM with support from the Panel of Experts and the Bank. However, it was not clear
  the level of commitment on the government side to fully finance and complete the pending activities.

  The ICR did not include and explicit statement of compliance, but stated that "the project closed with overall
  environmental and social safeguards performance consistently rated MS during much of the project
  implementation phase and at project closure."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 77) "FM and audit throughout the project
  were consistently compliant with the Bank and the country's Administrative Tribunal requirements." The
  project had an adequate accounting system to record project funds, expenditures, and resources following
  the procedures outlined in the Project Implementation Manual. Quarterly interim financial reports and
  annual financial statements were of acceptable quality. Reviews of interim financial and audit reports were
  unqualified. The Bank provided FM support and supervision on a timely basis, and training and capacity
  exchanges were consistently carried-out to sustain optimal FM practices. The ICR (paragraph 77) noted
  that "FM performance was consistently rated Satisfactory in Bank ISRs." However, the ICR did not
  comment on the status of the final audit reports.

  Procurement. While there were no instances of non-compliance with Bank policies or Mozambican
  laws, procurement was challenging throughout implementation. Specifically, procurement processing was
  a bottleneck with contracts related to the Corumana Dam (a combined 70% of the original project
  financing), suffering protracted delays (ICR, paragraph 59). Delays related to the Corumana dam contracts
  had a cascading effect on non-dam related contracts and sequencing of related activities. Also, the
  contract for the ESIA and RAP updates took two and a half years to process and was signed in mid-2014.
  Procurement activities suffered from the lack of technical rigor and poor quality of procurement packages,
  which led to extended exchanges between the Bank and GoM. Procurement performance improved after
  processing the dam contract and benefited from hiring an additional procurement officer in the second half
  of the project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not discussed by the ICR.


                                                                                                  Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)




d. Other
   Not discussed by the ICR.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons, the following two are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

1. To ensure successful implementation of activities, the Bank and the Borrower need
to include in the project design adequate implementation support measures that take into
account any capacity constraints. While the realities on the ground did not allow the implementing
arrangements to materialize as envisioned, the Bank and Borrower could have ensured adequate
staffing in light of the National Directorate for Water Resources Management growing portfolio. The
Borrower must also ensure key positions are filled with capable staff. While a program of technical
assistance could potentially bolster implementation capacity, the provider should ideally be familiar
with country and sector context in order to ensure advice is readily applied.

2. To close a project with pending activities, a firm and tangible government commitment is
needed to finance and complete each of the remaining activities. This is particularly important
for sensitive activities with potentially high risks, including reputational risks to the Bank, such as
resettlement compensation and dam safety. Short of project extension, the Bank could devise a
special instrument/vehicle to continue providing minimal financing mainly for soft activities that would
enable the Bank to support clients in fulfilling its obligations and mitigating risks to both the client and
the Bank.

The following additional lesson is emphasized by IEG:

To ensure successful and timely implementation of projects that involve dams and related
works, dam design and hydrological studies need to be ready at the onset of implementation.
The project experience demonstrated that deferring the dam related designs to a later time during
implementation not only caused significant delays, but also resulted in an unanticipated change in



                                                                                                        Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)



design. Dam design and hydrological studies need be conducted by reputable sources to ensure
quality and avoid costly changes during implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence. The ICR acknowledged that M&E design and implementation had shortcomings. The ICR
used the project data to the extent possible to assess the project outcomes. However, the limited congruence
between project scope and outcome indicators represented significant shortcomings in the system’s design and
implementation.

Quality of Analysis. The ICR provided clear linking to the extent possible between evidence and findings
and used the evidence base to serve the arguments under the different sections, in particular the discussion on
outcomes. However, the link between storage capacity and incremental dam yield needed to be clarified.
Overall, M&E design weaknesses hindered a comprehensive analysis of the project outcomes.

Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.

Results Orientation. The ICR included a comprehensive discussion on the achievement of the three PDOs. The
ICR also provided a well balanced discussion between reporting on the achievement of outcomes in relation to
the indicators and what the project actually achieved on the ground.

Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and integrated.

Consistency with guidelines. The ICR successfully used the available data to justify most of the
assigned ratings. Discussion of outcomes was adequate. However, the efficiency analysis could have benefited
from further evidence to justify the assigned rating.

Conciseness. The ICR provided comprehensive coverage of the implementation experience and candidly
reported on shortcomings. The reporting on safeguards was detailed, but did not include an explicit statement
on compliance, and the ICR did not report on the status of the final audit reports for the project. Also, the
sections on M&E implementation and utilization could have benefited from more details, and the outputs
in Annex 1 lacked targets. Also, the output regarding "two new irrigation canals in the Limpopo Valley" was not
discussed beyond Annex 1.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial despite some minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 27 of 28
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
MZ-Water Resources Dev I SIL (P107350)




                                                                      Page 28 of 28
