        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022606

1. Program Information



 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Mali                                         Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                            Approved Operations
 0                                             0

 Operation ID                                  Operation Name
 P157900                                       Mali - Poverty DPO Series




 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-60650                                    31-Dec-2017                                        56,050,190.00

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2017                                  31-Dec-2017
                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                                50,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                            56,050,190.00                                            0.00




P161619_TBL
 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Mali                                         Poverty and Equity

 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P161619                                      Mali Second Poverty DPO ( P161619 )




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-60650,IDA-62820,IDA-D3390              30-Jun-2019                                             57318757.30

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  05-Jul-2018                                30-Jun-2019

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                            60,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Revised Commitment                             59,934,794.73                                                 0.00

  Actual                                         57,318,757.30                                                 0.00



 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Sara Johansson de             Paul Holden                 Jennifer L. Keller               IEGEC
 Silva



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The First Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth Support Operation had two stated development objectives: (a)
Foster inclusive growth, and (b) Support pro-poor decentralized transfers and social protection. The second
operation maintained these development objectives.

The broadness of the first development objective, in particular, makes the articulation of a credible results chain
(and evaluation of efficacy) impossible. For the purposes of this ICRR, the objectives that can be logically inferred
from the content of the DPO series' associated prior actions (and results indicators) are as follows:

(1) Foster agricultural productivity

(2) Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility

(3) Improve micro-finance sector performance

(4) Improve targeting and efficiency of social protection and government transfers


b. Pillars/Policy Areas




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



The policy pillars were identical with the development objectives. For the purposes of this ICRR, the policy pillars
have been aligned to the four objectives above, which more accurately reflect the areas of action. Prior actions
associated with the four pillars are as follows:

Table 1. Pillars and Prior Actions

Pillar 1/Objective 1: Foster agricultural productivity
DPO 1                                                   DPO2
                                                        PA1b: The Recipient has enhanced the security of
                                                        land tenure by: (i) adopting two application decrees
PA1a: The Recipient has enhanced security of land
                                                        for the Agricultural Land Act; (ii) appointing members
tenure through the promulgation of the Rural Land
                                                        to at least 300 sub-district agricultural land
Act, dated April 11, 2017
                                                        commissions; and (iii) adopting through the Council
                                                        of Ministers the Domains and Land Policy.
PA2a: The Recipient has, through the Ministry of
                                                        PA2b: The Recipient, through the Ministry of
Economy and Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and
                                                        Agriculture has launched the e-voucher scheme for
Ministry
                                                        the distribution of agricultural input subsidies by: (i)
of Livestock and Fisheries, introduced an e‐vouc
                                                        completing the registration of farmers in four sub-
her scheme for the distribution of agricultural inp
                                                        districts (Yanfolila, Koutiala, Niono, Bla); and (ii)
uts subsidies, through the adoption of a revised
                                                        notifying beneficiaries via text messages about the
procedures manual, dated October 2016, governing
                                                        date at which the e-vouchers will be distributed.
the modalities of distribution of such subsidies.
Pillar2/Objective 2: Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility
PA3a: The Recipient has, through the Ministry of
                                                        PA3b: The Recipient, through the Ministry of Digital
Economy and Finance, issued a ministerial decision,
                                                        Economy and Communications, has: (i) included
dated October 17, 2016, establishing a commission
                                                        obligations in terms of wholesale supply and facility
in charge of awarding a 4G license to existing
                                                        sharing in the 4G licenses for the two active mobile
operators and, through the Ministry of Digital
                                                        operators; and (ii) launched the call for proposals for
Economy and Communication, issued a ministerial
                                                        a fourth mobile telecommunication license through
order, dated March 30, 2017, creating the
                                                        an open international bidding process offering
commission in charge of awarding a fourth mobile
                                                        market access conditions in line with international
telecommunications license, through an open
                                                        good practices.
international bidding process.
PA4a: The Recipient has, through the Office of the
Prime Minister, facilitated the extension of the mobile
telephone network to isolated areas, making
operational the Universal Service Fund Management
Agency (AGEFAU), through:
                                                        PA4b: The Recipient, through the Board of
i) Adoption of the decree of appointment of AGEFAU Administrators of the AGEFAU, has adopted
Director General;                                       AGEFAU’s work plan for 2018 which includes
                                                        investments to extend telecom services to previously
ii) Creation and provisioning of AGEFAU account;        uncovered areas.
and

iii) Adoption of a decree fixing the percentage rate
and modalities of payment of compulsory
contributions payable to AGEFAU (the fund).

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



                                                        PA5b: The Recipient, through:

                                                        (i) the Ministry of Energy and Water, has initiated the
                                                        reform process aimed at enhancing the efficiency of
                                                        the electricity sector by endorsing the audit of EDM,
New reform area in DPO 2                                including the proposed set of reform actions;

                                                        (ii) EDM, has initiated the process aimed at
                                                        improving revenue collection by requiring the use of
                                                        smart meters by high voltage users and large low
                                                        voltage users.
PA6: The Recipient has through the Ministry of
Economy and Finance and the Ministry of
Equipment, Transport and Regional Integration,
issued an inter‐ministerial order, dated October 20, DPO 1 Trigger dropped
2016, fixing the percentage of the Road Maintenance
Fund to be allocated to the routine maintenance of
priority rural roads.
Pillar 3/Objective 3: Improve micro-finance sector performance
PA7a: The Recipient, through the Ministry of             PA7b: The Recipient, through the Ministry of
Economy and Finance, has issued ministerial orders, Economy and Finance, has strengthened financial
dated August 31, 2016, withdrawing the licenses of inclusion by: (i) appointing a liquidator for two of the
those microfinance institutions that have been           microfinance institutions whose licenses have been
audited and needed to be liquidated pursuant to its withdrawn; and (ii) completing the 2017 supervision
micro finance sector emergency plan, dated March program of the CCS/SFD in accordance with its
2015.                                                    annual calendar.
Pillar 4/Objective 4: Improve targeting and efficiency of government transfers and social protection
PA8a: : The Recipient has, through its Council of
Ministers, advanced the decentralization process by
adopting a draft 2017 budget edition, dated
                                                         PA8b: . The Recipient has produced an electronic
September 21, 2016, providing for the transfer of
                                                         cadastral map for Bamako.
budgetary resources to local governments pursuant
to its competencies and resources transfer plan in
favor of local governments.
PA9a: The Recipient, through the Ministry for            PA9b: The Recipient, through the Ministry for
Solidarity, Humanitarian Action and Reconstruction Solidarity, Humanitarian Action has: (i) made
of the North, has adopted a unified vision of its social available online a Unified Social Registry, including a
protection policy, through: (a) adoption of a            mechanism to integrate beneficiaries of various
Presidential Decree, dated November 1, 2016, a social safety net programs; and (ii) made
pproving the National Social Protection Policy, al JIGISEMEJIRI beneficiaries eligible for free medical
ong with its accompanying social protection action care at the CSCOMS by distributing RAMED
plans 2016‐2018; (b) adoption of a Presidential          insurance cards.
Decree, dated September 5, 2016, creating the
National Council of Strategic Orientation of Social
Protection (“National Council”), and issuance,
through MSAH, of a ministerial order, dated March
23, 2016, creating the Unified Social Registry


                                                                                                        Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



Steering Committee
(“Steering Committee”); and (c) commencement o
f operations of both the National Council and th
e Steering Committee as evidenced by Minutes of
Proceedings dated October 7, 2016 and September
29, 2016.
PA10: The Recipient has made provision in its 2017
budget edition, dated September 21, 2016, for
budgetary allocations to expand the coverage of    Unchanged
social safety net programs, including JIGISEMEJIRI
and RAMED.
c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost: The cost of DPF1 was estimated at US$ 50 million, and DPF2 at US$ 60 million, for total cost
for the programmatic series of US$110 million. The actual amount disbursed under DPO1 was US$ 56,050,190,
while the actual amount disbursed under DPO2 was US$ 57,318,757, for a total disbursement of US$
113,368,947. Differences between approved amounts and actual disbursements are attributed to changes in
the local currency/US$ exchange rate.

Financing: Both DPF1 and DPF2 were financed through IDA grants.

Dates: DPF1 was approved on May 30, 2017, became effective on December 31, 2017, and closed as
scheduled December 31, 2017. DPF2 was approved on July 5, 2018, became effective on October 10, 2018,
and closed as scheduled on June 30, 2019.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The two original DOs of supporting pro-poor growth, transfers and social protection would be relevant to the
 World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in any low-or middle-
 income country. However, these objectives were set at such a high level that they cannot credibly be included
 in a results chain evaluated.

 Using the four derived objectives of the operation (as expressed in section 2a above), PRISGO operations
 were relevant to the substantial development challenges faced by Mali, in particular achieving peace and
 security, increasing agricultural productivity, and improving governance and service delivery (Systemic
 Country Diagnostic [SCD], p.xix, Country Partnership Framework [CPF] p. 2). Taken together, the breadth of
 the objectives covered (finance, land reform, infrastructure, social protection) may have been too ambitious
 given limited institutional capacity and the challenging policy environment.

     1. Foster agricultural productivity. Raising agricultural productivity central to poverty reduction in Mali,
        for several reasons. These include on the one hand, high food insecurity and the concentration of
        poverty in rural households (90 percent) and agricultural sector activity. On the other hand, non-
        agricultural sectors likely have limited potential for growth and job creation over the short term, given


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



       institutional constraints and the low skill levels of the population. Higher agricultural productivity would
       underpin food security and earnings increases.
    2. Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility. Improvements in rural infrastructure
       will help the rural population access markets (labor, produce) as well as services. Strengthening of
       infrastructure contributed to poverty reduction between 2000-2010 in Mali (SCD, p.11) and would
       underpin the development of agricultural value chains necessary to lower rural poverty. Still, prior to
       the operation, more than one fifth of the population lacked access to telecommunication services
       because of limited infrastructure and high tariffs. The road density in Mali is among the lowest in
       Africa, and electricity supply is limited and unreliable. Strengthening rural infrastructure would be
       necessary to lower transactions costs and increase access to markets (affecting objective 1 above)
       and access to social services (affecting objective 4 below).
    3. Improve financial stability of micro-finance sector. The micro-finance sector has a significant
       reach in Mali, much beyond that of the formal banking sector, and is serving close to one million
       people. Access to micro-finance (both credit and savings) can assist poor and rural households with
       consumption smoothing and provide sources for further investment in farm or small-scale off-farm
       activities (Objective 1). Confidence in the microfinance sector – and hence its potential for poverty
       reduction - was curtailed by fragmentation, poor management (the vast majority of institutions were in
       financial distress), and limited oversight.
    4. Improve targeting and efficiency of government transfers and social protection. Dissatisfaction
       with governance and service delivery is a root cause of continued instability in Mali. Decentralization
       of government decision making would be an essential component for improving public management
       and increase the participation and representativeness of the poor, thereby making policies more pro-
       poor. Previous operations had supported public financial management (PFM) reforms which included
       strengthening local government’s PFM capacity (Project Document P157900 [PD1], p.2). The high
       frequency of shocks – weather, security, health, commodity prices – also implies that strengthening
       social protection systems was and continues to be a priority in Mali.



These four objectives fit well with the World Banks CPF 2016-2019, which aimed to address the main drivers
of fragility through three pillars: (i) Improve governance, (iii) create economic opportunities and (iii) Build
resilience. In particular, PRISGO supported CPF objectives focused on strengthening public resource
management, at local levels, improving productive capacity and market integration in rural areas, improve
infrastructure and connectivity, and strengthening safety nets.

These pillars were in turn aligned with the Government’s main policy framework for 2016-2018, “Cadre
Stratégique pour la Relance Economique et le Développement Durable du Mali” (CREDD). More specifically,
the PRISGO series supported the first strategic axis, promoting inclusive and sustainable growth, with a focus
on promoting agriculture and increasing food security (PRISGO Objective 1), strengthen rural infrastructure
(PRISGO Objective 2) and engendering economic diversification (PRISGO objective 3). PRISGO Objective 4
also supported the second and third strategic axis of access to basic social services, especially expanding
social protection.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)




Pillar 1/Objective 1. Foster agricultural productivity, especially for poor households. Supported by
PA1a, 1b (land reform) and 2a, 2b (e-vouchers). The causal chain for these PAs was that improving the
security of land tenure would promote investment in the agricultural sector, and that the e-vouchers would
support the increased use of fertilizer and other inputs, thereby increasing crop yields.

Rationale.

Competing demands for land, including between foreign investors, farmers and pastoralists, was a source of
instability and conflict in Mali. A fragmented legal framework and the parallel systems of customary and
statutory laws resulted in low security of tenure. This, in turn, affects incentives and opportunities for
investment and thereby overall agricultural productivity. The Agricultural Land Act (ALA) constituted a major
step towards necessary land reform, as it provided an integrated legal framework which, inter alia, laid out
conditions of access to land, identified agricultural land management bodies, and a mechanism for managing
and resolving rural land disputes and conflicts. The approval of ALA had been stalled for a decade due to
strong vested interests related to the allocation of government-owned land.

PA1a. By supporting the promulgation of the Act, PA1a laid the necessary foundations for strengthening land
ownership which in turn should help support the use of land for collateral and increase both access to credit
and incentives for investment. This would contribute to higher productivity for both small-scale farmers and
the large-scale private sector investment needed to increase agricultural exports. On this account, PA1a is
rated Satisfactory.

PA1b. To support the implementation of ALA, PA1b supported the adoption of two application decrees and
the establishment of rural land commissions. These commissions represented a decentralized
implementation and oversight of the ALA, especially for resolving land disputes. PA1b focused on appointing
members to these commission. This signified an initial but very incomplete step towards operationalizing land
commissions for achieving land dispute resolution. Rural land commissions would still require funding
essential for their functionality in resolving land conflicts and an effective enforcement mechanism for
decisions taken by commissions. The activity does not deal with women's limited access to land under
customary law which would be critical to support an inclusive policy and its application. PA1b also supported
the adoption of the Domains and Land Policy covering urban land. Although this formed part of the overall
land reform, the action was unrelated to the objective of raising agricultural productivity. PA1b is rated
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Note: PA2a/b could also be considered under Objective 4, improving the efficiency and targeting of
Government transfers. The evaluation below includes both aspects: input subsidies as productivity
enhancers, and e-vouchers as efficient transfers.

PA2a. Improved access to inputs was part of a broader scheme of interventions to increase agricultural
productivity, especially among the poor, who face credit constraints in accessing inputs, know-how and
technology (SCD, p. 20, 35). Mali has a large and expensive subsidy scheme, accounting for 2 percent of
total Government expenditures. Since its introduction, subsidies had been distributed through paper
vouchers, a system which was poorly targeted, ineffective, opaque, and highly resource demanding. An e-
vouchers scheme piloted in Northern Mali had proved more successful in reducing costs, shortening
implementation time, targeting and tracking poor small holder producers, and increasing transparency in the
distribution, and had resulted in reasonably high uptake with 74% of vouchers claimed. PA2a supported the
gradual transformation of the paper subsidy scheme into an e-voucher scheme by ensuring that the legal


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



basis for the implementation of e-vouchers was in place, through the formal adoption of a revised procedures
manual for distribution of vouchers. PA2a is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA2b put in place a phased implementation of the e-vouchers scheme by (i) focusing on 4 sub-districts (ii)
identifying the steps needed to be able to deliver the e-voucher, namely registration of farmers and
notification via text message about distribution. The first round of e-voucher distribution had been undertaken
too late to be relevant to the farmers. These key steps formed a credible contribution to the distribution of the
subsidy through e-vouchers. Several important limiting factors had been identified during the pilot that would
need to be overcome for effectiveness of the scale-up, including (i) low coverage of mobile networks in
poorer rural segments, (ii) high farmer illiteracy (especially women) and (iii) low ICT capacity of implementing
agency, the National Council for Agricultural Research (NCRA) (World Bank, 2019: Digitizing Agriculture).
PA2b is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PAs under Pillar 1 are rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Pillar 2/Objective 2: Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility

Supported by 3a, 3b (competition in telecommunications market), 4a, 4b (extending
telecommunications services in rural areas), 5b (energy sector reform) and 6a (road maintenance).
The causal chain underlying these PAs is that rural infrastructure and communications are essential elements
in translating improved agricultural productivity into higher revenue from crop sales. Improved
telecommunications allow farmers to identify where the most profitable markets are

PA3a and 3b sought to support higher competition in the telecommunications sector to achieve
broader geographic coverage and more affordable services. Digital access could help connect rural
populations to economic opportunities and facilitate the delivery of public services. However, digital inclusion
is also strongly linked to the availability of electricity, a reform area which was not included in the first
operation. Given the existing situation of a de facto duopoly at the time of PRISGO1, PAs to increase
competition in the sector, and introducing measures to increase effectiveness in 4G licenses for existing
operators, are important for a more competitive telecommunications sector, which should deliver lower ICT
costs for private firms and individuals in areas where service was already available. However, the PAs are
essentially procedural and they do not themselves result in any increase in competition. PA3a established the
commissions in charge of preparing licenses for 4G and the commission in charge of launching the bidding.
PA3a is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA3b was revised in PRISGO2 (from "awards license" to "launches call for license"), to account for slower
than expected advancement on the licensing procedures. PA3b focused instead on (i) ensuring that
measures to establish a level playing field between incumbents and new entrants were included in the 4G
licenses for existing operators and (ii) that the process for an additional service provider license was
decisively underway, as indicated by a public call for proposal. The modification reflected a step back in the
results chain towards achieving more competition. A3b is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA4a and 4b aimed to support the extension of telecommunication services to rural areas, which would be
an essential part of achieving more inclusive growth. PA4a and b were supported by TA from the WB to
AGEFAU to reinforce investments in disadvantaged areas. Lack of extension of services to rural areas
reflected limited profitability for mobile operators in these areas. The Government had created a dedicated
Universal access fund to ensure access to ICT across its territory, financed through mandatory contributions
from telecom operators. However, by 2014, the fund amounted to 23 CFAF billions but had not disbursed


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



anything, lacking any management or formal structures to do so. PA4a and 4b thus focused on the
establishment and operationalization of an agency to manage the fund (AGEFAU), which provided the basis
for the implementation of the universal access strategy. PA4a established the basic modalities of the
AGEFAU (appointment of GD, establishment of an account, fixing compulsory contributions). Given the low-
capacity environment of Mali, AGEFAU would need significant technical support in moving from agency
establishment to actual policy implementation. PA4a is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Indeed, due to slower than expected progress, PA4b was revised compared to the original trigger, from
"published financial statements detailing the investments to extend telecom services", to "adopting a work
plan" with a specified budget for such investments. The modification reflected a significant step back from
action planned. This introduced important risk for delays due to incentive and capacity constraints, although
TA was provided by the Bank to mitigate these risks. PA4b is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA 5b supported the financial viability of the energy sector. Electricity access constitutes an important
constraint to inclusive growth and is very limited in Mali, with only half (48) percent of the population covered
(WDI, 2019 data). In February 2017, the Government and the World Bank agreed on a reform strategy to
address serious financial imbalances within the energy sector and particularly the electricity company (EDM),
which had resulted in serious underperformance and limited private sector investment. The strategy/action
plan was supported by the World Bank, through different investment projects. To support policy reforms
necessary for the effectiveness of these investments, and on the request of the Government, PA5b was
added to PRISGO 2. PA5b required (i) the Government to endorse the audit of the EDM (for which the pre-
subsidy deficit ran at 56 billion CFAF in 2016), and (ii) the application of smart meters for the largest
electricity consumers, to improve billing efficiency. A financially stable energy sector is a basic condition for
sustainable and predictable energy supply. Given the deep-seated problems in the electricity sector, mainly
related to poor governance and vested interests, government endorsement of audit (PA5bi) would not
meaningfully contribute to necessary reform measures. PA5b (ii), more directly supported improving the
financial situation of EDM but would need to be accompanied by an action plan for installing smart meters.
PA5b is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

PA6a supported improved road maintenance. A better and more extensive road network is essential to
improve access to markets and basic public services for rural households. The poor state of rural roads (5
percent in "good condition" prior to the operation [PD1, p. 1]) was partly due to inadequate maintenance. The
Road Authority (RA) was responsible for maintenance work, which was financed through the Road
Maintenance Fund (RMF). However, there was no systematic process for maintenance and the ad-hoc
approach jeopardized road sustainability. It was thus relevant that PA6a focus on improving resource
allocation by requiring that the Government earmark a share of the RMF for rural roads. This was followed by
an indicative trigger (for PRISGO2) for public financial statements confirming these RMF allocations. While
earmarking of resources provided a potential source of financing for rural road maintenance, actions did not
specify how the RMF would spend the money and strengthen its operations. PA6a is rated Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

PAs under Pillar 2 are rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Pillar 3/Objective 3. Improving financial stability of Micro-Finance Sector.




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



Supported by PA7a and PA7b (liquidation of insolvent institutions). The causal chain underlying these
prior actions was that rural microfinance institutions were important in providing financial services that
allowed rural residents to accumulate savings and borrow for investment in agricultural activities.

The PRISGO series supported the Government's Emergency Plan for the Micro Finance sector, approved in
2015. As noted above, the micro-finance sector is important in serving rural clients. However, the high
prevalence of underperforming institutions had lowered confidence in the micro-finance sector and reduced
households' willingness to use financial services, thus reducing financial inclusion (PD1, p.15). A critical
problem was that the national supervisory body (CCS‐SFD) lacked capacity and independence to fulfil its
monitoring mandate to ensure viable and reliable institutions. Improving oversight, closing down non-viable
institutions and establishing mechanisms for compensating depositors, were therefore central to rebuilding
confidence in the microfinance sector. PA7a supported the withdrawal of licenses of non-performing
institutions, representing the first decisive step in the essential liquidation process to improve micro-finance
sector stability. PA7a is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PA7b supported (i) the actual liquidation of at least two institutions and (ii) the CCS-SFD supervision program
of the sector to identify performance/viability issues. Both PA7a and 7b thus provided essential and credible
steps towards increasing confidence in the micro-finance sector. However, background work by the World
Bank (in 2015) suggested that public confidence in the sector hinged on liquidating (and compensating the
depositors of) a few specific larger institutions that dominated the market and were in severe distress. PA7b
specified that at least two institutions needed liquidation, but did not specify criteria (e.g., by market share) to
ensure that the most problematic institutions would be liquidated. PA7b is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

PAs under Pillar 3 are rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Pillar 4/Objective 4. Improve targeting and efficiency of government transfers and social protection.

Supported by PA8a and PA8b (budget decentralization), PA9a and PA9b (Social Protection Policy
including beneficiary registry), and PA10 (Safety net programs). The causal chain underlying these prior
actions was that government transfers were an important instrument to reduce the incidence of poverty in
rural areas. By improving the ability of the program to more precisely identify and target recipients, the PAs
contributed to alleviating rural poverty.

PA8a supported the decentralization objective through earmarked resources in the 2017 draft budget for local
government transfers, in concordance with the 2015 Peace Agreement under which the Government
committed to allocating 30 percent of its budget to local authorities [PD1, p. 17]. PA8a thus constituted a
credible step towards decentralization by focusing directly on achieving resource transfers towards local
authorities. To strengthen the pro-poor approach (which was measured in the related RI), PA8a could have
specified that decentralization should include the poorest localities. PA8a is rated Satisfactory.

Further, PA8b focused on improving tax collection at local levels, which was also essential to support higher
independence of local governments in resource management and their ability to execute pro-poor spending.
The development of a cadastral map, piloted for Bamako but with the objective of extending nationwide,
constituted a basis for improved property tax collection. However, by focusing on Bamako, it would not - over
the short period of implementation - reach other localities, least of all the poorest localities. PA8b is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.

PA9a supported a more inclusive social protection policy which focused on consolidation, scale-up and
targeting of SP, and a move away from food support to more effective transfers. With the launch of the

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



 JIGISEMEJIRI, a cash transfer program, in 2014, the Government aimed to increase the effectiveness of SP.
 Given the high fragmentation, weak coordination, and poor targeting of existing safety nets, supporting the
 new SP policy was an important step towards more pro-poor policies. PA9a also laid out critical and
 sequential actions (i, approving the Social Protection Policy, ii, creating a National Council of Strategic
 Orientation of Social Protection, iii, creating a unified beneficiary registry) from policy approval to
 operationalization in a logical results chain. PA9a is rated Satisfactory.

 PA9b supported the publication of the Unified Social Registry online where prospective beneficiaries can
 register (PA9bi) and linking beneficiaries of JIGISEMEJIRI to free health care (PA9bii). The Unified Social
 Registry (PA9bi) was the main mechanism for improving coordination, targeting and transparency of
 transfers, and its operationalization hence essential for implementing agencies as well as beneficiaries. The
 linking of cash transfer beneficiaries and health care provision (PA9bii) constituted a pilot for how the registry
 could be used to create synergies and expand coverage of services to the poor. PA9b is rated Satisfactory.

 PA10a was linked to and supported PA9a, and focused on the expansion of the coverage of Social Safety
 Nets programs, including prioritization of the Cash transfer program and the Health Care program (RAMED).
 By requiring earmarked budgetary resources, PA10a thus underpinned expanded coverage of social safety
 net programs. PA10a is rated Satisfactory.

 PAs under Pillar 4 are rated Satisfactory.

 With the exception infrastructure, pillars are rated moderately satisfactory (pillar 1, agricultural productivity
 and pillar 3, microfinance stability) or satisfactory (pillar 4, social protection) on the relevance of the Prior
 Actions. Most PAs provide logical steps in a results chain towards the intended objectives. However, several
 PAs, especially under pillar 2, were focused on adoption and promulgation of strategies, plans and
 processes, which were not sufficiently action oriented and could not therefore be expected to make
 measurable progress on the achievement of objectives



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicators, PAs, baseline-targets, status
                                                                                       Status
                                                      Baseline (2015)
RI (number and description)        Associated PA
                                                                                       (Dec 2019 unless
                                                      Target (2018/2019)
                                                                                       otherwise indicated
Pillar 1: Foster Agricultural Productivity
RI1: Functionality of land                            Baseline: 0
commissions (percent of land     PA1b                                                  65%
commissions which hold                                Target (June 2019): 80%


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



meetings at least once every
three months)
RI2. Agricultural subsidy
                                                                                72,790 (2019)
beneficiaries who receive their                    Baseline: 0
                                 PA2b
subsidies through e-vouchers                       Target (June 2019): >100,000
                                                                                51,634 (end 2020)
(as opposed to paper vouchers)
Pillar 2: Improve Rural Infrastructure Performance and Accessibility
                                                   Baseline (2015): CFAF 108
RI3: Average in tariff per       PA3a                                           CFAF 78.5 (2018)
minute for personal domestic                       Target (2018): CFAF 90
calls                            PA3b                                           CFAF 79.5 (2019)
                                                   Target (2019): CFAF 90
                                                   Baseline (2015): 0
RI4: Number of localities        PA4a                                           31 (2019)
benefiting from extension                          Target (2018): 16
projects of telecom services     PA4b                                           60 (2020)
                                                   Target (June 2019): 16
RI5: Number of large low voltage                   Baseline (2015): 0           60 (refers to number of
and high voltage users with      PA5                                            smart meters
smart meters                                       Target (June 2019): 6,000    installed).
RI_: Execution rate of                             Baseline (2015): 15%
maintenance needs for priority PA6                                              Dropped
rural roads                                        Target (2018): 40%
Pillar 3: Improve Financial stability of Microfinance Sector
                                                   Baseline (2014): 8.8%
                                 PA7a
RI7: Non-performing loans ratio
                                                   Target (2018): 4.5%          7.1%
of all microfinance institutions
                                 PA7b
                                                   Target (June 2019): 4.5%
Pillar 4: Improve targeting and efficiency of social protection and government transfers
RI8: Percentage of budgetary                       Baseline (2014): 15%
resources allocated to the three PA8a                                           20% (2019)
poorest regions in total                           Target (2018): 20%
budgetary resources transferred PA8b                                            19% (2020)
to regions.                                        Target (June 2019): 25%
RI9: Number of households        PA9a              Baseline (2015): 65,000
receiving cash transfers (direct                                                79,168 (2019)
transfers, high-labor intensive  PA9b              Target (2018): 100,000
work, and income-generating                                                     91,630 (2020)
activities)                      PA10              Target (June 2019): 150,000

Pillar 1/Objective 1. Foster agricultural productivity, especially for poor households. Progress measured
by RI1-RI2.

RI1. RI1 was an attempt to measure the operationalization of land commissions, and as such, the
implementation of the ALA with the ultimate purpose of increasing land tenure security. Active Land

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



commissions holding regular meetings however does not imply anything about the outcomes of the meetings
and does not convincingly measure any impact for the intended beneficiaries (smallholders), whether through
increased land security, agricultural productivity increases or any outcomes in between. The ICR notes that the
IBM phone survey could have been leveraged to collect more pertinent information which could have motivated
a more precise indicator. RI1 may also be difficult to monitor reliably. R1 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI2. RI2 (number of recipients of e-vouchers) measured the expansion of the e-voucher system in number of
beneficiaries. This indicates whether e-voucher expansion took place, but does not capture whether the e-
vouchers were better targeted or whether they were used to finance productivity enhancing measures or
activities. Data on use of e-vouchers for fertilizers and extension services by beneficiaries belonging to poorer
households (or communities) would have contributed to an understanding of the project’s efficacy. RI2 is rated
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Relevance of RIs under Pillar 1 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Pillar2/Objective 2. Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility. Progress measured by
RI3-RI5.

RI3 provided a succinct measure of the objective of PA3a and b, namely a lower tariff for personal domestic
calls. RI3 is an indicator of progress towards making infrastructure services more accessible, especially to more
vulnerable populations, by making them affordable. However, it does not capture the sustainability of the lower
tariffs or the extent to which lower tariffs were the result of increased competition in the sector (which was the
intent of the associated prior actions. It is a fully verifiable indicator. RI3 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

RI4 measured the number of localities that had received telecom services through the AGEFAU. The indicator
reflected fully the ultimate objective that PA4a and b contributed to by supporting the operationalizing of the
AGEFAU and the proof of investment in additional localities. It had a clear baseline and should be verifiable from
the government. RI4 provides no indication of the characteristics of the beneficiary localities such as rural
location or vulnerable communities. RI4 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

RI5, the installation of smart meters reflects momentum towards improving the financial viability of the energy
company. Moreover, although RI5 had a clear baseline and would be verifiable through EDM, it did not specify
the percentage of electricity consumption covered by smart meters or what “large” users implies). The indicator
had a clear baseline and should be verifiable during and at the end of the operation, through EDM's accounts
and monitoring documentation. RI5 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

RIs under Pillar 2 are rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Pillar3/Objective 3. Improve financial stability of microfinance sector. Progress measured by RI7.

RI7, by measuring the ratio of non-performing loans, constituted a relevant indicator for the policy objective of
supporting a more sustainable microfinance sector, and follows logically as an outcome from the two prior
actions focusing on liquidation of nonviable institutions. As pointed out in the ICR, an indicator focusing on
uptake of (micro-)financial services might have been even more relevant for the financial inclusion objective. RI7
had a clear baseline (8.8 percent of all loans in 2014) and target (4.5 percent in 2018) and would be verified
through CCS-SFD monitoring data which the PRISGO also supported by supporting supervision activities. RI7 is
rated Satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



RI under Pillar 3 is rated Satisfactory

Pillar4/Objective 4. Improve targeting and efficiency of government transfers and social protection:
Progress measured by RI8-RI9.

RI8, by measuring the share of budgetary transfers to the poorest as share of all regional transfers, captured
whether budgetary decentralization process was pro-poor which was part of the underlying reform logic,
(although the pro-poor focus was not actually specified in the PA). However, RI8 did not measure an increase in
the decentralization of resources, only whether they were pro-poor (in relative terms). The share allocated to
poor governments could improve while transfers to poor localities fell in absolute terms, which would go against
the overall objective. RI8 is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

The RI related to PA8b was dropped in PRISGO2 and not replaced by an adequate indicator to capture whether
local governments' own resources increased or not, leaving progress on strengthening tax collection at local
level unmonitored.

RI9 measured the increased coverage of the cash transfer program, but not whether it was pro-poor. Given that
the targeting of these cash transfers was judged relatively successful at the outset (PD, p. 22), RI9 likely
measures a pro-poor expansion. It does not measure other aspects e.g. expansion on health care access for
cash transfer beneficiaries (PA9b), which would be an important indicator of improved coordination across
sectors, efficiency, and pro-poor policies. RI9 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

There is no results indicator to measure progress on budgetary resources allocated to safety nets (PA10a).

RIs under Pillar 4 are rated Moderately Satisfactory.



Table 3. Indicators and efficacy
                                                                          Overall Efficacy
                                                            Pillar Efficacy
Results indicator   Relevance rating      Efficacy Rating
                                                            Rating        Rating
                                                                          Moderately
                                                                          Unsatisfactory
Pillar 1/Objective 1: Foster agricultural productivity, especially for poor households
                   Moderately                          Moderately
RI1                                   Modest
                   Unsatisfactory                      Satisfactory
                   Moderately
RI2                                   Substantial
                   Unsatisfactory
Pillar 2/Objective 2: Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility
                   Moderately                          Moderately
RI3                                   High
                   Satisfactory                        Satisfactory
                   Moderately
RI4                                   Substantial
                   Satisfactory
                   Moderately
RI5                                   Negligible
                   Satisfactory
RI_

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



     Pillar 3: Improve microfinance sector performance
                                                         Highly
     RI7                        Satisfactory       Negligible
                                                         Unsatisfactory
     Pillar 4: Improve targeting and efficiency of government transfers and social protection
                       Moderately                        Moderately
     RI8                                  Modest
                       Satisfactory                      Unsatisfactory
                       Moderately
     RI9                                  Modest
                       Unsatisfactory


  Rating

  Moderately Unsatisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Foster agricultural productivity, especially for poor households
               PA1a, 1b, 2a, 2b, RI1, RI2.

               Rationale
               By 2019, 65% of land commissions met regularly. By 2020, the share had increased to 70 percent, still short of
               the 80 percent target. Given the limited relevance of PA1b and R1 for increasing agricultural productivity, and
               lack of information on progress on intermediate indicators such as agricultural credit, or land security, the
               Efficacy of RI1 is rated Modest.

               By 2017 (PRISGO1), the e-voucher system had been put in place reaching 17500 beneficiary households. In
               2019, the number had quadrupled to over 70,000 beneficiaries, thus reaching round 70 percent of the target of
               at least 100,000. At the same time, the ICR reports that the scheme was highly successful in introducing
               targeting mechanisms and increasing transparency, and that it successfully reached the poorest farmers as
               well as female farmers (ICR, p. 29), although R2 does not measure targeting aspects. Participation in the e-
               voucher scheme fell again in 2020 (to around 50,000), due to security concerns, but the scheme remains in
               place and is being expanded geographically (ICR, p. 29). The efficacy of RI2 is rated Substantial.

               The overall efficacy of pillar 1 under Objective 1 is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Progress on land
               reform as well as the basis for a better targeted input distribution moved ahead, albeit slower than foreseen,
               with functional commissions and a successive expansion of e-vouchers. However, neither of these
               achievements necessarily reflect genuine improvement in either input use, land security or overall agricultural
               productivity.

               Rating



                                                                                                                Page 15 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)




Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve rural infrastructure performance and accessibility
PA3a, 3b, 4a, 4b, 5b, RI2, RI4, RI5.

Rationale
RI3. A provisional agreement with a fourth telecom service provider was made by end-2019, but the fourth
license had not been awarded at the time of writing of the ICR. However, the expected entry of a new
competitor appears to have led to incumbents lowering tariffs and increasing coverage. By 2019, the tariff had
fallen to 78.5 CFA per minute, down from 108 in 2017 and considerably further than the target of 90 CFA/min.
The indicator increased marginally in 2020, to 79.5. The efficacy of RI3 is rated High.

RI4. The start-up of AGEFAU was slow, and by mid-June 2017, no projects had been undertaken. Once
operational [in 2018? Check with TTL] disbursement towards investment projects took off, however. The
number of localities benefitting from extension services reached 31 by mid-June 2019, at almost 200 percent
of the target (16). Progress continued and by mid-June 2020, 60 localities had received extension services
projects. There is no information on where these localities were based or their poverty levels, however, and
so synergies with e-vouchers or financial inclusion reforms could not be verified. The efficacy of RI4 is rated
Substantial

Reforms in the electricity sectors did not move ahead as planned, possibly reflecting an unrealistic target in
the context of a major sector overhaul involving significant vested interests and governance problems. By
2019, only 60 smart meters had been installed, amounting to one percent of the target of 6,000. Progress
stalled completely during the following year, during which no new meters were put in place. The efficacy of
RI5 is rated Negligible.

The overall efficacy of policy pillar 2 is rated Moderately Satisfactory. This rating represents two very
different outcomes: on the one hand, significant success in lowering user tariffs and increasing the expansion
of telecom services. However, there was no progress at all in the electricity sector, which was in a major
crisis, with significant implications for other areas of reform, including ICT expansion. Though not rated here
as the area was dropped, there was no progress on rural roads maintenance which would also be a critical
component for poverty targeted infrastructure improvements.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



Improve microfinance sector performance
PA7a, 7b, R7.

Rationale
RI7. The microfinance sector performance did not sustainably improve during the operation. The ICR
indicates that the ratio of NPLs did improve by 2017, to 4.9 percent, but worsened again in the subsequent
period and reached 7.1 percent in 2019, representing very limited progress overall and a movement in the
wrong direction. The ICR does not provide information on intermediate activities such as the supervision or
liquidation processes, or on overall performance of the micro-finance sector in terms of outreach. According
to WDI data, access to finance (account or mobile) by the poorest 40 percent increased from 15.4 in 2014
percent to 31.3 percent in 2017, but the share who borrowed money fell from 44 to 41 percent.

The efficacy of RI7 is rated Negligible.
The overall efficacy of Pillar 3 is rated Highly Unsatisfactory, on account of the lack of progress on micro-
finance sector performance or financial inclusion.



Rating
Highly Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Improve targeting and efficiency of government transfers and social protection
PA8a, 8b, 9a,9b, 10a, RI8, RI9.

Rationale
[Need more information from TTL]

RI8. The worsening security situation resulted in crowding out of non-military expenditures which affected all
budgetary priorities. The ICR does not provide information on actual spending on sub-government transfers.
The share of budgetary resources to the poorest three communes (RI8) did increase, from 15 percent in 2015
to 20 percent in 2019, but fell short of the target of 25 percent (reaching 80 percent). Given that RI8 only
partially captures the PA and overall objective of improving the efficiency and targeting of transfers, coupled
with the limited progress, the efficacy of RI8 is rated Modest.

RI9. The number of households receiving cash transfers increased only slowly, from around 60,000 in 2015,
to 80,000 by 2019 and 91,000 in 2020, but remained much below the target of 150,000. No additional
information is available on (i) the characteristics of these households, and so targeting cannot be evaluated,
(ii) progress on program coordination/expanding access to health care (PA9bii), or (iii) budget allocations or
budget execution towards safety nets, to judge progress. On account of limited progress in combination with
the limited relevance of RI2 in capturing the objectives, the efficacy of RI9 is rated Modest




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 24
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



                  The overall efficacy of Pillar 4 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. This reflects the lack of prioritization of
                  the social protection sector in the face of significant security problems, lack of evidence on improved targeting
                  and efficiency, and the fact that RIs only partially measured progress on the associated PAs.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall efficacy of the PRISOG series in achieving objectives is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. The
rating does not represent uniformly modest achievements but instead very mixed outcomes. The PRISGO series
achieved solid progress in a few areas (targeting the poor with agricultural productivity measures,
telecommunications services affordability and extension). However, overall efficacy was significantly held back
by negligible or modest progress in key reform areas such as energy reform, safety net expansion,
decentralization, and strengthening micro finance sector performance[SJdS1] . As noted in the ICR, p. 9, limited
progress on reforms under PRISGO1 led to revised triggers (6 revised, two dropped, one replaced) in
PRISGO2, several with more modest ambitions. In a few cases (rural roads, tax collection) there was no
progress at all leading to a drop of the reform area. These modifications created a gap relative to expected
outcomes and progress towards impact.




Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The overall outcome of the operation is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to the limited progress in a number
of reform areas. The relevance of Prior Actions was moderately satisfactory as they set out specific reform
activities, in a logical sequence between PRISGO 1 and PRISGO 2, that could credibly support progress
towards agricultural productivity for the poor, fostering access to infrastructure in rural areas, micro-finance
sector improvement, and strengthening social protection. By contrast, the PRISGO series did not achieve the
intended progress towards objectives. Whereas there was measurable progress on fostering agricultural

                                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



productivity for the poor and a mixed record on infrastructure, the operations did not make headway on financial
exclusion (where the situation worsened) or social protection, where progress on decentralization or extending
services to the poor in different areas was too slow.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Progress towards the four development objectives of the PRISGO series include higher access to
telecommunications services and – although more modestly – the e-voucher expansion, the operationalization of
rural land commissions, and the expansion of the cash transfer safety net scheme. Each of these face moderate
risks (internal to each area/sector) and high risks (external to sector/area). Given capacity constraints, poor
governance and vested interests, continued engagement by the World Bank or other development partners
would be a strong mitigating factor for sustaining progress.

To continue to foster competition in the telecommunications sector, the entry of the fourth license operator will
be important. Although an additional provider had been identified and selected (by December 2019), it not been
approved by the time of the ICR, 16 months later.

The Government continues to support the e-voucher expansion (ICR, p- 29), adding new districts and
addressing mobile ownership and coverage constraints. The Government’s commitment is the strongest
mitigating factor for the significant vested interests in the input and subsidy distribution. The reform was also
supported by a WB DPF (P167547), approved in FY20.

Expansion of rural land commissions to more remote areas, and their effectiveness in resolving land disputes,
will hinge on continued support to ensure that these commissions are capacitated with technical and financial
resources. As per the PD of the new DPF operation, rural commissions relied on ad-hoc funding from localities
until recently, but there will now be a recurrent spending item in the National Budget. Through various donors,
technical support is now being provided to about 100-150 rural land commissions (PD for P167547, p. 34).

Finally, the expansion of the safety net program, while slower than foreseen at appraisal, has been progressing
steadily after the end of the PRISGO. It is being supported by a World Bank Safety Net project (P165064), due
to close in FY23, which has received additional financing due to good project performance.

Development progress achieved by the PRISGO (and other interventions) remain threatened by considerable
security threats in Mali, as well as COVID-19 related impacts on the socio-economic situation more generally,
but also directly on program implementation. The impact of the pandemic is being addressed through an
emergency operation (P174457).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

                                                                                                      Page 19 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)




Rationale

As noted in section 3a above, the PRISGO series was grounded in reform priorities established by the analytical
work prepared for the Mali SCD (2015). ASA focusing on rural finance, agricultural productivity,
telecommunications, and PFM, supported the development of prior actions. In addition, the PRISGO series built
on significant synergies as it was supporting reforms that were part of other WB projects such as the
interventions related to e-vouchers and safety nets and was linked to TA projects in the area of decentralization,
finance and telecommunications. The e-voucher intervention was a scale-up of a successful pilot in North Mali.
There were also valuable synergies between components. For example, ICT opportunities created synergies
between different program components such as telecommunications, e-vouchers, micro-finance and cash
transfers.

In the project design and risk analysis, the PRISGO aimed to incorporate lessons learned from previous
operations, namely (i) the importance of selectivity in policy focus (ii) the need to take incremental steps in each
reform (iii) the importance of agricultural productivity to poverty reduction and (iv) the critical role of Government
commitment especially in areas with strong vested interests (e.g., micro-finance and e-vouchers).

At the same time, the ambition of the policy reforms in the PRISGO, given the well-known capacity and
governance constraints in Mali, may have been unrealistic or required more explicit links between PAs and
expected outcomes. Moreover, the monitoring framework suffered from imprecision, in particular regarding RIs
under pillar 4 and pillar 1. Lack of targeting or precision thus compromised the relevance of M&E framework.
The ICR team reported difficulties in finding data, due to weak Government monitoring.

The Bank team recognized the risks facing Mali, in particular the high security and political risks endemic in Mali,
as well as risks related to vested interests in different areas. The team also pointed out the difficulties in hedging
against such risks, given high turnover among senior counterparts in the Government. It also highlighted the
substantial risks related to complexity of the program and weak institutional capacity. As discussed above, the
synergies with other ongoing WB projects, including TA, could have helped mitigate these risks (although they
did not in several areas). For the second operation, the project document put greater emphasis on the direct
risks due to governance/vested interests inherent in e-voucher, decentralization and energy reforms, and the
risks associated with high turnover among key Government counterparts. The mitigating strategy remained the
same, namely ensuring strong links to World Bank sector projects to facilitate dialogue and supervisions and
leverage capacity building and technical assistance.

In Mali, there are established coordination mechanisms with external development partners, for both budget
support and sector technical support and dialogue. PRISGO operations had been discussed and vetted within
this dialogue, to ensure coherence, synergies and complementarity (PD1, p.19; PD2, p.23).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

                                                                                                       Page 20 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)




The implementation of PRISGO1 was affected by an overall deterioration in the security situation coupled with
political instability, which required the World Bank team to adjust the program to retain relevance of the program.
There were significant modifications undertaken to adapt PRISGO2 to lessons learned under PRISGO1.
Between operations, two triggers were dropped, one (road maintenance) as the team judged that there was no
likelihood of progress, and one (telecommunications) because the trigger was beyond the control of the
Government. One trigger (synthetic tax) was completely revised as deemed irrelevant, and another six triggers
needed more precision, or were made less ambitious – which then compromised efficacy of the operation. In
addition, a new reform area – energy – was added, although the short timeframe of the second DPO likely
precluded progress in such a complex area. RI1 was also revised (from cadastral map to “functionality of land
commissions”). The adjustments made by the team were necessary in view of the worsening security
situation. Partly, however, they must be assigned to some weaknesses in the design, e.g. for the dropped
trigger for telecom, or the synthetic tax.

Four supervision missions per year were undertaken, and supervision was done jointly with task team leaders of
relevant sector projects in agriculture, telecommunications, and social protection. The team coordinated with
IMF around the energy component in the second DPO and met with the donor community for debriefings at
beginning and end of each mission.

Nonetheless, M&E was sporadic during the operations (ICR, p. 28). Given the synergies between PRISGO and
other projects, monitoring information should have been available from other project M&E, but there was
insufficient focus on ensuring regular updating. This was particularly serious given that the Government capacity
to monitor was weak. The ICR team reports difficulties in collecting data, even for the final ICR. At the same
time, the team successfully implemented low-cost, rapid so-called iterative beneficiary monitoring (IBM) surveys
for monitoring the implementation of e-vouchers and, later, land reform as well as health vouchers. The e-
voucher survey provided clear evidence that the first round of e-vouchers had not been distributed as intended,
which led to the revised trigger (PA2b) with specified implementation steps for the second DPO.

During the implementation, the Bank showed commitment to the reform agenda by delaying PRISGO1 to ensure
that the land act was enacted by Parliament (PA1a, RI1), and delaying the PRISGO2 due to the inadequate
distribution of e-vouchers (PA2b, RI2).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

World Bank prepared a DPO series that was well anchored in Mali’s development priorities and by and large
was underpinned by clear and credible prior actions. The Bank team also incorporated lessons learned from
previous operations and ongoing analytical work and sought synergies with other development interventions in
Mali. The policy context in Mali must be seen as extremely challenging, and the program faced strong
headwinds as armed conflict and communal violence spread outside of Northern Mali, affecting public service


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



delivery, political will, program M&E and more. Nonetheless, the Bank did not sufficiently account for the political
economy of underlying reforms at the outset (but adapted in the context of the second operation) or put in place
sufficient mitigating measures to address issues related governance and vested interest. Some revisions
reflected problems in the initial design rather than changing circumstances.

During implementation, the Bank responded to changes in program outlook and remained committed to the
dialogue underpinning reforms. At the same time, follow-up monitoring and evaluation was insufficient.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Poverty in Mali is concentrated in rural areas, and intimately connected with agricultural productivity. By focusing
on inclusive growth and resilience, as expressed in reforms focused on rural areas, productive opportunities,
financial inclusion and safety nets, the PRISGO series therefore had a strong social/poverty focus. By
addressing land issues, PRISGO also addressed a significant source of conflict.

The ICR and underlying M&E data do not contain information related to poverty impact and RIs generally did not
incorporate pro-poor dimensions. The ICR notes that the e-voucher scheme successfully reached the poorest
farmers, however, and the share of budgetary decentralization transfers allocated to the poorest regions
increased as well.



b. Environmental

The PRISGO series could have a positive impact on environment through various activities, but there is no data
to evaluate impact at this time. It will depend, inter alia, on how components related to agricultural practices as
well as cash transfers result in behavioral changes that in turn affect esp. rural conditions such as land use,
conservation methods, and input use.



c. Gender

The PRISGO series represents mixed results in terms of addressing gender issues more decisively. The safety
net and e-voucher programs did contain specific measures to increase inclusion of women (e.g., by registering
female household members as farmers as well as male). However, the complications related to women's access
to land under customary law were not addressed, and the participation of women in land commissions was very
limited. The PRISGO framework did not measure female participation in pertinent areas such as microfinance,
cash transfers, etc. The ICR indicates that women were well represented among beneficiaries of the e-voucher
program but provides not details to this effect.


                                                                                                     Page 22 of 24
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)




d. Other

none.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR has several strengths. It is well written and has a clear narrative. It provides a review of the country and
sector context for different reforms. It provides a succinct and clear account of the design of two operations
where substantial modifications were made; the reader can easily follow these modifications and their rationale.
Ratings are well motivated and logical. The ICR team faced significant challenges in collecting information in the
context of a low capacity counterpart with limited monitoring capacity.

The ICR could have provided a clearer analysis of the relevance of the PAs, which are rated MS in the ICR,
motivated by the revisions towards more modest PAs in the second operation. In a few instances (e.g. Land
reform) the ICR reduces the rating for the PAs on account of not achieving the outcome. Yet, it should be
sufficient that the PAs contribute meaningfully to outcomes.

The ICR could have provided more information on the Bank's implementation performance, in particular
monitoring, and the coordination under implementation with other important stakeholders. Overall, the ICR is
relatively brief, and more details and references would have been helpful to understand fully the assessment.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                  IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                   Moderately          Moderately
Outcome
                                   Unsatisfactory      Unsatisfactory
                                   Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                   Satisfactory
Relevance of Results                                   Moderately
                                   ---
Indicators                                             Unsatisfactory
Quality of ICR                     ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons



                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mali - Poverty DPO Series (P157900)



The ICR provides the following lessons, with which the ICRR concurs with some modification of language.

     1. The scope of the PDO should reflect the limited range of feasible PAs and the constraints of the
          implementation timeframe. In the PRISGO series, PDOs are set at such a high level that is impossible to
          evaluate them against performance criteria. The PDO needed to be more narrowly specified so that
          reforms underpinning them can be more closely linked to the objectives.
     2.   Overambitious triggers had to be downgraded in the PRISGO2 and ended up being input focused due to
          limited progress. In setting triggers, acknowledging capacity constraints as well as political and security
          risks is essential .
     3.   An explicit results chain provides a focus for assessment of program design. As pointed out by the ICR,
          many reforms focus on inputs and activities and leave gaps detailing how these activities will contribute
          to the achievement of ultimate objectives such as land security and effective use of agricultural inputs. A
          clearer results chain would have clarified each step (and associated risks) towards achieving outcomes
          and objectives and how to measure progress.
     4.   Results indicators need to track progress towards achieving the associated objective. This requires
          avoiding RIs that focus on partial results, achieving inputs or simply measuring whether activities
          were completed.
     5.   Technology can be leveraged to facilitate M&E in conflict affected areas. The IBM phone survey was
          used to significant effect to evaluate the first pilot of the e-voucher scheme, and was used also for the
          operation (e.g. on land commissions). Although those not covered by mobile network would not be
          accessible through this approach, the IBM survey provide a low cost and effective means to gather
          information, also at mid-term.
     6.   Addressing complex policy areas such as the energy sector requires a robust political consensus. To aim
          to achieve meaningful progress over three years, in areas such as energy reform where progress has
          been stalled during many years prior, is unrealistic. DPOs may not be the appropriate instrument for
          achieving such reforms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 24
