     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022648

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P143408                                    Samoa Aviation Investment Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Samoa                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58050,IDA-D4570,IDA-H9140,TF-         30-Jun-2019                                           41,732,156.14
 17019

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Mar-2014                               31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               25,000,000.00                                    300,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                44,118,965.34                                    299,100.25

 Actual                                            42,141,701.71                                    299,100.25




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman            Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   This project in Samoa was the second phase of the regional Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP), with
   the first phase in Kiribati, Tonga and Tuvalu. This program aimed at improving the aviation infrastructure
   and the oversight of aviation operations in the participating countries.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) was:

   " To improve operational safety and oversight of international air transport and associated
   infrastructure".

   The PDO is parsed as follows for this review:

   1. To improve operational safety of international air transport and associated infrastructure; and 2. To improve
   operational oversight of international air transport and associated infrastructure.

   The PDO was unchanged, although the project scope was expanded with the two Additional Financing's
   (AFs) for the project (discussed in section 2e).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 5 - 6).

   1. International Airport Infrastructure Investments. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$32.5 million.
   The actual cost was US$44.0 million. This component financed infrastructure investments at
   Samoa's Faleolo International airport. Activities in this component: (i) rehabilitating airport runways,
   taxiways and apron; (ii) installing new navigation aids, automatic weather monitoring, safety and security
   and air traffic control equipment; (iii) upgrading the generator capacity, and installing energy efficient
   equipment (terminal lightning); (iv) providing water storage tanks; (v) security improvements (closed circuit
   television); (vi) upgrading the runway lighting and fire safety equipment; (vii) providing Very Small Aperture
   Terminal (VSAT) secure communication system. (VSAT refers to a two-way secure satellite communication
   system that enables the regional civil aviation authorities and air transport organizations to communicate
   essential safety and security communications in a timely manner); (ix) design and consulting services.

   The scope of this activity was increased to include additional works on the terminal and airside's pavement
   interface, as a result of the Government's airport terminal expansion project at the Faleolo international
   airport financed by another donor.

   2. Strengthening Policy and Regulatory Capacity and Training. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$1.6 million. The actual cost was US$1.7 million. Activities in this component: (i) Technical Assistance
   (TA) and training to improve sector management and sector safety and security oversight; (ii) developing a
   national aviation policy; and (iii) safety and security oversight audits.

   3. Strengthening Airport Operations and Management Capacity. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$1.6 million. The actual cost was US$0.6 million. Activities in this component: (i) studies to assess the



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



  current condition of the aviation sector; (ii) developing a strategic business plan; and (iii) training on aviation
  policy, operations and management.

  4. Project Management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.9 million. The actual cost was US$4.0
  million. This component provided implementation support, including technical, advisory, and administrative
  support to the Pacific Aviation Investment Program's (PAIP) Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit and the
  project support team, and financing the annual subscriptions for operating the VSAT infrastructure during
  implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$38.6 million. The actual cost was US$51.5 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IDA grant of US$25.0 million (US$5.0 million from the
  IDA allocation and US$20.0 million from the regional IDA funding for the program). AFs of US$16.6 million
  and US$2.2 million were approved on June 6, 2016, and April 18, 2019, respectively. With this, the Bank
  financing was US$43.8 million. The amount disbursed was US$42.1 million. About US$58,954 was
  undisbursed. The difference between the IDA grant and the amount disbursed was due to the exchange
  rate changes during implementation.

  There was a Trust Fund grant of US$0.3 million from the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) for
  purchasing the Pacific Aviation Safety Office's (PASO) oversight services. US$0.29 million of this grant
  was disbursed. There was parallel financing of US$8.3 million for the civil works from the European
  Investment Bank (EIB) until it was replaced by IDA funding in the first AF (see below).

  Recipient contribution. The recipient contribution was estimated at US$5.0 million at appraisal. According
  to the Data Sheet (ICR, page 2), there was no recipient contribution during implementation.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 5, 2014, became effective on May 8, 2014, and was scheduled
  to close on June 30, 2019. The project closed on December 31, 2020.

  Other changes. The following changes were made during the project lifetime.

        AF of US$16.6 million was approved on June 3, 2016, for: (i) expanding the project
         scope (discussed in section 2d); and (ii) to accommodate the Government's decision to replace EIB
         financing (about US$8.3 million), with the more favorable terms of the IDA funding.
        To prepare an Integrated Environmental and Social plan for this project and the new terminal
         development project.
        The closing date was not extended with the AF, as it was anticipated that the grant would be fully
         disbursed by the original closing date.

  The second AF of US$2.2 million was approved on April 18, 2019, to close a financing gap, due to the
  cost overruns for activities associated with component one activities. The other changes made with this AF
  are as follows:

        A Grievance Redress Mechanism was added as an indicator.


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



         The closing date was extended by 18 months from June 30, 2019 to March 31, 2020 for completing
          the ongoing activities.

   The project closing date was further extended by three months from March 31, 2020 to June 30, 2020,
   through a Level 2 restructuring on March 22, 2020, for additional training programs for the Samoa
   Airport Authority (SAA) and the Civil Aviation Division (CAD) staff. These programs were suspended
   following the declaration of travel restrictions by the government in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. As
   the original training program had been completed, the government opted to cancel the additional programs,
   and use the AF grant for purchasing additional equipment from local suppliers for activities associated with
   component one activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. The project addressed a key development challenging facing the Samoan
economy. Samoa is a group of islands in the South Pacific located in the "Cyclone belt". The gross
domestic product (GDP) of the Samoan economy is dominated by tourism, but agriculture and fishing are
also important in the economy. About 22% of Samoa's GDP comes from tourism, with the majority of
tourists arriving by air, and about 18% of local employment comes from tourism- related activities. Air
connectivity is essential for meeting Samoa's educational and medical needs. Given Samoa's geographic
distance from main markets, air services are important for exports of high value, time-sensitive
goods. Since Samoa is also vulnerable to natural disasters, the sector is crucial for effective disaster risk
management in matters pertaining to delivering emergency aid.

The aviation sector in Samoa faced the following challenges: (1) constraints on airport profitability due to
the long routes, thin traffic and low freight levels; and (ii) shortage of personnel
with appropriate expertise. While these challenges were in general faced by the sector in all the Pacific
Island Countries, a specific challenge faced by Samoa was that the latest International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) Universal Safety Audit Program (USOAP) in 2010 identified 59 findings, and
benchmarked Samoa below the global average in six of the eight areas (discussed in section 4).

Government and regional strategy. At appraisal, the government strategy articulated in the Development
of Samoa (2012 -2016) identified transport infrastructure as a priority sector. Before appraisal, the
government enacted legislation demonstrating its commitment to the sector. In 2012, government
approved the Airport Authority Act separating airport operations, with the SAA responsible for air traffic
control and aviation security, and the CAD for regulatory oversight. This legislation authorized SAA to
impose and collect fees for air services. At the regional level, Samoa ratified the Pacific Islands Air Services
Agreement (PIASA) in 2007, thereby demonstrating its commitment to fostering an enabling environment
for promoting regional market competition through new service routes. The government's Strategy for the
Development of Samoa for 2017-2020 reiterated the goal of improving transport infrastructure as one
of four priority areas. The government's long- term development agenda outlined in Samoa
2040 underscored the aviation sector's role in accelerating sustainable development.

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, they were consistent with
the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2013 - 2016. The CAS acknowledged that the level of finance

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



               required for aviation investments exceeded the national IDA allocation. Given the regional cross-country
               spillover effects of investments under the PAIP, regional IDA funding resources were mobilized to support
               financing for the project. The PDOs were well aligned with the Bank's Regional Partnership Framework
               (RPF) for Pacific Island Countries for 2017- 2021. The RPF highlighted the importance of the aviation
               sector under objective 4.2: Increased access to basic services and improved connective infrastructure. The
               RPF highlighted the need for a regional approach to allow the Pacific Island countries ICs "to benefit from
               economies through bulk procurement and centralized implementation arrangements".

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank has financed aviation sector investments under the Samoa
               Infrastructure Asset Management Project (SIAM) completed in 2000. Under this project, the Bank among
               other things, financed aerodrome upgrades at Faleolo international airport for compliance with the
               International Civil Aviation Organization's (ICAO) standards. The investment under this project was
               anticipated to meet a ten-year service life before future rehabilitation would be required, and this time span
               had been exceeded when this project was prepared.

               This project, the first of its kind in Samoa, focused exclusively on the aviation sector. Unlike the prior Bank
               project, which financed only aviation infrastructure investments, this project also had components
               for driving sector reforms. Specifically, the project had a legal covenant stipulating SAA to collect a "safety
               and security levy from departing international passengers" by September 30, 2014, for strengthening
               the financial viability of the aviation sector in Samoa. Given the importance of the sector to the economy,
               the government strategy and the Bank's strategy at the country and at the regional level, the relevance of
               the PDO is assessed as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             To improve operational safety of international air transport and associated infrastructure.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The results framework was clear. The causal links between the project activities, their
                             outputs and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes were monitorable. Activities such as installing
                             new navigation aids, Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) secure communication system, rehabilitating
                             airport runaways, taxiways and apron, installing safety and security and energy efficient equipment, and
                             training Samoan Airport Authority (SAA) were aimed at modernizing air traffic management. The outputs of
                             these activities were expected to aid the Faleolo International airport to reach ICAO's global safety and
                             security standards.


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



Outputs (ICR, pages 17 -19).

      The apron at the Faleolo airport was expanded to 9,500 square meters, thereby creating a total
         surface area of approximately 41,500 square meters, with a new base and asphaltic surface. This
         expansion allowed the larger (Code E) aircraft, such as New Zealand's B777 and B787 to safely park
         on the apron, while allowing other aircrafts to enter, park and exit. The activities included expansion
         and strengthening of the apron, reconfiguration of the fuel hydrant infrastructure and modification of
         airfield drainage at the airport, in the wake of the Government's airport terminal expansion project
         financed by another donor.
        The Very Small Aperture (VSAT) secure satellite communication system was operational when the
         project closed. This system enabled the regional civil aviation authorities and air transport
         organizations to communicate essential safety and security information in a timely manner.
        The two-way Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS-B), a satellite-based technology for
         aircraft monitoring and facilitating communications with other regional airports, was operational when
         the project closed.
        SAA staff were trained in using the VSAT and ADS-B equipment.
        The Navigation Aids, Airfield Ground Lighting (AGL) Power Systems and Air Traffic Control Equipment
         (ATC) were installed. The AGL was upgraded through replacing low intensity runway lighting with high
         intensity energy efficient lights for night operations.
        Safety screening equipment such as closed-circuit (CCTV) was installed at to cover all parts of the
         Faleolo terminal building.
        Two refurbished rescue vehicles were commissioned to ensure that the Faleolo airport was in
         compliance as an Airfield Rescue and Fire Fighting (ARFF) Category 10 airport.
        A Training Needs Assessment and a training plan was completed. The fire fighter staff, air traffic
         controllers and maintenance staff of SAA were trained by the Tonga Airport Limited (TAL) staff.
         According to the second project restructuring paper, by February 2019, 70% of SAA and 60% of CAD
         skill gap had been addressed. However, the third restructuring paper (paragraph nine) notes that
         about US$465,000 was unspent, as the training program was stopped prematurely because of the
         COVID-pandemic and the funds were spent on buying equipment instead.
        The ICR (paragraph 85) notes that the contract for the Air Traffic Control equipment was signed in
         June 2018, with the equipment scheduled for installation in April 2019. However, the installation was
         only completed in March 2020. The ICR further notes that some spare parts supplies were only
         arriving in December 31, 2020. The ICR notes that when this project closed, one container of spare
         parts had not yet arrived in Samoa, and that the SAA was to cover the cost of the spare parts
         contained in this container (approximately US$12,525). These delays were due to an underestimate in
         the amount of works required and poor planning by the contractor, which led to multiple shipment
         delays. The ICR does not provide details, but notes that not all the planned contracts under this
         project were completed by the project closing date.

Outcomes.

The outputs of the project activities described above were expected to lead to the intended outcome of
regulatory certification of the safety and security procedures at the Faleolo international airport.

The Faleolo international airport was certified. An inspection carried out by SAA with support from the Pacific
Aviation Safety Office (PASO), certified that the aerodrome design and operations at the Faleolo international


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



airport were compliant with the safety and security standards required by the Samoa Civil Aviation Rules (part
139 and part 172), and applicable portions of ICAO (Annex 14).

While the intended outcome was realized, given that all not all of the planned activities were completed when
the project closed, efficacy is assessed as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve operational oversight of international air transport and associated infrastructure.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The results framework was clear. The causal links between the project activities, their
outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. Activities such as developing a
strategic business development plan for SAA, conducting safety and security audits, implementing a safety
and security levy for departing international passengers, and training the staff of SAA and the CAD were
aimed at strengthening airport operations and management. The outputs of these activities were likely to aid
in regulatory certification of the airport. The combination of these activities together with the aviation
infrastructure investments discussed above, were aimed at supporting tourism and thereby the long-term
development outcome of sustaining economic growth and reducing poverty.

Outputs (ICR, paragraphs 42 - 46)

      An Aviation Sector Strategy was completed as targeted. The strategy provided on overview of the
       regulatory environment for Samoa, the role of air transportation, the current state of aviation
       infrastructure and the challenges of regulatory oversight in Samoa.
      The Master Plan and the Business Strategy was completed as targeted. The plan and the strategy
       focused on Samoa's operations and management capacity. The plan included a 30 year planning
       horizon, travel demand forecasts for passenger and freight traffic for international and domestic
       services, locating critical operational infrastructure that met international service standards and
       regulatory requirements, and recurrent expenditures for airport operations. This plan was to align long-
       term infrastructure action with national priorities, and guide decision-making on areas requiring
       investment.

Outcomes

The outputs of these activities were expected to contribute to two outcomes: (1) implementing a ' regional
safety and security levy for departing international passengers for strengthening the financial viability of
SAA; and (2) ensuring that the safety and security standards of the airport reaches the global standards as
validated by ICAO.

      The government imposed a regional safety and security levy of 11 Samoan Tala (WAT) (about
       Australian Dollar 0.6 or US$0.44 cents) from each departing international passenger. 59% of the

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



                                    revenue from this levy is allocated to the Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure (MWTI),
                                    39% to SAA, and 2% to the airlines as their administration fee. Since this levy was initiated in October
                                    2015, over WST 6 million (approximately US$2.4 million) was collected. These funds are used for
                                    oversight of the aviation sector. The Civil Aviation Division (CAD) was responsible for the MWTI's
                                    portion of the levy, and the fees collected by CAD are used for preparing manuals and reports for
                                    ICAO audits, implementing ICAO's standard recommended practices, and Samoa's payments to the
                                    Pacific Union Safety Office (PASO). The funds allocated to SAA are used for maintaining the
                                    equipment and staff remuneration.

                            The project activities were expected to ensure that the safety and security of the airport conforms with
                            the global ICAO standards measured through the ICAO Universal Safety Audit Program (USOAP). The audits
                            focus on a country's capability to provide safety oversight, by assessing whether the country has implemented
                            key elements of the program. The audit covers eight areas (legislation, organization, licensing, operations,
                            airworthiness, accident investigation and air navigation).

                                  Based on the ICAO USOAP Continuous Monitoring Approach (CMA), Samoa had an Effective
                                    Implementation (EI) score of 47.8%, as compared to 56.4% at the baseline in December 2010. This
                                    was short of the target of 41.3%.The ICR notes that Samoa is the only Pacific Island country to have
                                    updated the USOAP scores on a temporary basis, after cross checking with autonomous third-party
                                    assessments. The CMA was rigorous and overseen by the New Zealand aviation authorities. The ICR
                                    however notes that the actual EI on the USOAP still needs be validated by ICAO, that is scheduled for
                                    2022.

                            Given that the intended outcomes were largely achieved although actual EI score still needs ICAO
                            validation, efficacy of this objective is assessed as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given that the outcomes were achieved for the most part though ICAO validation is still required, overall
                            efficacy is assessed as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for activities associated with aviation infrastructure
investments, using the same methodology. These activities accounted for 84% of the project cost at appraisal,
and 86% of the actual cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from the tourism sector's contribution to
GDP. The methodology entailed a comparison of "without the project" and "with the project". The scenario with
the project was that Samoa complies with the ICAO standards, and hence there is no disruption to the jet
services and to tourism-related activities. The scenario with the project was that Samoa does not comply with
the ICAO standards and there is disruption to the jet services that limits the number of incoming tourists. The
economic analysis covered the time horizon of 12 years (2014 -2026). The key assumptions included: (i) tourism
grows at an average rate of 3.6% per annum (according to the estimates of the World Travel and Tourism
Council (WTTC) (this assumption may be unrealistic, given the disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic and
decline in GDP); and (ii) there is a 25% reduction of tourists with an estimated impact of US$48 million, due to
the disruption of jet services without the project.

The Net Present Value (NPV) at a 6% discount rate was estimated at US$76.0 million, as compared to the NPV
of US$117.0 million at appraisal, using the same discount rate. The ICR (page 21) notes that a 6% discount rate
was used considering that the GDP per capita in Samoa has been increasing on average at 3% per year from
2010 - 2018; it also follows the World Bank's Guidance Note on Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic
Analysis of World Bank Projects (May 2016). The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 31.9%,
slightly lower than the ex ante EIRR of 33.6%, due to the increase in cost of the apron work related activity.

Administrative and operational issues. The costs of the apron works proved to be more than expected at
appraisal, as the specifications of the apron pavement were changed from a flexible to rigid pavement to avoid
damages to the underground services. This was not known at the time of contract tendering, as there were no
documents regarding the apron layout and specifications at appraisal. This necessitated the AF of US$2.2
million. There were delays of about 17 months in contracting for the civil works due to a combination of factors,
including procurement delays, additional preparation of the technical proposal as the original proposal lacked
key aspects of design, and the termination of the original design and supervision consultant in 2016 due to non-
performance. The delays in the initial years were exacerbated by the delays in implementation of
activities relating to airfield lighting, power system and air traffic control equipment. The ICR (paragraph 85)
notes that not all the planned contracts under the project were completed at project closure, although the project
closed 18 months behind schedule.

In sum, efficiency is assessed as substantial, due to the satisfactory economic justification of the project and the
minor administrative and operational shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      84.00
 Appraisal                                                  33.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



                                                                                      86.00
ICR Estimate                                               31.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank's regional strategy is assessed as High. Efficacy of the
objectives to improve operational safety and oversight of international air transport and associated infrastructure
is assessed as substantial. Although there were administrative and operational shortcomings during
implementation, efficiency is assessed as substantial, in view of the economic justification for the project. Taking
these ratings into account, overall outcome is assessed as satisfactory, reflecting minor shortcomings in the
achievements of its objectives and in its efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk. There is a substantial risk relating to the financial sustainability of the development
outcomes. The ICR (paragraph 93) notes that SAA's revenue has been shrinking because of the decline of
international arrivals in recent years due to a combination of factors, including the measles outbreak in 2019,
the COVID-19 pandemic since 2020, and the flash floods as a result of Cyclone Zazu in December 2020.
This revenue shortfall could undermine SAA's capacity to subscribe to the Pacific Aviation Safety Office's
(PASO) technical service on aviation safety oversight. Furthermore, the reduced air traffic has also
affected SAA's revenue from landing fees. This puts at risk the maintenance of the infrastructure created
under this project, once the Defect Liability Period expires in September 2020.

Exposure to Natural Disasters. There is a substantial risk to the aviation infrastructure created under this
project, given that Samoa is vulnerable to natural disasters. The ICR (paragraph 94) notes that the new
airport terminal building was seriously impacted with the ground floor flooded, damaging electronic
equipment within the terminal including the elevators, the escalators, check-in service computers, security x-
ray system and baggage conveyors, in the wake of the torrential rains and gusty winds that Samoa
experienced in December 2020 under Cyclone Zazu. There is also the risk associated with potential lack of
preparedness for natural disasters, given that the training program was halted, prior to the ICAO inspection.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The analytical underpinnings of the project, based on the assessments of the aviation sector in the South
  Pacific, were sound. These assessments indicated that the countries lacked the proper policy, regulatory

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



  features and information to comply with the ICAO's safety and security requirements of airports. The
  project's design was well-aligned with the three projects in the first phase of the regional
  program. Lessons incorporated at design included: (i) incorporating policy triggers to achieve policy
  changes (the levy for international passengers; (ii) introducing regional Communication, Navigation and
  Surveillance (CNS) systems in view of their regional spillover benefits; and (iii) refurbishing fire tenders as
  opposed to purchasing new fire tenders, as the former was about 30% cheaper than the latter option, and
  the technologies used in new tenders were deemed to be unsuitable to the operating environment (PAD,
  pages 7- 8).

  The implementation arrangements made at appraisal proved to be appropriate. The Samoa Airport
  Authority (SAA) was in charge of implementing the project. A Project Support Team (PST) was
  established to support SAA. In view of the weak implementation capacity in Samoa, the Technical and
  Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSC) based within Tonga Airports, Limited (TAL) was to provide additional
  support to project and fiduciary management, safeguard policies and M&E (PAD, paragraphs 30 - 31).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including the Government's commitment to strengthening the
  regulatory oversight of the sector and weak implementation capacity in the country. Mitigation
  measures at design, included a passenger safety and security levy to departing passengers, and
  engaging the TFSC to assist Samoa. With mitigation measures, the project risk was rated
  moderate (PAD, page 10). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and
  fiduciary compliance (section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings. The actual costs of apron works at the airport proved to be higher than
  expected and the project underestimated the risk associated with changes in donor funding. These
  issues were however addressed during implementation as part of the restructuring and AF in 2016. There
  were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 10).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were held twice a year on average during implementation. These missions were
 supplemented with additional technical missions when deemed necessary. The ICR (paragraph 89) notes
 that weekly meetings were held with the implementation team to monitor progress. The team provided
 capacity building and training through World Bank workshops. There were four Task Team Leaders (TTLs)
 and changes in key project teams (safeguards and financial management) during the project lifetime of six
 and half years. However, the continuity of leadership was more or less maintained either through co-TTL-
 leadership, or a handover period when the incumbent worked with the new TTL/team member for a period
 of time. The team showed agility to address the risk that was not foreseen at appraisal. This risk was due
 to the Government's decision to construct the new terminal building financed by another donor. This
 required a significant change in project scope (expansion and strengthening of the apron and taxiways,
 reconfiguration of fuel hydrant infrastructure and modifications to airfield drainage), and ultimately total
 financing requirements. This issue was addressed through the AF for the project. A Grievance Redressal
 Mechanism (GRD) was added through the project restructuring.


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 This project was part of the regional Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP), and the M&E design was
 harmonized across the program as part of the requirement for Regional IDA financing. This however
 required indicators that could be used for all the participating countries. A benefit of this approach was to
 provide comparable measurement across all projects in the series and to help in future preparation of
 projects in a streamlined fashion. The key outcome indicators - compliance by Samoa of the security and
 safety standards of ICAO and implementation of a levy for departing international passengers - were
 appropriate for monitoring project performance.

 As highlighted by other projects under the series, indicator two (safety and security standards of the airport
 reaches global (ICAO) average was dependent on an external agency. Given that ICAO validation was not
 under the project's control, SAA updated the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Program (USOAP) score
 using the Continuous Monitoring Approach (CMA) on a temporary basis after cross checking with
 autonomous third party assessments. This score however still needs to be validated by the ICAO
 certification process (scheduled for 2022).

 The ICR points out that since the ICAO indicator is an aggregate, it can only capture the measurable
 aspect of the USOAP. Thus the project's achievements would not be fully captured by this indicator.



b. M&E Implementation
  Even though this project was part of PAIP, it was responsible for its own M&E, which was then funneled
  to the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU) for overall reporting. This allowed for a more
  standardized approach in terms of measurement and data collection. The ICR (paragraph 75) notes that
  during the first part of implementation, not all achievements were captured in the Results Framework.
  However this issue was rectified, and all indicators were updated during the project lifetime. A Grievance
  Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established with the project restructuring.

  The ICR (paragraph 76) notes that there were occasional delays of the project's quarterly reporting, due
  to the delay in transferring data between SAA and TFSU. Since TFSU was not based in Samoa, SAA had
  limited means to effectively help the Project Support Team overcome the challenges associated with
  timely data collection and transfer. These were however rectified by project closure. The ICR notes that
  several approaches were trialed during implementation to improve the M&E of the project such as spider
  graphics and new processes for collecting data.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)




c. M&E Utilization
  The results framework was used to measure project progress.

  On balance, while there were shortcomings in M&E design and the choice of outcome indicators, the
  team provided the additional evidence to demonstrate the achievement of the objectives, therefore M&E
  is assessed as substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies: two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) (PAD, page 31). No other safeguard policies were triggered during
   implementation.

   Environmental Assessment. The adverse environmental impacts of the project were expected to be
   limited, and mainly site- specific. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and publicly-
   disclosed at appraisal to address environmental issues (PAD, paragraph 53).

   The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that the project adhered to the Bank requirements for environmental
   safeguards. Since construction of a new terminal financed by another donor was introduced during
   implementation, an Integrated Environmental and Social Management Plan (IESMP) was prepared at the
   time of project restructuring and publicly-disclosed.

   A Grievance and Complaint Logging system was set up and available on the Samoa Aviation Investment
   Project (SAIP) website. This system allowed the stakeholders to not only log potential issues, but also see
   anonymous information about other grievances. This included statistics on time taken to resolve and the
   level of priority. Thirteen complaints were received during the project life. Of these eleven were low priority,
   with two resolved within the standard service of 28 days, while the rest took up to 85 days to resolve.

   Indigenous Peoples. A social assessment was conducted at appraisal and publicly-disclosed. The PAD
   (paragraph 51) notes that since the overwhelming majority of project beneficiaries in Samoa are Indigenous
   Peoples (IPs), no separate IP plan was prepared at appraisal. The PAD also notes that no impacts on
   indigenous culture, language, customs, institutions or customary lands were expected from the project
   activities.

   The ICR (paragraph 80) notes that project adhered to Bank requirements for social safeguards.




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. An assessment of the financial management capacity of the SAA conducted at
   appraisal, concluded that SAA's financial arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, paragraph 47).

   The ICR (paragraph 82) notes that the financial management was rated satisfactory for the majority of the
   project's life. It was downgraded to moderately satisfactory in December 2019. The ICR (paragraph 83)
   notes that a major issue cutting across the IDA portfolio and affecting this project was due to the handling
   of contract tax liabilities. This issue was eventually resolved through the involvement of the Attorney
   General's Office and the Tax unit of the Revenue Division. The ICR provides no information on the quality
   of audits.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment of SAA was conducted at appraisal. The assessment
   highlighted risks relating to accountability in evaluation and approval procedures, and adequacy of SAA
   staffing. The mitigation measures incorporated at design, establishing a post for procurement officer in the
   Project Support Team (PST), and using simplified procurement procedures and templates for the Pacific
   Region (PAD, paragraph 49).

   A regional procurement approach was used for projects under the PVIP, with procurement centralized
   through the TFSU. This mitigated the high risk of procurement issues in capacity-constrained countries and
   increased the attractiveness of works, given the small and remote nature of countries under the program.

   The ICR (paragraph 84) notes that procurement was rated moderately satisfactory of the project, with a
   downgrading to moderately unsatisfactory in June 2020. This was due to the delay in implementation and
   delivery of supplies and equipment for airfield lighting, power system and air traffic control equipment. The
   installation of these activities were however completed for the most part by March 2020. The Borrower's
   ICR (page 7) notes that the introduction of the Bank's new Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement (STEP) system created major delays in the implementation of some activities. The ICR does
   not report any case of misprocurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Efficacy of the two PDOs are
                                                                                 assessed as substantial. Not all
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               the project activities were
                                                                                 completed when the project
                                                                                 closed and the safety and

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



                                                                                    security standards of the Faleolo
                                                                                    international airport still needs
                                                                                    ICAO validation.
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                    Additional evidence is provided,
                                                                                    beyond the RF indicators, to
Quality of M&E                    Modest                Substantial
                                                                                    demonstrate the achievement of
                                                                                    the intended outcomes.
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

1. The regional approach can be a good option for remote island countries with a limited IDA
allocation. Being part of an IDA regional program allowed Samoa to access additional regional IDA
resources for large scale investments in the aviation sector. This project also demonstrated that a
regional approach to central procurement can be effective in generating cost savings, as compared
to procuring specializing equipment for each country separately.

2. While regional programs help in harmonizing solutions across participating countries,
such programs need to allow some flexibility for countries to tailor activities to specific
country circumstances. In this project, the same set of results indicators were used for all the
participating countries. While this project was able to achieve the requirements of the results
indicator, it was the only project that was able to do this. The lesson of this project is that results
indicators in a regional program needs to take into consideration each country's context.

3. Remoteness premiums need to be factored into project budgeting, especially when there
are limited benchmarks for a certain sector. For countries like Samoa with substantial
remoteness premiums, the costs of shipping, equipment, maintenance and expert staff are usually
two to three times higher than in less remote countries. The lesson is that higher cost contingencies
needs to be factored into the project design at appraisal.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The efficacy section is notable for the adequate level of detail; it provides a
clear and substantiated set of observations to assess the achievement of the PDO. The quality of analysis
provides sufficient interrogation of the evidence and clearly links the evidence to findings. The lessons from the
experience of implementing this project are linked to the narrative. The theory of change provided in the ICR

                                                                                                          Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)



provides a clear linking of activities to the outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR candidly discusses the
advantages and disadvantages associated with projects with regional IDA funding.

The information provided in the ICR on financial management and environmental management is rather sparse.
Also, the main body of the text at 27 pages is considerably more than the usually recommended length of 15
pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 16
