     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022385

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P147489                                   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Africa                                    Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55250,IDA-H9780,IDA-H9790,IDA-        30-Jun-2018                                         94,990,796.61
 H9800

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2014                               31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         106,960,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          105,041,934.51                                               0.00

 Actual                                        94,990,796.61                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gisela Mariela Garcia      Salim J. Habayeb             Joy Maria Behrens              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives in the legal agreements and the PAD were identical and did not change during
   implementation. Project objectives were: (i) to expand the provision of services to mitigate the short and
   medium term impact of sexual and gender based violence; and (ii) to expand utilization of a package of health
   interventions targeted to poor and vulnerable females (PAD p.10). The first part of the PDO applies to



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



   Burundi, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and to the International Conference for the Great
   Lakes (ICGLR). The second part of the PDO applies only to Burundi and DRC.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Holistic Support for Sexual and Gender-Based Violence and Violence Prevention (appraisal
   estimate of US$50.51 million; actual allocation of US$50.62 million). This component was meant to
   support the delivery of an integrated package of short and medium-term assistance to survivors of SGBV at
   both the community and health facility level while promoting gender equality, behavioral change, and
   violence prevention in the intervention zones of each participating country. The response aimed to support
   survivors’ physical, mental, social and economic well-being. Guiding principles for support to survivors
   included confidentiality, informed consent, and respect. The component aimed to strengthen the capacity of
   existing structures and systems at the community and health facility levels with referral mechanisms
   strengthened in order to provide a continuum of care. The component included the following main areas of
   support: integrated support for survivors of SGBV and prevention of violence at the community Level;
   integrated support for survivors of SGBV at health facility level; and support for existing integrated Centers
   of Excellence in North and South Kivu.



   2. High Impact Basic Health Services (appraisal estimate of US$34 million; actual US$34 million). In
   DRC, the component supported the introduction of a Performance Based Financing (PBF) aimed at:
   improving utilization and quality of health services; improving access to health services for the most
   vulnerable; and strengthening Performance Purchasing Agencies (PPA) for management of PBF. The
   project funded PBF payments to health facilities, including upfront quality improvement funds for targeted
   facilities; essential drugs; health services for the most vulnerable through the Provincial Health Equity
   Funds; performance-based contracts for regulatory entities; and, operating and management cost of PPAs
   to implement PBF. In Burundi, the project aimed to reinforce maternal, reproductive and emergency
   obstetric services at the health facilities that participated in the national PBF program in the three targeted
   provinces. The national PBF program was supported through the WB Financed Health System Support
   Project ("KIRA") (P156012 – US$50 million).



   3. Regional Networking, Knowledge Sharing, Capacity Building and Research (appraisal estimate
   of US$22.4 million; actual allocation of US$21.2 million). This component funded (i) Regional Learning
   and Capacity Building activities, including knowledge sharing and Training of Trainers of member states;
   and (ii) Regional Communication to raise awareness on SGBV. It also supported Program Management and

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



  Institutional Capacity Building of ICGLR’s to deliver its mandate. ICGLR was to play a convening role,
  supporting regional knowledge sharing and advocacy efforts in SGBV (PAD p.76).



  Project scope and area selection. The operation targeted some of the poorest and most vulnerable
  groups in the Great Lakes Region (PAD, p. 9). The PAD (pp.11-12) stated that geographic areas were
  carefully selected based on the following criteria: (i) unmet needs for key services; (ii) violence/conflict
  levels; (iii) presence of refugees or internally displaced people; (iv) poverty and vulnerability levels; and/or
  (v) presence of other development partners, to avoid duplication or build partnerships. In DRC, the project
  targeted the provinces of North and South Kivu. In Burundi, the project targeted the provinces of Cibitoke,
  Makamba and Muyinga. In both DRC and Burundi, provinces were selected based on their high rates of
  conflict and sexual violence. In Rwanda, the project had a national scope. The majority of project
  funds (69%) were allocated to DRC activities (ICR, p. 12).




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost, financing, and Borrower contribution. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$107
  million, consisting of IDA Grants to: DRC, US$73.86 million; Burundi, US$15.15 million; ICGLR Conference,
  US$3 million; and an IDA Credit to Rwanda, US$14.95 million. The actual cost reported by the ICR
  (US$105.8 million) and the actual cost based on the disbursed amount of U$95 million reported in the
  system did not match because the ICR amounts were calculated using exchange rates at the time of project
  approval (ICR, p. 12 and p. 84). There was no direct Borrower contribution planned or provided.

  Project estimated costs were distributed as follows:

                                                       Total Costs in US$ Million
  Components                                           DRC Burundi Rwanda ICGLR Total
  1. Support for GBV Survivors & Violence
                                                       34.97 5.76        9.78                  50.51
  Prevention
  2. Basic Health Services                             31.69 2.34                              34.03
  3. Reg Knowledge Sharing & Capac Building            7.2   7.05        5.17        3         22.42
  Total Estimated Project Costs                        73.86 15.15       14.95       3         106.96



  Dates. Appraisal was finalized on June 12, 2014 and the project became effective on September 22, 2014.
  A Mid-Term Review was carried out on November 17, 2017. The project closing date was extended by a
  total of 18 months, beyond the original closing date of June 30, 2018 to allow the completion of project
  activities. The project closed on December 31, 2019.

  Restructurings. The project underwent four restructurings:




                                                                                                        Page 3 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



   – The first two restructurings (August 27, 2015 and February 27, 2017) included changes in institutional
   arrangements, disbursement arrangements, and legal covenants.

   -The 3rd and 4th restructurings (March 6, 2018 and April 25, 2019) included changes in the project closing
   date, results framework, and disbursement arrangements. Consequential downward revisions of some
   associated outcome targets were made during the last restructuring of April 25, 2019, eight months before
   project closing, at which time US$79.39 million were disbursed (84%).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was responsive to a set of issues affecting women who were among the most vulnerable
groups in the Great Lakes Region. Women faced multiple and mutually reinforcing constraints, including
high levels of violence, inadequate control over their health, limited economic opportunities and lack of
control over resources (PAD, p. 3). The severity of constraints varied widely across countries. Violence
against women and girls has become a major public health and development issue in the Great Lakes
Region. For example, in DRC, 97 percent of women faced one or more of the above-mentioned constraints;
42 percent were affected by both domestic violence and inadequate control over their health, and 25
percent by three key constraints (domestic violence, lack of control over their health, and inadequate control
over resources). In Burundi, groups most at risk of sexual violence included young women, female headed
households, and marginalized populations who were easy targets of SGBV. In Rwanda, gender-based
violence and violence against children remained important problems in spite of strong government
commitment to promote gender equality and to reduce SGBV.

The objectives were aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG) strategic priority to address fragility, conflict,
and violence (FCV). Addressing gender issues in FCV countries, including preventing and responding to
GBV, has been part of IDA commitments since IDA 16. The IDA 19th replenishment reiterates the
commitment to address gender in FCV situations and calls for a continuous focus on GBV and deepening
partnerships with local institutions to deliver services and increase the agency of women and girls (Gender
in FCV Evaluation Approach Paper, p.4, forthcoming). The new World Bank Group FCV Strategy (2020-
2025) explicitly refers to this in para 51 and 72. As per the ICR (p.14), the project was closely aligned with
the objectives of the United Nations (UN) Special Envoy to the Great Lakes Region and the UN Special
Envoy on Sexual Violence in Conflict at the time of its closure.

The objectives were relevant to the WBG Gender Strategy (2016-2023). In particular, they are clearly
aligned with two pillars: (i) “improving human endowment”, focusing on reducing maternal mortality and
improving women’s access to maternal health; and (ii) enhancing women’s voice and agency and engaging
men and boys”, aiming to reduce GBV and its impacts, especially in fragile and conflict situations.

The objectives also supported regional commitments outlined in the WBG’s Africa Gender Action Plan
(FY2018-2022). Addressing “Gender Gaps in Fragility and Violence” is one of the five priorities outlined in

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



the current Plan, including through: (i) increasing the availability and affordability of reproductive health
services, including for survivors of GBV in all IDA financing operations for maternal and reproductive health;
and, (ii) increasing the number of operations in fragile contexts preventing or responding to GBV, including
through access to essential services and livelihood support activities for women (Africa Gender Action Plan
p. 14).

The PDO was relevant to Bank country strategies for DRC at appraisal and closing. The PDO for DRC was
relevant to the Country Assistance Strategy at appraisal (CAS FY2013-FY2016), especially regarding the
objective of expanded utilization of essential health services by poor and vulnerable women. This objective
was aligned with the CAS strategic objective (iii): “Improve social service delivery to raise human
development indicators”, and CAS Outcome 3.2. “Improved access to health services in targeted areas”.
The project was also relevant to CAS strategic objective (iv) to address fragility and conflicts in the Eastern
provinces, as it targeted GBV survivors in North and South Kivu. The CAS at appraisal did not include any
specific objective to address GBV. Although the DRC CPF for 2021-2026 is still under preparation, the
PDOs are aligned with the priorities identified by the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) that will
inform the strategy. It prioritizes improved access to comprehensive family planning services, good quality
health services and addressing gender inequalities, including GBV, as well as addressing masculinities and
male identities (in particular, in conflict-affected areas). The SCD also recommends addressing the impact
of conflict in the eastern provinces through programs tailored to specific groups (including survivors of
sexual violence).

The objectives were aligned with the WBG country strategies for Rwanda, both at appraisal and
closing. Gender was considered a cross-cutting issue for the Country Partnership Strategy at appraisal
(FY2014-FY2018, then extended until FY2020) and at closing (CPF FY2021-2026), the latter focusing on
human capital investments and policy support for reaping the benefits of the demographic dividend and
increasing women’s economic empowerment. The 2019 Systematic Country Diagnostic identifies “expand
response and prevention services to address GBV in all districts and sectors” as a strategic action for one
of its high-impact priority areas (“building on Rwanda’s success in gender equality”). The corresponding
CPF (FY2021-2026) identifies GBV as one of the areas that need further attention to tackle gender gaps in
Rwanda (para. 31, p. 16).

The objectives were aligned with the former CAS and remain aligned with the current CPF for Burundi. The
PDO was aligned with objective 2.3 of the CAS FY2013- FY 2019 “Improved access to and quality of basic
social services”. The strategy reports that GVB “remains a major obstacle to the achievement of gender
equality.” Furthermore, the PDO is aligned with objective 1.3 of the current CPF (FY2019-FY2023):
“Improve access to quality reproductive, maternal, child health, and nutrition services” and, to some extent,
to the objective 1.1. “Expand social protection and economic inclusion for the poor, women and other
vulnerable groups”.

The PDO was and remains aligned with national policies on gender and GBV in the three countries, as
reported by the PAD Annex 5, in particular: the National Gender Policy (2009) and the National Strategy
against GBV (2009) for DRC; the National Gender Policy 2012-2025 (strategic objective 2) for Burundi;
and, the National Gender Policy 2010 (strategy 6: “Increasing measures to address GBV by tackling the
different influencing factors”); and the National Policy against GBV (2011) in Rwanda. The PDO is also
aligned with governments’ ratification of 1979 CEDAW; endorsement of the 1995 Beijing Platform, and the
Africa UNiTE campaign to end violence against women and girls.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



               The ICR also highlighted the relevance of PDO to the national health policies in Burundi and DRC. In DRC,
               with the Five-Year Health System Development Strategy (2019-2022), which sees PBF as the means to
               achieve Universal Health Coverage. In Burundi, the project is aligned with the National Health Policy (2016-
               2025) and the National Health Development Plan (2019-2023), which have a distinct focus on improving the
               quality of maternal and adolescent health services.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Expand the provision of services to mitigate the short and medium-term impact of sexual and gender-based
                             violence.
                             (Under the Original Outcome Targets)

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                             The ICR (p. 34) noted that the entire premise of the project was to improve the wellbeing of GBV survivors
                             and vulnerable women in one of the most conflict-ridden regions of the world, and that most survivors were
                             women. The ICR presented a broad illustration of the theory of change linking activities directly to outcomes,
                             and noting that project activities to build awareness about GBV and to increase availability of integrated GBV
                             services in communities, health facilities, and at Centers of Excellence would plausibly result in expanded
                             provision of services for survivors, leading to the mitigation of the short and medium-term impact of sexual
                             and gender-based violence.



                             Outputs and intermediate results



                             In DRC:


                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



All 2014 baselines for the following indicators were recorded as zero prior to project contributions.

The project did not achieve any of its original targets for intermediate results under Objective 1 in DRC:

The number of survivors who presented themselves at least once to a SGBV case manager trained by the
project reached 13,014 in 2019, short of the original target of 27,060 survivors.

The number of survivors treated in a health facility was 14,446 in 2019, short of the original target of 20,075
survivors.

The number of beneficiaries receiving specialized mental health care was 1,064 beneficiaries, short of the
original target of 6,975 survivors.

Survivors receiving psychosocial, legal services, and referral to health services at the community level
reached 17,741, short of the original target of 29,660 survivors.

The number of poor and vulnerable women benefitting from economic empowerment activities was 3,991
women in 2019, short of the original target of 13,530 women.

The number of persons benefiting from sensitization and advocacy activities to improve awareness and
knowledge of SGBV, gender equality, and/or reproductive health reached 473,407 persons in 2019, short of
the original target of 1,260,000 people.



In Burundi:

Concerning baselines, the Task Team clarified (7/27/2021) that there was lack of consistency across
countries in the PAD, and that it was unclear what were the initial data sources for baselines. This was a
major reason why the results framework was restructured. Ultimately, beneficiaries were counted in the same
manner in each country for component 1, i.e., those receiving services that were directly financed by the
project.



The number of poor and vulnerable women benefiting from economic empowerment activities increased from
a baseline of 17,000 women in 2014 to 31,326 women, essentially attaining the target of 31,600 women.

The number of survivors receiving medical treatment, psychosocial, forensic, and legal services increased
from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 3,820 survivors in 2019, exceeding the target of 550 survivors.

The number of persons benefiting from sensitization and advocacy activities to improve awareness and
knowledge of SGBV, gender equality and/or reproductive health increased from a baseline of 2,100 in 2014 to
257,759 in 2019, exceeding the target of 9,400 persons.

Reported SGBV cases taken to the prosecutor increased from a baseline of 240 cases in 2014 to 1,458
cases in 2019, exceeding the target of 1,300 cases.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



One-Stop-Centers (OSCs) set up and/or upgraded and staffed as per guidelines increased from zero in 2014
to three in 2019, attaining the target.

The percentage of criminal investigations conducted on SGBV cases using reference from OSCs increased
from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 55% in 2019, exceeding the target of 34%.

Staff involved in SGBV services and trained in relevant areas increased from a baseline of 65 staff in 2014 to
972 staff in 2019, exceeding the target of 320 staff.



In Rwanda:

Sensitization and advocacy activities to promote gender equality that were implemented reached 8 activities,
short of the original target of 39 activities.

The number of survivors receiving medical treatment, psychosocial, and forensic services increased from a
baseline of zero in 2014 to 52,032 survivors in 2019, exceeding the original target of target of 29,400
survivors. 3019 survivors received legal services, and reported cases taken to the prosecutor reached
12,828, exceeding the original target of 7,866 cases.

OSCs set up and/or upgraded and staffed as per guidelines increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 23
OSCs in 2019, exceeding the original target of 17 OSCs.

Staff involved in SGBV services trained in relevant areas reached 1,706 staff, exceeding the target of 230
staff.



Outcomes



According to the ICR (p. 16 and p. 38), all related project activities and results framework indicators focused
on expanding services, and not wider impacts on outcomes for GBV survivors or women. Per Operations
Policy Bank Guidance for ICRs, when the articulation of a PDO statement includes activities/outputs
explained by “to”, then what comes after that usually constitutes the main objective(s) to assess, i.e., the
mitigation of the short and medium-term impact of sexual and gender-based violence. Even if a longer-term
impact beyond the purview of the project was unsuitably included in the PDO statement, then such an
outcome is part of the outcomes that are used to assess and rate efficacy. Nevertheless, the Task Team
(7/27/2021) noted that while the results indicators did not measure impact, the link between the results
tracked by the project indicators and impact is clearly demonstrated in the literature.



In terms of service provision, the percentage of reported cases of SGBV who received emergency kits (PEP)
within 72 hours:



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



- increased in Burundi from a baseline of 30% in 2014 to 39% in 2019, short of the original target of 60%; and

- receded in Rwanda from a baseline of 30% in 2014 to 27% in 2019, and remained short of the original target
of 60%.

- The percentage of eligible cases of SGBV who received emergency kits (PEP) within 72 hours in DRC
increased from a baseline of 25% in 2014 to 71% in 2019, exceeding the target of 50%.



The ICR’s discussion on Post-Exposure Prophylaxis or PEP indicates the importance of both supply side and
demand side aspects for alleviating barriers to seek care. PEP must be started within 72 hours after exposure
to HIV to be effective. The ICR reported that many survivors arrived at a facility after the 72-hour window, due
to various barriers, and were not eligible for treatment (ICR, p.18). Barriers may include distance and travel
time, fear of retaliation, weak penal systems, fear of arresting the perpetrator who is often the main economic
earner in the family, and limited awareness of services available or of survivor rights (ICR, p. 19). Only 20% of
the planned sensitization and advocacy activities were undertaken in Rwanda.



The percentage of reported cases of SGBV who received at least 2 multidisciplinary services as needed
(medical, legal and psychosocial):

- increased In Burundi form a baseline of zero in 2014 to 87% in 2019, exceeding the target of 75%;

- increased in Rwanda from a baseline of 20% in 2014 to 100% in 2018, exceeding the original target of 80%;
and

- increased in DRC from a baseline of 50% in 2014 to 51% in 2019, short of the target of 75%.



Note: The ICR (p. 30) argued that a split rating was not applied because there was no major change to the
project’s scope and targets were revised in both directions to be both more and less ambitious. The argument
is not persuasive, as the guidelines lead us to go through the split rating process and find out if the changes
make a difference in the efficacy ratings. The principle is to ensure that the project demonstrated
accountability for reaching the envisioned level of outcome, without penalizing the project for reasonable
adaptations during implementation. Therefore, evaluation of project performance in the ICR should take into
account performance against both original targets and revised targets.




Rating
Modest




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Expand the provision of services to mitigate the short and medium-term impact of sexual and gender-based
violence.
(Under the Revised Outcome Targets)


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: The same as above, under original Objective 1.



Outputs and intermediate results.



In DRC:

The number of survivors who presented themselves at least once to a SGBV case manager trained by the
project increased to 13,014 in 2019, short of the revised target of 16,193 survivors. As noted above under the
Original Objective 1, 2014 baselines in DRC were recorded as zero prior to project contributions.

The number of survivors treated in a health facility increased to 14,446 in 2019, exceeding the revised target
of 10,000 survivors.

The number of beneficiaries receiving specialized mental health care increased to 1,064 beneficiaries,
exceeding the revised target of 727 survivors.

Survivors receiving psychosocial, legal services, and referral to health services at the community level
reached 17,741 survivors, short of the revised target of 18,538 survivors.

The number of poor and vulnerable women benefitting from economic empowerment activities reached 3,991
women in 2019, short of the revised target of 8,456 women.

The number of persons benefiting from sensitization and advocacy activities to improve awareness and
knowledge of SGBV, gender equality and/or reproductive health reached 473,407 persons in 2019, short of
the revised target of 787,500 people.



In Burundi: The same as under the Original Objective 1, above.



In Rwanda:




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



Sensitization and advocacy activities to promote gender equality that were implemented reached 8 activities,
attaining the revised lower target.

The number of survivors receiving medical treatment, psychosocial, and forensic services increased from a
baseline of zero in 2014 to 52,032 survivors in 2019, exceeding the revised target of 29,600 survivors. 3019
survivors received legal services, and reported cases taken to the prosecutor reached 12,828, essentially
attaining the revised target of 12,866 cases.

OSCs set up and/or upgraded and staffed as per guidelines increased from a baseline of zero in 2014 to 23
OSCs in 2019, exceeding the revised target of 23 OSCs.

Staff involved in SGBV services trained in relevant areas reached 1,706 staff, exceeding the target of 230
staff.

The ICR (p. 19) also noted that the project delivered lifesaving medical services to GBV survivors. Centers of
Excellence in DRC treated complex cases, including 731 women for fistula repair, 1,546 women for uterine
prolapse and 242 women for other gynecological complications.



Outcomes



The percentage of reported cases of SGBV who received emergency kits (PEP) within 72 hours:

      increased in Burundi from a baseline of 30% in 2014 to 39% in 2019, exceeding the revised target of
       35%; and
      receded in Rwanda from a baseline of 30% in 2014 to 27% in 2019, and remained short of the revised
       target of 42%.
      the percentage of eligible cases of SGBV who receive emergency kits (PEP) within 72 hours in DRC
       increased from a baseline of 25% in 2014 to 71% in 2019, exceeding the target of 50%.



The results for reported cases of SGBV receiving at least 2 multidisciplinary services as needed (medical,
legal and psychosocial) are shown above under the original Objective 1.



In view of the results in service provision compared to revised targets, the achievement of this objective is
considered to be marginally substantial under these revised targets.



Revised Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Expand utilization of a package of health interventions targeted to poor and vulnerable females.

Rationale
Theory of change

The theory of change illustrated by the ICR considered that increasing the availability of medicines,
infrastructure, equipment of health facilities along with improvements in the quality of health services would
plausibly expand the utilization of a package of health interventions targeted to poor and vulnerable females.



Outputs and selected intermediate results



For all countries under the project, 453,529 persons received essential health, nutrition, and population
services exceeding the target of 333,737 persons (ICR, p.67).



In DRC, with a budget of US$31.7 million, the project expanded maternal child health services in target zones
through the implementation of a PBF scheme that contracted public and private health facilities (including 26
hospitals and 250 health centers in 13 health zones covering 3.75 million people) and involved the public
health administration and the provincial public purchasing bodies. Payments to contracted facilities were
based on the delivery of a defined quantity and quality of health services. Compliance was verified by a
purchasing agency, a third-party agency, the provincial health directorates, and health administrators.
Contracted facilities used payments to improve infrastructure and equipment (ICR p. 23; ICR Box 2 p.29).



The average availability of essential tracer drugs at health facilities in DRC increased from a baseline of 63%
in 2014 to 87% in 2019, surpassing the target of 80%.



The average quality score at health facilities (per PBF check-list) in DRC was 77% in 2019, short of the target
of 85%.



The percentage of identified poor people benefiting of Equity Fund in DRC reached 43% in 2019, exceeding
the target of 30%; and the annual number of identified poor beneficiaries reached 59,152 in 2019, exceeding
the target of 51,723.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)




In Burundi, the scope and budget of Component 2 were smaller at US$2.3 million, and included training for
health workers, research on the main causes of maternal deaths, upgrading facility equipment, and supplying
facilities with medication in targeted provinces (ICR, p. 24).



The number of youths who benefited from reproductive health services in Burundi reached 23,755 in 2019
surpassing the target of 10,000 persons.



Outcomes

A split evaluation for this objective was not deemed necessary, as it was clear at the outset that it would not
be consequential to the assessment of this objective. For two outcome indicators that had reduced targets,
both of the original and revised targets were not met.



DRC surpassed its PDO targets for utilization of modern contraception, antenatal care and births attended by
skilled health personnel. This achievement as measured by administrative data, was bolstered by a more
rapid increase in trends in targeted health zones than in non-targeted zones, suggesting project contribution
to the observed increase in service utilization for poor and vulnerable females. The difference in difference
model found a significant impact on utilization of modern contraception and antenatal care (12.3% and 18.3%
increases, respectively). The model also found that while the project likely increased utilization of assisted
deliveries, results were not statistically significant.

Note: The results framework for both DRC and Burundi was revised during the fourth project restructuring of
April 24, 2019 because of methodological issues that were identified in the latter period of the project (ICR, p.
14).

                                                     Original Revised
Indicator                            Unit Baseline                    Endline
                                                     Target   Target
Prevalence of modern                       7%
contraceptive use (women between %         (revised 18%         N/A       26%
15-49 years old)                           from 9%)
Annual number of women aged 15-
                                #          38,970    130,343    N/A       194,883
49 who use modern contraception
                                           50%
Percentage of pregnant women               (revised
                                    %               60%         69%       69%
who receive 4 antenatal care visits        from
                                           41%)
Annual number of pregnant women
                                    #      55,302    94,569     N/A       100,001
who receive 4 antenatal care visits


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



                                           47%
Births (deliveries) attended by            (revised
                                      %             84%         N/A       100%
skilled health personnel                   from
                                           74%)
Annual number of births (deliveries)
attended by skilled health           #     52,050     115,860   N/A       155,859
personnel

The ICR noted a rapid decrease in contraception use after PBF ended, likely due to the lack of commodities
(ICR p. 24). This decrease was not observed in antenatal care or institutional deliveries.



In Burundi, results were less positive. The project surpassed its PDO target for births attended by skilled
health personnel, reaching 100% but it did not meet its targets (original or revised) for utilization of antenatal
care and modern contraception. The ICR analysis compared trends in PDO indicators for targeted and non-
targeted provinces and, observed a positive trend across provinces, especially on modern contraceptive use.
Yet, using a difference-in-difference model, the ICR reported no major difference in service utilization
between provinces that received support and those that did not.



                                                      Original Revised
Indicator                         Unit     Baseline                    Endline
                                                      Target Target
                                           34%
Prevalence of modern
                                           (revised
contraceptive use (women          %                 31%         43%        23%
                                           from
between 15-49 years old)
                                           22%)
Annual number of women aged
15-49 who use modern         #             112,558 165,860 N/A             277,266
contraception
Percentage of pregnant women
who receive 4 antenatal care %             36%        64%       51%        44%
visits
Annual number of pregnant
women who receive from 4     #             31,622     52,598    N/A        44,819
antenatal care visits
                                           77%
Percentage of births (deliveries)
                                           (revised
attended by skilled health        %                 89%         N/A        100%
                                           from
personnel
                                           73%)
Annual number of births
(deliveries) attended by skilled #         67,893     92,195    N/A        114,723
health personnel




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 26
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



                              The ICR suggested that the type of incremental support and the amount of funding invested for this objective
                              in Burundi (see above under outputs), when compared to DRC, may not have been sufficient to increase
                              utilization across target provinces (ICR, p. 26).

                              On balance, the achievement of this objective is considered to be marginally substantial.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the first objective, the project sought to expand services to meet the needs of GBV survivors with an
                            integrated support for survivors of GBV and violence prevention in all three countries and to mitigate the short
                            and medium-term impact of sexual and gender-based violence. The project focused on service
                            expansion. Related services were limited before the project, and the project expanded important services to
                            GBV survivors and women such as Post-Exposure Prophylaxis for HIV, multidisciplinary GBV services such
                            as health services for GBV survivors, mental health services for GBV survivors, legal services and economic
                            empowerment activities for women. Under the original outcome targets, the project partly achieved its first
                            objective to expand the provision of services to mitigate the short and medium-term impact of sexual and
                            gender-based violence.

                            The second objective sought to expand utilization of high impact basic health services through a package of
                            health interventions targeted to poor and vulnerable females in two countries, DRC and Burundi, as both
                            countries had acute service delivery gaps and quality deficiencies (ICR, p. 10). The project aimed at
                            strengthening health systems so that vulnerable women could access services they needed. The project
                            almost fully achieved this second objective, but with shortcomings, under the original outcome targets.

                            Under the original outcome targets, the aggregation of achievements across both objectives is consistent with
                            a modest efficacy rating.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Under the revised outcome targets, the project almost fully achieved, with some shortcomings, its two
                            objectives to expand the provision of services to mitigate the short and medium-term impact of sexual and
                            gender-based violence, and to expand utilization of a package of health interventions targeted to poor and
                            vulnerable females.


                                                                                                                              Page 15 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



  Under the revised outcome targets, the aggregation of achievements across both objectives is consistent with
  a substantial efficacy rating.




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
There was no economic analysis at appraisal. The PAD (pp. 24-25) presented generic arguments about a strong
rationale for the public provision of services for survivors of SGBV and vulnerable women, and the economic
rationale for investing in maternal health.

The ICR conducted an economic analysis (ICR, pp. 85-93, Annex 4) and used three measures to show that the
project benefits outweighed its costs: (i) the benefit to cost ratio (BCR -the ratio between the benefits and costs
of the project, expressed in monetary units at discounted present values); (ii) the net present value (NPV -that is,
the sum of the present values of a cash flow stream); and, (iii) the internal rate of return (IRR -the discount rate
that equates the present value of the project’s cash inflow to the present value of its outflow).

As reported in the ICR, and given that the project included several benefits that were hard to quantify, the ICR
analysis was limited to five quantifiable benefits for which the team had some data. These included the number
of: i) deaths adverted due to emergency medical service provision to GBV survivors; ii) HIV infections adverted
due to the administration of PEP within 72 hours; iii) deaths adverted due to increased utilization of antenatal
care; iv) deaths adverted due to increased assisted deliveries; and v) deaths adverted due to increased
utilization of modern contraception (ICR p.46).

The economic analysis was sound and clear in its limitations. This ICRR agrees that it was reasonable to expect
these benefits as a result of project interventions. The assumptions used to calculate the number of deaths
adverted and to monetize them as well as the cost of HIV infections adverted were reasonable and are clearly
spelled out in ICR (e.g., number of productive years of life saved, years living with HIV, annual cost of HIV
treatment). To address the lack of specific data, three scenarios were used considering a low, mid and high
estimate, respectively. A discount rate of 3% was used, and a sensitivity analysis was undertaken using a 5%
discount rate.

Even using low-estimate scenarios, the project benefits outweighed its costs. The Benefit-Cost Ratio (BCR)
ranges from 5.32 for the low estimate, to 6.96 for the high. The project investment of US$95 million generated
economic benefits with a net present value ranging from US$381 million to US$526 million. The internal rate of
return ranged from 8.31 to 11.90 percent.

However, there were significant shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. Delays in implementation
reduced project efficiency. The project had only disbursed one third of its funds one year before it was originally
scheduled to close. Long procurement processes in all countries resulted in delayed activities. This led to
extensions in all countries and for ICGLR. Institutional arrangements were changed twice in DRC, where


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



activities for component 2, including PBF, took 2.5 years to start. In Rwanda the project only started to move at
a suitable pace after the third restructuring when activities were streamlined and funding was better aligned with
government's goals of addressing GBV in hospitals. In Burundi construction contracts were severely delayed,
and only concluded in the final month of project implementation (ICR p. 33). Implementation inefficiencies were
also observed in multi-sectoral coordination in DRC and Burundi (ICR, p. 36), lack of standardized approach
among the five separate country engagements (ICR, p. 37), and overall issues with coordination and lines of
authority (ICR, p. 45).


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              8.31
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated high across the entire project, as the objectives were and remain relevant to
addressing GBV and investing in maternal and reproductive health, and remain fully relevant to country and
Bank strategies at project closing.

Efficiency, also assessed across the entire project, is rated modest in view of significant shortcomings in the
efficiency of implementation.

Efficacy and Outcome



       Under the original outcome targets, efficacy is rated modest, as the objectives were partly achieved. The
        outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory under the original outcome targets.

       Under the revised outcome targets, efficacy is rated substantial, as the objectives were almost fully met.
        The outcome is rated moderately satisfactory under the revised outcome targets.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



According to IEG/OPCS guidelines, when project objectives/associated outcome targets are revised, the final
outcome is determined by the weight of Bank disbursements under each set of objectives/outcome targets (in
this case: 84% under the original outcome targets, and 16% under the revised outcome targets):



      Under the original targets, the outcome is rated moderately unsatisfactory (3) with a weight value of 2.52
       (3 x 84%).

      Under the revised targets, the outcome is rated moderately satisfactory (4) with a weight value of 0.64 (4
       x 16%).



These add up to a value of 3.16 (rounded to 3), corresponding to an overall outcome rating of moderately
unsatisfactory, consistent with significant shortcomings in the operation’s achievement of its objectives and in its
efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several aspects of the project are expected to be sustained over the long term. This includes cross country
collaboration and regional learning supported by ICGLR; pursuing challenging multisectoral work to prevent
the impacts of GBV; the leading work of Centers of Excellence on GBV prevention and response; and the
ability of medical professionals to handle complex GBV cases, supported by training, infrastructure and
equipment procured through the project; as well as CBOs and other community structures that were
strengthened or created through the project, such as the Village Saving and Loans Associations satellites
(ICR p.47).

In addition, as per the ICR, recently approved Bank projects are providing continuous support in DRC and
Rwanda to sustain results. In Eastern DRC, the GBV Prevention and Response Project (P166763 – US$100
million), included lessons from this project in setting up and measuring multisectoral services to survivors;
the Multisectoral Nutrition Project (P168756 – US$492 million) will continue to finance PBF in South Kivu;
and, the Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal Child Health Results (PDSS) will continue to
support PBF in North Kivu. In Burundi, the Health System Support Project (KIRA, P156012 – US$ 50 million)
has incorporated some of the health services covered by the OSCs in each target province.

Yet, the use of government’s own resources to sustain access to services supported by the project is
limited. While in Rwanda OSC services are integrated into the government’s budget, in Burundi OSCs
services are paid through out-of-pocket expenditures. The government’s own resources to sustain PBF in
DRC are limited (ICR p.47).




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



Burundi and DRC remain fragile and the security situation may impact the sustainability of results. Burundi
and DRC are two long-standing FCV countries: they were in the harmonized list of Fragile and Conflict-
Affected States at the time of project appraisal (2013); and they remained there at the time of ICR.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Thorough analysis at appraisal informed project design. The ICR (p. 6) noted the following: “as the WB
  was implementing multiple disarmament, demobilization and reintegration projects in the Great Lakes
  Region [at the time of project appraisal], it became apparent that investments were needed for women
  who had survived decades of violence and conflict”. The PAD in its Annex 5 included a detailed analysis
  of GBV policy and related legal framework in the three focus countries; it also listed relevant interventions
  implemented in the countries at appraisal (PAD pp. 144-150). Annex 6 outlined findings of a review of
  evidence that included over 40 impact evaluations of interventions that provided holistic services to
  survivors of SGBV and prevention services for SGBV (PAD p.151-157). In addition, the project team at
  appraisal had surveyed the work of other multilaterals, international and local NGO, and community-
  based initiatives with whom they could partner with.

  Given a tight timeline for project processing, readiness was incomplete and many activities, such as
  preparing operations manuals, safeguard instruments, and recruiting key staff were postponed to the
  implementation phase, and the launch of most project activities was therefore delayed (ICR, p. 44).

  The project had a complex design, both in terms of its technical components, institutional arrangements
  and results framework. The ICGLR’s role as a regional entity was not added until very late in the
  preparation process when an unexpected regional grant became available. Hence, the true regional
  component of the project was added late in the preparation cycle, after the project had been designed as
  a three-country operation. The political economy between the participating countries made information
  sharing and planning of joint events a challenge (ICR, p. 44).

  There was lack of alignment between the project's ambition of working in three different countries, and
  issues related to the emergency nature of the operation and low institutional capacity in focus countries.
  The project aimed at using complex integrated, multisectoral, systems-strengthening approaches and
  complex institutional arrangements to address GBV and improve women’s health that were in line with
  best practices. As a result, there were many actors in each country, which hindered or prevented
  good coordination of project activities, and, as described in the ICR and restructuring papers, institutional
  arrangements took time to establish and operate given the fragile setting (ICR p.49). The time necessary
  to address social and cultural barriers as well as human and financial resource constraints in fragile
  settings was underestimated. Bank staff acknowledged that "the project experienced greater
  barriers than anticipated in identifying SGBV survivors within communities and linking them to health
  services in Burundi and DRC (Project 4th Restructuring Paper, p.7).

  According to the ICR (p. 35), the project was not a true regional operation. The rationale for the regional
  approach during preparation was to share lessons between countries and implement a shared agenda.

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



  Yet the PAD recognized the vastly different contexts and needs in each country. The project had different
  institutional arrangements, used different activities, and at times different components in each country.
  The results framework did not include regional level indicators, which would have streamlined reporting
  and made assessing the project’s overall performance more straightforward. According to the ICR (p.
  38), the results framework at entry did not sufficiently define project indicators so that they could be
  measured consistently across countries. The ICR also noted that the PDO statement could have been
  simplified to make evaluation of results clearer.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 45), the project had an insufficient supervision budget given that it was a
 multisectoral and multi-country operation implemented in a fragile context. The Task Team established
 efficient ways to conduct supervision and drew on the expertise of an interdisciplinary team, including
 public health specialists, mental health specialists, PBF specialists, and gender specialists. The initial
 changes made by the team through restructurings were related to design, and later changes focused on
 the results framework.

 Internal coordination was an issue. As reported by the ICR, the project did not function as one, but rather
 as five separate country engagements (DRC component 1, DRC component 2, Burundi, Rwanda and
 ICGLR) with separate implementation units and country dialogues. Bank team members had limited
 coordination across countries and between sectors (ICR p.37).

 Nevertheless, the Task Team undertook its supervision efforts in spite of major challenges during
 implementation, including the conflict and the volatile security environment in Burundi that led to the
 suspension of all operating international NGOs in the country in June 2018, affecting not only progress
 related to results for Burundi, but also ICGLR that was based there. The project Mid-Term Review was
 concluded in November 2017, a year before the project was expected to close. Following the Mid-Term
 Review, overall progress improved, including disbursements and coordination. Implementation Status and
 Results Reports were effectively used to monitor project implementation and raise issues and questions to
 management.

 Lessons learnt during implementation were used to inform a new operation in DRC: Gender-Based
 Violence Prevention and Response Project (P166763, approved in August 2018), as reported by the last
 project restructuring (4th Restructuring Paper p.6).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective on health interventions was clearly stated and was reflected by its indicators, while the first
 objective on SGBV was complex and not fully reflected by its indicators. M&E design put a lot of emphasis
 on impact evaluation (IE). Three impact evaluations were planned in collaboration with the WB Gender
 Innovation Lab and a baseline survey originally meant to assess results of PDO 2 in DRC was incorporated
 into the evaluation of the Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal Child Health Results Project or
 PDSS (for its acronym in French Projet du Développement du System de Sante, P147555, US$714.5
 million) (ICR p.38). Greater attention at appraisal on the choice and definition of indicators, especially for
 PDO 1, and the data needed would have facilitated the assessment of project results. There were no
 adequate indicators directly linked to the regional knowledge sharing, research and capacity building. Nor
 were there indicators that captured collective project achievements, despite the regional nature of the
 project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project completed two of the three impact evaluations it had originally planned. The impact
  evaluation in Burundi was cancelled due to the 2015 crisis, which substantially delayed project
  activities. In addition, the end line survey in DRC was not conducted as planned because it was
  integrated into the impact evaluation. The ICR reported that this IE is currently delayed due to COVID-19
  (ICR p.40).

  The expected reporting on the Kampala Declaration indicators did not progress as planned and was
  discontinued with the Mid-Term Review. Achieving this implied a continuous monitoring and collection of
  country level SGBV data that were at the discretion of respective Member States (thus, outside the scope
  of the ICGLR’s mandate and budget). The project team realized after the first monitoring report that a
  regular monitoring on this was outside the ICGLR's control and discontinued the effort during the Mid-
  Term Review.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project contributed to the evidence-base on interventions to prevent and mitigate the effects of GBV.
  Project funds supported the evaluation of two innovative approaches to improve mental health of
  survivors and prevent intimate partner violence. The results of both IEs would undoubtedly be widely
  shared to inform future interventions. Indeed, the Rwanda IE results have already been used by the
  government to decide whether to scale up the Agents of Change Program nationwide.

  Lessons learned from the use of GBV indicators were shared with other Bank teams aiming to improve
  measurement of available services to GBV survivors although it is not clear how they were used to
  improve measurement of project PDOs. However, the Task Team clarified (7/27/2021) that in all

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



  countries, the project invested in improving tracking of GBV indicators. This was done through project
  records, and the Bank and PIU teams invested a substantial amount of time in the final two years of the
  project to improve reporting (verifying data sources, clarifying indicator definitions, and cross-checking
  calculations).

  The mid-term evaluation of PDSS provided useful insights on the plausible impacts of this project; yet it
  is not clear how these results informed project implementation. The PDSS IE was completed in 2018,
  and included three provinces in DRC. The PBF approach used in both projects was the same (see ICR
  Box 2 p.29).



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental category B and triggered two safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) was triggered in all three countries, and OP/BP 4.10 for Indigenous People
   was triggered in DRC. The project was prepared under Emergency Procedures outlined in OP10.00, which
   allowed for deferring preparation of safeguards instruments until project implementation.

   The ICR reported several delays in preparing province-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans in DRC. The ICR
   (p. 42) also noted that one Integrity case was reported in DRC during project implementation and has now
   been closed. The ICR did not provide further information to explain this issue, however, the Task Team
   clarified (7/27/2021) that this was due to confidentiality (the TTLs received a complaint through the GRM; it
   was communicated to INT; and the case was then opened and followed by INT). The project developed
   Environmental and Social Action Plans explaining anticipated impacts, as well as required safeguards
   documents and instruments (ICR p. 42). But the ICR did not explicitly report on compliance with safeguard
   policies, even though the latest safeguards rating was recorded as moderately unsatisfactory in the
   Operations Portal. Per Task Team clarifications (7/27/2021), safeguard policies were followed, but
   implementation of the IPP in DRC was a challenge, resulting in a moderately unsatisfactory rating at the
   end of the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout project implementation, except for two brief
   periods. Long procurement processes in all countries resulted in delayed activities. The ICR was not
   explicit about full compliance with operational policies on financial management, procurement and
   disbursement, nor did it mention qualified or unqualified audits. But the Task Team confirmed (7/27/2021)
   that procurement guidelines were followed throughout implementation, and that all audits were
   unqualified.



                                                                                                   Page 22 of 26
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project was the first IDA operation with a major focus on GBV in fragility, conflict and violence settings.
   It contributed to build evidence on what works, and strengthened the capacity of Bank staff working on this
   topic. The project contributed to expand the evidence-base related to services for GBV survivors. The IE of
   the Narrative Exposure Therapy in DRC was found to be an effective and promising strategy to offer
   mental health services in community settings (ICR Box 1 p.21 and ICR p.48).



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Both ICR and this ICR Review
                                                                                   rated Relevance of Objectives
                                                                                   as high and Efficiency as
                                                                                   modest. The ICR rated efficacy
                                                                                   as substantial across the entire
                                                                                   project, and this ICR Review
                                                                                   undertook a split evaluation
                                                                                   methodology according to
                                                                                   IEG/OPCS guidelines since
                                                                                   associated PDO-level outcome
                                 Moderately            Moderately                  targets were revised. The split
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              evaluation found modest efficacy
                                                                                   under the original outcome
                                                                                   targets and substantial efficacy
                                                                                   under the revised outcome
                                                                                   targets. The aggregation of the
                                                                                   assessment under original and
                                                                                   revised outcome targets
                                                                                   (following the split evaluation
                                                                                   methodology) yields an overall
                                                                                   outcome rating of moderately
                                                                                   unsatisfactory.
                                                                                   There is no actual disagreement
                                                                                   on the sub-ratings of Bank
                                 Moderately            Moderately                  Performance: the ICR rated
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              Quality-at-Entry as modest, and
                                                                                   this ICR Review also rated it as
                                                                                   moderately unsatisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 23 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



                                                                              because of significant
                                                                              shortcomings. The ICR rated the
                                                                              Quality of Supervision as
                                                                              substantial, and this ICR Review
                                                                              also rated it as moderately
                                                                              satisfactory because of
                                                                              moderate shortcomings. The
                                                                              aggregation of the two sub-
                                                                              ratings is consistent with a
                                                                              moderately unsatisfactory rating
                                                                              for overall Bank Performance
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 47-49) offered many lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
restated by IEG:



This project illustrates the importance of making adequate provisions for evaluation when
testing new interventions, even in FCV settings. The project contributed to the evidence-base on
interventions to prevent and mitigate the effects of GBV in low income and fragile settings. Project
funds supported the evaluation of two innovative approaches to improve mental health of survivors
(through NET) and prevent intimate partner violence (through its Agents of Change program that
trained couples). The IE of NET in DRC and the IE of couples' training in Rwanda both showed
promising results that will undoubtedly inform future interventions as already shown by the
government of Rwanda's use of the evidence of the couples' training program to inform the decision
of whether to scale up the intervention nationwide.

Partnering with experienced local NGOs and leveraging existing capabilities achieves greater
results, especially in low income and fragile settings. Centers of Excellence provided
specialized care and comprehensive services to GVB survivors, that were otherwise not available in
DRC Eastern provinces. This effort aimed at complementing and improving existing services. The
specific expertise of Centers of Excellence contributed to train public providers and increased
community outreach, while filling service gaps through, for example, mobile clinics. This strategy
ultimately contributed to increase the quality and availability of GBV specialized services and
reproductive, sexual and maternal health services in public facilities and it was then replicated in
Burundi and Rwanda. While the ICR reported issues in referral systems between Centers of
Excellence and public facilities, the importance of investing in existing NGO's resources and
strengthening links with publicly run facilities in fragile and low-income setting should not be
undervalued, given the limited capacity and resources in those settings.

Working with existing local leaders and community-based organizations enlarges project
outreach. The outreach of the project’s was larger when services were delivered with community-

                                                                                                 Page 24 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



based organizations. The project worked with local leaders to change norms and practices,
decrease stigma around GBV, and raise awareness about available services. The project also
partnered with CBOs to conduct community therapy sessions and deliver services. This approach
helped broaden awareness which resulted in more people searching for individualized services in
DRC and Burundi.

Reducing social and cultural barriers for SGBV survivors to access services takes time and
should be internalized in project ambitions at the design stage. While the project recognized
this issue in its design, it did not fully incorporate it in its PDO and intermediate indicators until very
late in implementation. The greater than anticipated difficulties in identifying SGBV survivors within
communities and linking them to health services observed in Burundi and DRC were noticed after
the Mid-Term Review. Had the reasons for not accessing services been explored earlier, this would
have resulted in more accurate targets and less changes near the end of project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Given that the operation is the first one devoted to gender-based violence, an IEG project visit could shed
  further light on implementation issues and examine the sustainability of the results achieved. Specifically,
  further assessment of the approach and results of this project may be particularly relevant to the forthcoming
  IEG evaluation on Gender in FCV.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a broad overview of the theory of change that linked project activities directly to outcomes
(ICR, p. 7). Some of the evidence issues were related to the project itself and its design, and not to the ICR that
aptly explained them. The ICR offered specific lessons, directly derived from project experience. Lessons
learned, insights, and recommendations are likely to be useful for future operations aiming at responding to
GBV. The ICR had some shortcomings, however. It did not undertake a split evaluation according to guidelines,
even though associated PDO-level outcome targets were revised. The ICR had reporting gaps on fiduciary
compliance and on compliance with safeguards. This ICR Review recognizes the challenge of assessing the
project and its undertakings in three countries, but the ICR could have been more concise. Although it was
largely results-oriented, its storyline was diluted by a lengthy implementation narrative, and unnecessary tables
and figures, resulting in a main text of 49 pages.

In the larger context extending beyond project performance, nonetheless, the ICR acted as a vehicle to convey
important knowledge generated by the project on relevant aspects of gender-based violence in FCV settings.




                                                                                                        Page 25 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Great Lakes Emergency Women's Health Pr (P147489)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                   Page 26 of 26
