     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022579

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P111795                                   NI PFM Modernization TAL

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                 Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-48070,IDA-55790,TF-14059              31-Dec-2015                                          38,353,816.12

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Dec-2010                               31-Aug-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                     3,351,580.26

 Revised Commitment                            38,346,121.83                                     3,346,121.83

 Actual                                        38,353,816.12                                     3,346,121.83




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Daniel Nogueira-Budny      Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original project development objective (PDO) as set out in the Financing Agreement (p. 5) was to
   enhance the efficiency, performance orientation, and transparency of the Recipient’s public expenditures
   management.

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 5) had the same formulation.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



   A revised PDO was introduced in 2014 with Additional Financing (Report No. 90599-NI): to enhance the
   efficiency and transparency of the Recipient’s public expenditure management and strengthen the Recipient’s
   statistics management capacity (p. 4, see also p 5. of the Financing Agreement for the Additional Finance,
   dated 6 November 2014).

   The ICR makes this distinction between the original and revised PDO on p. 7 but erroneously cites the revised
   PDO as the original PDO on p. 1.

   For the purposes of the ICRR, the revised PDO can be broken down into three objectives: to enhance the
   efficiency of the Recipient’s public expenditure management, to enhance the transparency of the Recipient’s
   public expenditure management, and to strengthen the Recipient’s statistics management capacity. What
   follows is an assessment of the project’s achievement of these three objectives including a rating for each.
   (Since the portion of the PDO that was dropped did not witness any significant activities prior to restructuring,
   the ICRR will follow the lead of the ICR and not undertake a split PDO evaluation).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Nov-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Originally, the project had four components:

   Component 1: Strengthening of institutional capacities of the Ministry of Finance (Originally
   US$2.1M, revised to US$4.5M) The objective of this component was to strengthen institutional capacities
   and support the operation of lead entities within the Ministry of Finance and prepare for implementation of a
   new financial management information System. The component had eight sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Enhancing the budgeting system: This sub-component was designed to enhance
   the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit’s (MHCP) budgeting system, through: (i) redefinition of budgeting
   functions; (ii) strengthening of MHCP’s capacity to gather, integrate and consolidate information from
   municipal budgets; and (iii) strengthening of MHCP’s capacity to produce, interpret, and publish fiscal
   statistics.

   Sub-component 1.2 - Strengthening of the accounting system: This sub-component was designed to
   strengthen MHCP’s accounting system, through: (i) redefinition of accounting functions and support of its
   adaptation and implementation; (ii) development of new accounting classifications according to international
   standards and preparation of necessary manuals and guidelines for their dissemination, and provision of
   training; (iii) review and improvement of standards and quality of existing Government financial statements;

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



(iv) and preparation of specifications for Government’s asset management system and registration of
Government assets.

Sub-component 1.3 - Strengthening of the treasury system: This sub-component was designed to
support the strengthening of MHCP’s treasury system, through: (i) redefinition of treasury management
functions and support of its adaptation and implementation; (ii) review and analysis of specifications for
registration and integration of revenue management information into the operations of a single treasury
account for Central Government agencies; (iii) promotion of gradual de-concentration of payment functions
and implementation of a single treasury account in Central Government agencies; and (iv) provision of
training to the MHCP’s treasury office’s personnel in topics related to cash programming, placement, and
administration of debt.

Sub-component 1.4 - Strengthening of the Public Credit Office: This sub-component was designed
to provide technical assistance to strengthen the MHCP’s public credit system to implement and monitor the
Government’s national public debt strategy through: (i) acquisition and adaptation of a new software version
for Government’s debt management system and development of its interface with existing and new
Systems; (ii) provision of technical assistance and training for the implementation of the new software
version; (iii) analysis and evaluation of the existing public debt portfolio and development of an updated
public debt strategy; and (iv) provision of training to personnel in debt management-related topics.

Sub-component 1.5 – Strengthening and integration of the public procurement system: This sub-
component was designed to strengthen and integrate the Government’s procurement system, through: (i)
redefinition of public procurement functions and development of technical specifications for the integration
of the Government’s public procurement system into the new System; (ii) support for initiatives to optimize
procurement practices; and (iii) enhancement of MHCP’s procurement office technical capabilities and the
provision of specialized training.

Sub-component 1.6 – Strengthening of the civil service management unit: This sub-component was
designed to provide support to strengthen MHCP’s civil service system, through: (i) redefinition of human
resource management functions and the development of technical specifications for the integration of the
Government’s civil service information system into the new System, and support for its adaptation and
implementation; (ii) development of cross-checking mechanisms to validate personnel information with other
related databases; (iii) implementation of the post-classification and personnel performance evaluation
modules under Government’s civil service information system; (iv) and training of personnel to operate new
functions of the civil service information system and interface them with the new System.

Sub-component 1.7 – Strengthening of the National Public Investment System: This sub-component
would help strengthen the Government’s National Public Investment System, through: (i) redefinition of the
Government’s national public investment system and the development of technical specifications for
integration into the new System and support for its adaptation and implementation; (ii) design of instruments
and mechanisms to enhance the quality of public investment projects. (iii) design, development, and
implementation of a public investment transparency portal to facilitate broad dissemination and monitoring
of public investment projects; and (iv) updating and dissemination of a specialized training program to
personnel on public investment projects’ preparation, evaluation, and implementation.

Sub-component 1.8 - Strengthening of the internal audit system: This sub-component was designed to
provide support to strengthen MHCP’s internal audit office, through: (i) design and development of internal
auditing manuals and guidelines with specific procedures for the auditing of each System module; (ii)


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



provision of training to MHCP’s internal audit office personnel; and (iii) design and drafting of specifications
for the development of a specialized information system to help perform auditing functions on each of the
automated modules of the new System.



Component 2: Design, acquisition, and development of a renewed Integrated Financial Management
System (SIGAF) (Originally US$5.4M, revised to US$13.1M). The objective of this component was to
modernize the PFM information system by developing a new functional model, which would consolidate and
integrate all the core financial management and administrative processes of the Central Government, with
the possibility to be expanded and implemented by decentralized entities and municipalities. This
component had three sub-components.

Sub-component 2.1 - Acquisition and configuration of the technology architecture and software
applications to support a web-based integrated system: This subcomponent was designed to adapt and
customize the technology architecture and software applications to support the establishment of the New
Software Application, through: (i) preparation of terms of reference and provision of technical support for the
bidding process for the acquisition of Application; (ii) acquisition and configuration of the Application; (iii)
provision of specialized supervision for implementation of Application; (iv) provision of training to MHCP’s
personnel on Application; and (v) preparation of technical documentation for implementation process of
Application.

Sub-component 2.2 - Design and acquisition of technology infrastructure: This subcomponent was
designed to support the design and installation of the technology infrastructure to support the operation of
the New Software Application, through: (i) definition of hardware architecture and development of technical
specifications for required equipment and supporting goods; (ii) acquisition and installation of computer
equipment, telecommunications, security, and other necessary supporting goods and software licenses; (iii)
hiring of specialized technical assistance support for data-base administration and maintenance; (iv)
provision of technical assistance to certify compliance with information security standards; (v) installation
and testing of telecommunication facilities; and (vi) provision of training to MHCP’s personnel on the
management and maintenance of installed hardware and supporting goods.

Sub-component 2.3 – Strengthening of the MHCP’s Technology office: This subcomponent was
designed to strengthen MHCP’s technology office, through: (i) financing of salaries on a declining basis of
specialized civil service personnel in MHCP’s technology office; (ii) provision of general information
technology training to MHCP’s technology office personnel; and (iii) financing of incremental costs
of software licenses and other operating costs for the implementation of existing PFM information system.



Component 3: Implementation of SIGAF and PFM capacity building in Central Government agencies
(Originally US$1.2M, revised to US$5.9M). The objective of this component was to support the installation
and roll-out of the new SIGAF in the Central Government (and eventually in all decentralized agencies and
municipalities depending on resource availability), and capacity building efforts to develop users’ capabilities
to operate the system. This component had two sub-components.

Sub-component 3.1 - Installation and roll-out of the new SIGAF: This subcomponent was designed to
support installation and implementation of the new PFM information system, through: (i) provision of
technical support for installation and implementation of system at MHCP’s central units and at spending

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



units of all Central Government agencies; (ii) preparation of support material for installation, operation and
implementation of system; (iii) review of existing Legal Framework and drafting of amendment proposals
when deemed necessary; and (iv) strengthening of MHCP’s technology office to provide support to users.

Sub-component 3.2 - Development of a permanent training and knowledge management network on
PFM and related public sector administration topics: This subcomponent was designed to develop a
permanent training and knowledge management network on PFM and related public sector administration
topics through: (i) formulation of a knowledge management model and validation with users; (ii) drafting of
necessary guidelines and specific procedures for knowledge management network to be established and
operational; (iii) provision of training to MHCP’s central units personnel and other spending units’personnel
in the Central Government; (iv) carrying out of surveys and establishment of focus groups to gather
information and feedback from users; and (v) implementation of a permanent dissemination program of
good practices and information sharing among users.



Component 4: Project Management (Originally US$1.2M, revised to US$3.0M). The objective of this
component was to provide support to the MHCP to oversee and administer the implementation of the
project including the Bank’s funding as well as the co-financing funds.



Significant Changes During Implementation

A Level 1 restructuring (P150743) was approved on November 7, 2014 (Report No: 90599-NI), bringing in
an additional US$25 million in credit to the project, revising the PDO and key indicators, and introducing a
fifth component. Several restructurings (nine in total) led to significant reallocations between disbursement
categories and changes in loan closing dates. The ICR erroneously notes that this restructuring—the only
one that changed components and costs—took place in 2017.



The following changes to existing components occurred during the restructuring in 2014:

Component 1. A new Subcomponent 1.8 was added—Strengthening capacities of the College of Public
Accountants of Nicaragua (the national association of accountants and auditors, CCPN)—as activities in the
previous subcomponent to strengthen the internal audit system were completed with the development of
internal auditing manuals. This new sub-component was designed to assist the CCPN in designing and
implementing a self-sustainable training system for professional accountants to obtain the skills needed to
support implementation of international accounting and auditing standards.

Component 2. Under this Component, additional support was provided to Subcomponents 2.1, 2.2, and
2.3. The estimated cost of activities under Component 2 was US$10.70 million. Subcomponent 2.1 focused
on the configuration of the SIGAF, preparing it to be deployed in 2017. Subcomponent 2.2 focused on
strengthening communication security, both concerning information managed internally within the MHCP
and that which is published externally through MHCP channels. This activity also supported improving
incident monitoring, analysis of vulnerabilities to better prevent security breaches, effective follow-up, and
providing prompt solutions. To guarantee the continuity of financial operations in case of a natural disaster


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



  or similar events, Subcomponent 2.2 included the construction of a contingency site for the SIGAF
  Datacenter.

  Component 3. Under this Component, additional support was provided to support the new SIGAF and
  promote its use throughout the public administration. TA was provided not only on the application of the
  system but also on the integrated administrative processes and procedures, support for pilot tests, and the
  operational acceptance stage. Assistance under this Subcomponent also included support for strengthening
  subnational PFM capacity through assessments and analytical activities in view of a future expansion of the
  PFM reform. The estimated amount for these activities under Component 3 was US$2.20 million.

  Component 4. The implementation of the additional financing required continued support to the MHCP to
  oversee and administer the Project. The estimated amount for these activities to be executed under
  Component 4 was US$1.20 million.



  The following component was added during the restructuring in 2014.

  Component 5: Enhancing Statistics Management Capacity (Originally US$0.0M, revised to US$8.5M)
  Recognizing the role that reliable data plays in a results-oriented PFM system, the Government of
  Nicaragua (GoN) requested support to modernize the capacity of the National Institute of Development
  Information of Nicaragua (INIDE). The impending 2017 National Census of Population and Housing
  motivated the GoN to strengthen the national statistics capacity beyond the census. As such, this
  Component was designed to strengthen INIDE through the implementation of activities critical for the pre-
  census phase as well as other recurrent statistical operations. Specifically, assistance included support for
  the design and implementation of a digital Multi-Purpose Cartography. This Component also sought to
  develop INIDE’s capacity to edit and update the cartography periodically. Support also included the
  acquisition of the technological infrastructure to carry out the census and other periodic surveys through
  electronic methods as well as TA to build the capacity to utilize this technology for data collection. Mobile
  Capture Devices (MCD) were acquired for the fieldwork as well as software and applications necessary for
  the collection, monitoring, storage and processing of census data. The estimated cost for these activities
  was US$8.9 million.



  The following changes were made to the results framework

  PDO Indicators 3 and 5 were dropped. PDO Indicator 2 was modified (from “Public access to key fiscal
  information,” to, “Timely disclosure of key fiscal/budget documents compared to PEFA requirements) and
  PDO Indicator 4 included an additional clause (“Average processing time for the preparation and issuance
  of financial statements of the Central Government after the closing of the fiscal year”). An additional PDO
  Indicator was added (“Capacity to carry out statistical data collection is strengthened”).

  Additionally, eight intermediate indicators were revised and eleven dropped.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



   Project cost. At appraisal, the total cost of the project was estimated at US$22.4 million. Additional
   Financing of US$25.0 million was added in July 2014. The actual project cost at closing was US$50.6
   million (ICR, p 2), of which Bank-administrated funds comprised US$35M from IDA and US$3.4M from the
   European Commission.

   Financing. The project was initially financed by a US$10.0 million IDA Credit and a recipient-executed trust
   fund of €3.0 million from the European Union (TF071843), although this was €2 million at the time of
   appraisal (as per the PAD). The project also included parallel co-financing of US$10 million from the Inter-
   American Development Bank (IADB) and US$2.7M in Government co-financing. Additional Financing from
   the World Bank in the form of a US$25.0 million IDA Credit was approved on July 8, 2014.

   Borrower contribution. The task team reported that, according to Government reports, the borrower
   contribution was US$2.7 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on 10 December 2010 and became effective on 6 May 2011. The original
   Closing Date was 31 December 2015. The project’s closing date was pushed back several times, first to 31
   December 2017 (as part of the Additional Financing) then to 31 December 2018, then to 30 November
   2019, then to 30 June 2020, then to 31 August 2020. In total, the project was extended for 24 months to
   accommodate the Additional Financing, and then an additional 32 months to allow for finalization of all
   activities and full disbursement of funds (much of which was to account for the high degree of political
   unrest that has gripped the country since 2018, and some of which was due to COVID-19 related delays).
   On 31 August 2020 the project was closed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Both the original and revised PDOs were relevant to the country’s development priorities as described in
the CPF and Nicaragua’s need for modernized PFM systems and processes. However, they were
unrealistically ambitious and complex given country capacity requiring the design and implementation
of new IFMIS with 8 systems within a 5-year period.

Both the original and revised PDOs were relevant to the Government’s priorities, building on PFM reforms
supported jointly by the Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank from 1996-2010 including a
modern legal framework (Law 550), fiscal policy capacity, and a medium-term budget framework. The
original PDO supported the implementation of the Government’s comprehensive PFM modernization plan
2008-2012, in which upgrading and a full roll-out of the SIGFA were prominent. The revised PDO, which
was amended to reflect the Additional Finance support to INIDE and strengthen the capacity of public
sector accountants and auditors in partnership with CCPN, was aligned with the Government’s priorities as
outlined in the National Human Development Plan (2018-2021): the prudent management of public
finances, central government, decentralized entities, and state-owned enterprises, as well as improved
effectiveness, efficiency, and quality of public spending. The addition of the objective around strengthening
the Recipient’s statistics management capacity was a direct response to the Government’s request for
support in preparation for the National Census of Population and Housing.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



Both the original and revised PDOs were relevant to the Bank’s strategy for Nicaragua. The original PDO
was aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy for the period FY08-12 (Report No.
39637-Ni), whose fourth pillar aimed at strengthening governance and accountability through modernization
and professionalization of state institutions and the promotion of citizen engagement. The revised PDO was
aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for FY18-22, whose Objective 7 (Improved
Data Availability and Public Sector Management Capacity), focused on improving the availability of public
sector data and building the capacity of the Government to facilitate the effective allocation of public
resources.



Status of PDO Indicators

  PDO Indicator           Baseline                   Actual    End Target    Status
  Fiscal and budgetary
  projections analyzed
  under a multi-annual
  perspective, are linked B                          B+*       B+*           Achieved
  to budget and
  expenditure policies
  (PEFA, ID12).
  Timely disclosure of
  key fiscal/budget
                                                                             Partially
  documents compared B                               B*        B*
                                                                             Achieved
  to PEFA requirements
  (PEFA, ID10)
  Average processing
  time for the
  preparation and
                                                                             Not
  issuance of financial 6.0                          4.0       3.0
                                                                             Achieved
  statements of the
  Central Government
  after the fiscal year.
                                                                Updated
                                                                cartography
  Capacity to carry out                                         with national
                                        Country's Digital
  statistical data                                              coverage
                                        cartography cartography                Achieved
  collection is                                                 used in at
                                        is outdated finalized
  strengthened.                                                 least one data
                                                                collection
                                                                operation.



* Since a second PEFA never took place, the ICR assessed progress using proxy indicators


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                               Page 8 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To enhance the efficiency of the Recipient’s public expenditure management

                Rationale
                Enhanced efficiency of public expenditure management was to be achieved by modernizing the country’s
                IFMIS and other PFM systems and processes, which would allow for single data entry, a reduction in
                transactions, and increased accuracy and quality of financial data.

                Two of Objective 1’s three PDO indicators relied upon PEFA indicators, where baselines and end targets
                were only available 6 years after project approval and second ratings (to allow for an assessment of change
                over time) never took place, so actual ratings at project completion are unknown. The ICR analyzed proxy
                indicators to assess the project’s achievement of objectives: an intermediate indicator on the number of
                central government agencies using the multi-year and results-based budgeting methodologies, and the fact
                that a treasury single account was fully implemented, central government debt is now recorded automatically,
                and SIGAF functionality across central government and decentralized entities). PDO Indicator 3 was not
                achieved.

                Enhanced efficiency was to be achieved by strengthening institutional capacities of the Ministry of Finance,
                including development and implementation of a new IFMIS (SIGAF) and strengthening of its budgeting,
                accounting, treasury, public credit, public procurement, civil service management, public investment, and
                internal audit systems as provided for under Law 550.

                Outputs

                      While the time lag to publish monthly budget execution information online decreased, SIGAF is still
                       unable to regularly produce monthly and ad hoc reports without substantive manual corrections
                       according to the assessment conducted for the ICR. In response to IEG’s question, the Director
                       General for Technology, Ministry of Finance, indicated and provided proof to the task team that, as of
                       1 September 2021, SIGAF is able to produce quarterly and annual reports on budget execution to the
                       National Assembly without manual correction.
                      All Central Government's payments to vendors, public entities and personnel of Central Government
                       payroll are processed electronically according to Treasury Single Account (TSA) procedures
                      Six of the planned seven SIGAF systems (Accounting, Budget, Procurement, Public Credit, Public
                       Investment, and Treasury are operational at an over 90 percent rate of satisfaction, although several
                       defects were reported in the ICR and several system modifications are pending.
                      100% of staff from MHCP units satisfactorily completed training to operate and maintain SIGAF.


                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)




      A Contingency Data Center up to international standards was implemented. This facilitates SIGAF’s
       business continuity in the event of a failure of the main data center.
      SIGAF was successfully implemented in 23 central government and 18 decentralized functional
       entities at the time of the ICR’s writing (18 March 2021). At time of ICRR, the task team verified with
       the Ministry of Finance that the number of decentralized functional entities using SIGAF has increased
       to 46, and that seven decentralized entities—i.e., councils, special funds, but also the Mayoralty of
       Managua—are now using SIGAF as well.

Outcomes

Determining whether the first PDO indicator was achieved—i.e., whether fiscal and budgetary projections are
linked to budget and expenditure policies—is not feasible, due to the lack of comparative scores from the
PEFA assessment. The ICR used an intermediate indicator--the number of Central Government agencies
using the multi-year and results-based budgeting methodologies--which increased from 45 to 60 (100 percent
of all Central Government agencies). This is a reasonable output-level proxy to gauge the targeted outcome.
Furthermore, the ICR notes (pp 9-10) that the project supported the operationalization of a business
intelligence portal to facilitate budget analysis and produce statistical data for risk management as well as to
support budget preparation and execution.

Likewise, it is not possible to validate whether the second PDO indicator was achieved i.e., timely disclosure
of key fiscal/budget documents compared to PEFA recommendations. That being said, the project did
succeed in upgrading SIGAF onto a web-based platform, the consolidation of budget execution reports and
financial statements produced in a manner consistent with IPSAS (as well as the IMF Government Finance
Statistics Manual, GFSM 2012, and the national legal framework), and full implementation of the TSA, the
interfacing of GoN’s Debt Management and Financial Analysis System (SIGADE) with SIGAF to allow for
automatic recording of foreign and domestic public debt. To ensure uniformity in the online publication of all
Government procurement processes (i.e., not only those entities using SIGAF but for every government
entity), SIGAF uses the preexisting Public Procurement Information System and its website
(www.nicaraguacompra.gob.ni) to publish its procurement processes.

The project was unable to improve processing time for the preparation and issuance of financial statements of
the Central Government. FY18 financial statements took 18 months to be published, while FY19 financial
statements took 9 months. The ICR considers these delays to be growing pains in using SIGAF to produce
the statements; work to address the SIGAF accounting inconsistencies behind these delays have been fixed,
according to the task team, meaning that FY20 statements should be published within the recommended
timeframe following the close of financial year.

Summary: significant achievements were made to improving PFM efficiency, particularly in the launching of
the country’s new IFMIS and the upgrading of public sector accounting through mainstreaming international
accounting standards, revising budget classifications, developing a unified chart of accounts, reviewing
reporting standards, and broadening the TSA. That being said, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that
the project achieved most of the targeted outcomes



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the transparency of the Recipient’s public expenditure management

Rationale
Enhanced transparency was to be achieved by modernizing the country’s IFMIS and other PFM systems and
processes (particularly accounting and budgeting).

As was the case for Objective 1, one of Objective 2’s two PDO indicators relied upon PEFA indicators, where
baselines and end targets were only available 6 years after project approval and second ratings (to allow for
an assessment of change over time) never took place, so actual ratings at project start and completion are
unknown. The second PDO indicator (Average processing time for the preparation and issuance of financial
statements of the Central Government after the fiscal year) was not achieved.



Outputs

      Several outputs were achieved. First, Central Government financial statements are presented
       according to an accounting plan consistent with the 2012 IMF Manual for Government Financial
       Statistics Standards and applicable legal framework through SIGAF. Second, staff from all MHCP
       units satisfactorily completed the training to operate and maintain SIGAF. Third, there is improved
       transparency from SIGAF implementation as outlined above.
      The project also supported partial achievement in two areas. First, 90 percent of staff were trained
       using the online training platform designed for the first training course on International Public Sector
       Accounting Standards (IPSAS); however, IPSAS are not currently being used and no adjustments
       have been introduced to adopt them in the near future. Second, six SIGAF systems (The payroll
       system was dropped in 2020) were operating at an over 90 percent rate of satisfaction. The remaining
       issues are expected to be resolved by a work plan being developed by the vendor and GoN to correct
       remaining defects, performance improvement and implementation of system modifications.

Outcomes

It was impossible to measure improved transparency in GoN’s public expenditure management based on one
of two relevant PDO indicators, given the absence of PEFA assessments. As a proxy, the ICR uses the
transparency portion of the Open Budget Index to gauge progress. The transparency score for Nicaragua did
increase, from 37 in 2010 to 41 in 2019, although this is down from a high of 46 in 2015. The ICR noted
progress in publishing key fiscal documents online, including budget documents on the MoF’s website
(www.hacienda.gob.ni), procurement documents (www.nicaraguacompra.gob.ni), and a forthcoming website
for public consultation.

Bringing the average processing time for the preparation and issuance of financial statements of the Central
Government after the fiscal year from 6 to 3 months (the second PDO indicator) was not achieved. Instead,
average time increased to 8 or 9 months (the ICR mentions both amounts of time). According to the ICR,
these delays were caused by “accounting inconsistencies generated by SIGAF that had to be painstakingly



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



and manually corrected by MHCP,” and these are being addressed. The ICR indicates that there is an
expectation that end-of-FY20 statements will be published within the three months target.

Summary: project measures to improve the transparency of the Recipient’s public expenditure management
were not successful overall. While some tangible achievements were recorded, one PDO indicator was not
achieved and the second could not be verified due to lack of indicator data.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the Recipient’s statistics management capacity

Rationale
Strengthened statistics management capacity was to be achieved by modernizing and strengthening INIDE
through the design and implementation of a digital, multi-purpose cartography and electronic data collection.

This PDO indicator (Capacity to carry out statistical data collection is strengthened) was achieved.

Outputs

      All 153 of Nicaragua’s municipalities had an updated cartographic framework for statistical operations.
       This means that 100 percent of municipalities have the operational technology infrastructure to carry
       out periodic surveys as well as the software and applications necessary to collect, monitor, store, and
       process census data.
      A system of electronic data collection and processing was successfully developed and piloted.

Outcomes

The project’s strengthening of GoN’s statistics management capacity was meant to ensure that INDIDE could
carry out the National Census of Population and Housing in 2017, as well as future surveys, using electronic
methods. The PDO indicator was achieved: “The digital tools developed under this component (notably digital
multi-purpose cartography) were successfully tested during pilot population and housing censuses in the
municipality of Jalapa, Nueva Segovia in 2017 and the municipality of Somontillo, Chinandega in 2018. The
tools were also used to carry out the national survey for children and adolescents covering 20,000
households (ICR, pp 17-18). The ICR notes that due to civil unrest that began in 2018 (a year after the
Census was supposed to take place), the Government was forced to postpone the Census to 2022. As such,
the Government may very well have to update the cartography again by then. Nevertheless, the digital tools
and capacity developed by the project were successfully used to carry out the National Survey for Children
and Adolescents.

Summary: The measures introduced to modernize and strengthen GoN’s statistical capacity were
successfully implemented. Both output targets and the PDO indicator were met.


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the data indicate improvements in key outputs and outcomes, the project fell short of achieving key
                            indicators. This was exacerbated by the inability of measuring several outcome indicators, due to the project’s
                            reliance upon PEFA indicators and the absence of a repeat PEFA to establish change over time. Regardless,
                            several investments and reforms introduced (and defined as outputs in the evaluation) supported the
                            achievement of progress in the PDOs and generated concrete improvements in PFM, albeit in several
                            instances falling short of project targets and expectations.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   There was no formal economic cost-benefit analysis prepared either at the time of appraisal or in the context of
   the 2014 Additional Financing. The PAD simply referred to likely positive fiscal impacts resulting in economic
   gains but without any attempt to quantify or link these improvements to specific project activities or targets.
   Annex 4 of the ICR (pp 44-47) presents a summary of the principal achievements of this project and two
   interrelated World Bank projects for Nicaragua, compared to the situation at appraisal; however, it does not
   provide sufficient information to allow for an assessment of cost-benefit analysis.

   Assessments of project benefits were largely qualitative. The majority of the project’s interventions involved
   activities geared at increasing the efficiency of core government processes, including the use of budget
   resources (including expenditure, procurement, and debt management). Project interventions may have led to
   improvements in public sector efficiency in that public servants spend less time manually inputting data and
   automated functions reduce human error and room for corrupt practices.

   While one could make the argument that the extension was 32 months—since the original 24-month extension
   was to accommodate Additional Financing—in actually, the project incurred a cumulative extension of 56
   months: the project’s duration was almost doubled. This extension is a sign of inefficiency on the part of the
   Bank, even if PFM reforms are notoriously time-consuming.


   Efficiency Rating
          Modest


                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was rated Substantial, as original and revised objectives were aligned with both
government and Bank priorities for the country, although the timeline was overly ambitious for the country
context. The overall efficacy was rated Modest (with Negligible for one PDO, modest for one, and Substantial
for one). The efficiency was rated Modest.

Based on those ratings, the project’s outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to Development Outcome is low. Risks were reviewed throughout the life of the extended project.
The ICR rightly notes the lack of stakeholder (MHCP) technical capacity as one of the highest risks to the
achievement of project objectives. Nevertheless, achievements are increasingly sustainable as system kinks
are worked out and the usage of a fully operational SIGAF is institutionalized.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the project was designed to support the Government’s PFM reform program, and while it did
  provide substantial technical assistance that allowed for significant achievements in the area of PFM, its
  design was unrealistically ambitious and set the Government up to fail given the timelines presented.
  Additional Financing to accommodate newly important activities allowed for an additional 24 months of
  implementation time. The project also suffered from deficiencies in the results framework, with PEFA
  indcators non-existent for both baselines and target dates. There was also failure to explain

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



  comprehensively to the Government the benefits and trade-offs of reliance on commercial off-the-shelf
  (COTS) software. The ICR notes, “the Government’s limited understanding of the functionality of the
  [COTS IFMIS] system that they were acquiring. A 2011 IT report commissioned by the project identified
  potential problems with the selection of a COTS solution: there was no functional analysis of the COTS
  supplied by the market; the decision to use a COTS was not properly analyzed and justified; technical
  bidding documents did not accurately describe all the Government’s needs; there was no proper
  assessment of the vendor’s capabilities; and the vendor committed to more than was feasible, under the
  proposed costs. The project financed study trips to visit the implementation of in-house developments of
  customized solutions. There were no study trips to look at the experience with COTS” (p 18).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 While supervision remained consistent throughout project implementation and coordination with the IADB
 was notable, the Bank team did not adequately identify implementation challenges early on, preventing
 them from designing proactive interventions to keep the project on track, particularly around the SIGAF.
 Given early delays and challenges, the project’s ratings should have been revised downwards significantly
 earlier than July 2016, two years after the Additional Financing and restructuring



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Results indicators were drawn from the PEFA. This is problematic for several reasons. First, PEFA
 indicators used were composite measures, with the PEFA scores used broader than the specific outcomes
 that project activities were intended to impact.

 Also, many of the PEFA indicators used did not have baseline data or targets. The PAD noted that baseline
 and end-target values would be set once the forthcoming PEFA (planned for 2010) took place. That
 assessment was only completed in August 2015 (using 2013) data, and then only made public in 2019.
 This means that several PDO indicators had neither baseline nor annual targets until August 2015, which
 was just four months before the original closing date. Furthermore, as no second PEFA was undertaken
 during the project, there are no formal values for indicators drawn from the PEFA (the ICR Results
 Framework lists PEFA baseline scores from a “2013 PEFA” and project-end values from a “2015 PEFA,”


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



 whereas, in actuality, those later scores were developed by the ICR team to be able to measure change
 over time).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Additional Financing and restructuring, following the 2014 Mid-Term Review, led to improved PDO
  and intermediate indicators. As noted in the ICR (p 18), the revised M&E framework was significantly
  streamlined. However, during the project Mid-Term Review, in 2014, PEFA indicators were retained,
  even though baseline data did not exist.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data is meant to help identify areas in need of intervention. However, given the complications with
  the original PDO and intermediate indicators noted above, the need for corrective action may not have
  been as readily noticeable as it would have been otherwise.

  It should be noted that the ICR mentions one impact of this project as improving the culture of M&E
  within the Government. If true, this is a significant outcome that should be documented and replicated
  elsewhere, even if it cannot be captured by the project’s results framework.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project’s environmental and social assessment categories were rated a “C” technical assistance project
   providing soft reforms in PFM. No environmental safeguard policies were triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The ICR (pp. 20-21) notes that the project had satisfactory financial management
   performance. It also mentions temporary issues related to errors and inconsistencies with the project’s
   financial system SIGFAPRO: the government’s system for managing development cooperation
   expenditure. However, those issues did not harm the timeliness or reliability of FM reports production or
   otherwise FM management and monitoring. Quarterly interim unaudited financial reports and annual
   audited financial statements were timely and submitted to the World Bank in acceptable form and
   substance.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



   Procurement was conducted in accordance with World Bank rules and procedures and was overall timely
   (ICR, p. 21).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None were noted.



d. Other
   None were noted.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 IEG notes the unrealistically
                                                                                 ambitious design, deficiencies in
                                                                                 the results framework, and
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Unsatisfactory              failure to fully explain software
                               Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 options to the client. Supervision
                                                                                 during implementation was
                                                                                 better than at entry.
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The design called for procurement of a customized off-the-shelf IFMIS system, its deployment,
training of staff, and implementation of 8 systems within a 5-year-period. This was unrealistically
ambitious given the country capacity and not in line with the Bank's PFM modernization experience
elsewhere; in fact, the IFMIS diagnostic report from 2010 by an independent international expert
(referenced in the ICR) concluded that “the SIGAF project is the most ambitious IT project ever
started in Nicaragua and, as such, is riskiest due to its complexity, size, and management”
(Cornelius Hopmann 2010. “Alternativas para la Estrategia de Desarrollo y las Modalidades de
Contratación – SIGAF” p 3).

IEG supports lessons from the ICR on the need for realistic timelines, reform sequencing, and risk
assessments. IEG adapts lessons from the ICR as follows:



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NI PFM Modernization TAL (P111795)



The results framework and supervision of PFM projects should focus on the systems and reforms
supported by the project. At the design stage, the two PEFA linked PDO indicators were overly
aggregated and did not have baselines or targets. Use of PEFA indicators should be taken only
when baseline data exists and when there are adequate assurances that a second assessment will
be undertaken at an appropriate time to assess impact.

The Bank should focus holistically on PFM reforms needed to achieve intended results, not just
systems. ISRs reveal that the Bank team focused primarily on the execution of the main contract
(SIGAF) and did not discuss in much detail progress towards achieving other PFM reforms
supported by the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR developed theories of change for the original and restructured projects and makes a good attempt to
gauge the achievement of project objectives using proxy indicators, given the challenges mentioned above with
those indicators using PEFA scores. Some minor errors over project iterations were noted in the ICR. IEG
complements the task team for their timely and comprehensive responses to its questions and concerns,
including the provision of critical additional documents requested for the ICRR.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
