     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022647

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P126504                                    Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Samoa                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-13579                                   31-Aug-2018                                         14,800,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2012                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           14,800,000.00                                    14,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            14,800,000.00                                    14,800,000.00

 Actual                                        14,800,000.00                                    14,800,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Grant Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) were to:

   (i) improve the climate resilience of the West Coast Road; and (ii) enhance local capacity to develop a
   more climate resilient road network".



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Feb-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 5 to 7).

   1. Improving the Climate Resilience of the West Coast Road (WCR). The estimated cost at appraisal
   was US$15.4 million; actual cost is not available. The ICR (page 36) noted that actual cost of components
   was pending when this ICR was being finalized. The project team was unable to provide the actual cost
   data. The team informed IEG that they had requested the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the Land
   Transport Authority (LTA) to provide the actual cost of components several times. However, the information
   has not been provided to date.

   This component aimed to improve the climate resilience of the WCR. Activities in this component were: (i)
   raising the most vulnerable sections of the WCR (about 26 kilometers (km)), sealing road shoulders,
   improving longitudinal and cross drainage and adding road safety features; and (ii) technical assistance
   (TA) for design and supervision.

   The original target was reduced from 26 km to 23 km in December 2014, as the remaining 3 km were
   covered under an ongoing Bank-funded "Enhanced Road Access" Project. The target was reduced from 23
   to 12.5 km through the project restructuring (discussed below). Further, the Government's decision in
   November 2019 to change the WCR surfacing from chip seal to asphalt, increased the design and
   supervision costs. This resulted in further reducing the target from 12.5 km to 10.64 km.

   2. Vulnerability Assessment of the Samoa Road Network. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.7
   million; actual cost is not available. This component financed technical assistance (TA) activities
   for addressing climate change factors in the sector. Activities in this component included: (i) assessing the
   climate change vulnerability of the road network using the Pacific Climate Change and Catastrophe risk
   assessment; and (ii) preparing a climate resilience/adaptation strategy.

   3. Project Management and Operating Costs. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$0.8 million; actual
   cost is not available. This component planned to provide project management support
   in fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



   Project cost. The actual project cost was US$17.0 million, as planned.

   Project financing. The project was financed by the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) grant of
   US$14.8 million. This amount was disbursed.

   Recipient contribution. The recipient contribution was estimated at US$2.2 million. The team clarified that
   recipient contribution was as planned and counterpart funds were used to cover the cost of taxes on works,
   goods and services.

   Dates. The project approved on December 18, 2012, became effective on April 26, 2013, and was
   scheduled to close on August 31, 2018. The project closed 28 months behind schedule on December 31,
   2020.

   Other changes. There were two Level 2 restructurings.

   The main changes made through the first project restructuring on February 7, 2018, are as follows:

         The project scope was reduced, with the target for road works eventually reduced from 23 km to
          10.64 km. The plan originally aimed at improving the climate resilience of 23 km of the
          WCR through interventions ranging from minor improvements to comprehensive rehabilitation, which
          differed over the length of the road. However, the Government decided that their needs would be
          best met through rehabilitating the entire WCR road (including through increasing the climate
          resilience design standard and raising minimum elevation of the road from 2 meters (m) to 2.24
          m that accounted for potential sea level risk. Upgrading the project scope increased costs that were
          not feasible with the grant. Hence the original targets were scaled down from 23 km to 12.5 km.
          Further, the government's decision in November 2019 to change the WCR surfacing from chip seal
          to asphalt further increased design and supervision costs. This resulted in further reducing the
          length of roads to be rehabilitated from 12.5 km to 10.64 km.
         The results framework was revised given the reduced scope of the project.
         The closing date was extended by 22 months from August 31, 2018 to June 30, 2020, for completing
          the activities that were delayed due to factors such as, difficulties of undertaking cadastral survey of
          land boundaries, and decision to upgrade the climate resilience design standard.

   Through the second restructuring on May 5, 2020, the closing date was extended by six months from
   June 30, 2020, to December 31, 2020, for completing the activities affected by the restrictions due to the
   COVID-19 pandemic.

   Split rating. Although the PDOs were unchanged, the project scope reduced while funding remained the
   same. This review is based on a split rating of objectives, when 12% (US$1.8 million) was disbursed
   before restructuring, and the balance 88% (US$13 million) disbursed after restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



Country context. Samoa, a small remote Pacific Island State, is vulnerable to natural disasters and climate
change factors. Extreme weather and climatic events had caused severe damage to infrastructure and
other economic assets in the past. Tropical cyclones and associated heavy rains are moreover expected to
be intense in future, as 80% of the Samoa coastline is rated as sensitive to erosion, flooding and landslips.

Sector context. The Samoan road network faces a range of vulnerability issues such as: (i) coastal
exposure to sea level rise during cyclones; (ii) inland flooding and landslips during extreme rainfall events,
and damages from earthquakes; and (iii) pavement deterioration due to rising water levels in some
locations. The WCR, the primary artery on the main island of Upolu (one of the two large islands of Samoa),
is a vital link connecting Samoa's capital city - Apia to the port and the airport, the Mulifana inter-island ferry
wharf (the main gateway to Samoa's second island, Savai'i ), and communities along the north-west coast.
Given that over 50% of Samoa's population and its industries are located along the WCR corridor,
maintaining the WCR to climate resilient standards was critical for Samoa's economic development.

Government strategy. Samoa was the first country in the pilot program for climate change to have
endorsed the strategic program for climate resilience. The Government's Strategy for Development of
Samoa 2016 -2017 to 2019 -2020 identified key outcomes in four priority areas: economic, social,
infrastructure, and the environment. The outcome 10 of the strategy articulated the need for "Efficient, Safe
and Sustainable Transport Systems and Networks", and key outcome 14 highlighted the need for "Climate
and Disaster Resilience". These goals were reiterated in the Samoa Transport Sector Plan for 2014 - 2019.
The PDOs were relevant to the Samoa Land Transport Authority's (LTA) Corporate Plan for 2017 -
2020. The second goal of this plan highlighted the need for "improving and sustaining the road transport
network".

Bank strategy. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank strategy. At appraisal, the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for 2012 - 2016 identified strengthening resilience against natural disaster and climate
change, as a priority. The PDOs were well-aligned with the Bank's Regional Partnership Framework (RPF)
for 2017 - 2021 for nine Pacific Island Countries, including Samoa. The third focus area of the
RPF specifically highlighted the need for strengthening preparedness and resilience to natural disasters
and climate change, and the fourth focus area highlighted the need for increasing access to basic services
and improving connective infrastructure.

Prior Bank experience. The Bank has a long history of engagement with the Government of
Samoa. Phases 1 and 2 of the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management Program (1999 to 2014) supported
reforms in road maintenance and management. The Cyclone Emergency Recovery Project (2004-2008)
supported recovery from Cyclone Heta and reducing coastal vulnerability, and the Post Tsunami
Reconstruction Project (2010 - 2016) supported rehabilitation of communities on Upolu affected by the
tsunami of September 29, 2009.

This project was envisioned as the first of two projects for Samoa under the Pilot Program for Climate
Resilience. The framework of this project provided the foundation for the Pacific Climate Resilient Transport
Program (PCRTP) Series of Projects (SOP). Given that the project addressed an important
development challenge of enhancing the climate resiliency of the WCR and enhancing the local capacity to
develop a climate resilient network, and the PDOs were relevant to both the Bank strategy for Samoa and
for the region. The relevance of PDO is assessed as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




                                                                                                          Page 4 of 16
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To improve the climate resilience of the West Coast Road (WCR).

                Rationale
                Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were
                logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. Rehabilitating the affected sections of the WCR, improving
                road pavement by raising vulnerable sections of the WCR, sealing shoulders, improving longitudinal
                and cross drainage, and road safety features, were intended to improve the climate resilience of the WCR.
                Measures such as raising road elevation, coastal protection revetment, and new vegetated coastal scour
                protection, were aimed at reinforcing the climate resilience of the WCR. Under the assumption that
                the design incorporates the recommendations of the vulnerability assessment, government's strong
                commitment, and that the local contractors have adequate capacity, the outputs of these activities were likely
                to lead to the intended outcome of improving the climate resilience of the WCR.

                Outputs (ICR, pages 27-29).

                        10.64 km of the WCR were rehabilitated through a minimum elevation of 2.25 meters (m), well short
                           of the original target of 26 km. The rehabilitated roads were in the eastern half of the WCR that were
                           more vulnerable to severe weather events and climate change than the western half.
                          The length of sealed shoulders on both sides of the WCR increased to 21.28 km, short of the original
                           target of 25 km.
                          17 drainage outfall channels were upgraded as targeted.
                          The coastal protection revetment was raised to 2,500 m to enhance coastal protection as per the
                           revised target (The team clarified that the revetments sloping structures made of rock and constructed
                           on backshores. They dissipate the energy of storm waves and prevent further recession of the
                           backshore).
                          2,000 m of new vegetated coastal scour protection were planted by the communities as targeted, to
                           protect soil against scour. (The team clarified that that these measures help enhance climate
                           resilience of the road by reducing wave overtopping and coastal erosion, especially during storm
                           surge).
                          Road safety features were incorporated on WCR such as sealing its shoulders, bus stops, installing
                           signages and providing thermoplastic line marking, rumble strips and additional safety furniture, such
                           as guard rails.

                Outcomes



                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



The outputs mentioned above were expected to increase the number of km of the WCR that were
rehabilitated with improved climate resilience measures. 10.64 km of the WCR were improved to climate
resilience standards, well short of the original target of 26 km. The rehabilitation included additional climate
resilience measures of raising the road elevation that accounted for potential seal level rise over the design of
the road, coastal protection revetment, and vegetated scour protection. The 10.64 kilometers of the road were
fully rehabilitated with 50 millimeters of asphalt concrete overlay, which also contributed to enhancing the
climate resilience of WCR and improving the quality of the road.

The ICR (paragraph 27) notes that the project enabled the project road to largely withstand the Category 2
Tropical Cyclone Zazu on December 18, 2020. While flood damages occurred around Afega Bridge (the only
bridge along WCR not rehabilitated under this project), no flood damages occurred on the rest of WCR
rehabilitated under the project. The ICR notes that for the damaged section, the Land Transport Authority
(LTA) inspected the damages and instructed the contractor of this project to replace the damaged surface
and base course, and seal the section with a single chip seal surface. These emergency works were funded
under this project.

As the outcomes with respect to the km of roads that were rehabilitated with climate resilient features were
well short of the original target, efficacy of this objective was assessed as modest before the project
restructuring.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the climate resilience of the West Coast Road (WCR).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). Although the PDO were unchanged, the targets were reduced rather significantly.
The ToC is the same as under original objective.

Outputs (ICR, pages 29-30).

The outputs described above were relevant to this objective.

Outcomes.

      10.64 km of the WCR were rehabilitated with 50 millimeters of asphalt concrete overlay and climate
       resilience measures (such as raised roads and improved drainage). This was slightly short of the
       revised target of 12.5 km. The rehabilitation included additional climate resilience measures of raising
       the road elevation that accounted for potential seal level rise over the design of the road coastal
       protection revetment and vegetated scour protection.
      The ICR (paragraph 27) notes that the project enabled the project road to largely withstand the
       Category 2 Tropical Cyclone Zazu on December 18, 2020. While flood damages occurred around
       Afega Bridge (the only bridge along WCR not rehabilitated under this project), no flood damages

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



         occurred on the rest of WCR rehabilitated under the project. The ICR notes that for the damaged
         section, the Land Transport Authority (LTA) inspected the damages and instructed the contractor
         of this project to replace the damaged surface and base course, and seal the section with a single
         chip seal surface. These emergency works were funded under this project.

Given that the revised targets with respect to rehabilitation of WCR road with climate resilience features were
largely met, efficacy of this PDO is assessed as substantial after project restructuring.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance local capacity to develop a more climate resilient road network.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. Activities
aimed at developing a vulnerability assessment of the Samoan road network and preparing a climate
resilience and adaptation strategy were aimed at enhancing the local capacity to develop a more climate
resilient road network. Under the assumption that there is relevant data to complete the vulnerability
assessment, and that the Government is committed to adopting climate resilient policies, codes and
standards, the outputs of these activities would aid in ensuring that the road network is more resilient to
climate change factors and natural disasters.

Outputs

      Technical Assistance (TA) was provided for assessing the climate change vulnerability of the main
         road network on the two principal islands of Upolu and Savai'i, and for preparing a climate
         resilience/adaptation strategy for the road network identifying key hazard types and risk levels (such
         as sea-level rise, tropical cyclones, extreme rainfall and temperature events) and assessing the likely
         severity and timing of risk impacts for all major links of the road network. This analysis used the latest
         results from the Pacific-Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program, and the
         Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and Financing Initiative.
        A strategic planning tool was developed for informing the resilient design of infrastructure investments.
        The ICR (page 18) notes that the vulnerability assessment framework developed under this project
         was adopted by the World Bank's Transport Global Practice (GP), and subsequently incorporated into
         the GP's flagship report on Moving Towards Climate Resilient Transport that was delivered at the
         Conference of Parties (COP) 21 in December 2015.
        The Project Management Division (PMD) staff of the LTA were trained to update sections of the
         completed Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Road Strategy. No targets were specified
         for this indicator.
        TA was provided to the LTA for developing an investment and maintenance strategy to enhance the
         climate resiliency of the road network.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



                            Outcomes

                            The outputs described above were originally envisioned to measure the recipient's progress towards
                            developing and adopting climate-resilient road policies, codes and practices in general, and through adopting
                            the vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Road strategy in particular.

                                  The Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Road Strategy was endorsed by the Cabinet
                                   Development Committee on August 17, 2017, as per the original target.

                                  The planning tool (which was derived from the Vulnerability Assessment and Climate Resilient Road
                                   Strategy) was used for informing the resilient design of six infrastructure investments in WCR, Cross-
                                   Island Road, Mali'oli'Bridge, Moamoa Ford, Nuusuatia Bridge and Aia Bridge - as per the revised
                                   target. The ICR (paragraph 29) notes that the size of drainage initially proposed by the design
                                   consultant for this project was increased to be consistent with the Vulnerability Assessment
                                   recommendation of using pipe culverts with a minimum of 900 millimeters of standard internal
                                   diameters, as per the revised target.
                                  The Vulnerability Assessment was used for prioritizing investments that led to selecting works to be
                                   upgraded under the second phase of this project as per the revised target.

                            Given that the revised targets demonstrated how the outputs of the vulnerability assessment were used for
                            guiding outcomes, efficacy of this PDO is assessed as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To enhance local capacity to develop a more climate resilient road network.

                            Revised Rationale
                            No change. As above.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale



                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 16
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



         The overall efficacy before restructuring was modest, given that the outcome under PDO1 was well short of
         the original target.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Efficacy after restructuring was assessed as substantial after project restructuring, as the revised outcomes
         were realized for the most part.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal for activities associated with
rehabilitation of the WCR. These activities accounted for 91% of the appraisal estimate. The ICR does not
provide information on the actual project cost at closing. Hence, there is no information on the scope/coverage
of the ex post EIRR. The methodology entailed a comparison of "with" and "without" climate change adaptation
measures. The "with" climate change adaption measures scenario assumed upgrades to WCR
(including improvements to enhance the climate resilience of WCR through raising the road pavement at select
locations, sealing the shoulders of the road, and improving longitudinal and cross drainage). The "without"
climate change adaptation measures scenario assumed the upgrades to WCR as part of normal maintenance
activities, but excluding the climate change adaptation measures identified above. Traditional benefits of travel
time saving and reduction of vehicle operating costs were not considered in this analysis. The quantified benefits
were to come from reduction in maintenance cost due to climate change adaptation measures. The Net Present
Value (NPV) at 3% discount rate at closure was 0.76 million, as compared to the NPV of US$2.34 million at
appraisal, using the same discount rate. The PAD (page 11) notes that a 3% discount rate was in line with the
discount rate provided in the Pacific Study Series entitled, Climate Profiling, A Risk-Based Approach, developed
by the Asian Development Bank (ADB, 2005). The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
19% as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 30%. The ex post EIRR was lower due to the increase in costs of the
road rehabilitation activities.

Administrative and operational issues. Project implementation started nearly a year after effectiveness for a
combination of factors, including delays associated with jointly procuring the Project Management Company
(PMC) for this project with that of another Bank-financed project (Enhanced Road Access Project) due to the low
capacity in the country and limited competition in the market, and negotiations between the selected PMC and
the Government that were stalled over several months over a Samoan tax issue (the team clarified that this
issue was about interpretation of tax obligations by consultants and contractors under the relevant Samoan law.
The government's confirmation that all contracts should be inclusive of all taxes helped in resolving the
issue). This was exacerbated by the delays over which the project had no control, due to the restrictions

                                                                                                           Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



imposed in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. These factors resulted in the project closing 28 months behind
schedule.

The design consultant's initial cost estimate for upgrading the WCR was significantly overestimated and required
substantial revision. The initial cost estimate was almost three times higher than the estimated cost at appraisal.
The ICR (paragraph 44) notes that the consultant's initial estimate made several assumptions and
questionable hypothesis (such as 40% premium over local prices for international consultants and 25%
preliminary and general allowance).

Implementation was further hampered due to factors, such as high staff turnover within the Land Transport
Authority (LTA) Project Management Division (LTA had three Managers over 1.5 years since March 2015), slow
progress of road design due to the debate between the government agencies on the road reserve boundaries of
WCR, lack of effective communication between the LTA and the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
on land acquisition issues, unclear responsibilities within the PMC and the LTA for managing the safeguards
processes, and the PMC overcharging the project which led to ineligible expenditure (discussed in section 10).

The project scope was eventually reduced rather substantially from 23 km to 12.5 km. Finally, the government's
decision to fully rehabilitate parts of the WCR road and switching WCR's surfacing from chip seal to asphalt,
increased design and supervision costs.

In sum, given that the project financed a much reduced project scope with the available grant and there were
administrative inefficiencies, efficiency is assessed as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     91.00
 Appraisal                                                 30.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets. With high relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies,
modest efficacy and efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory (3).




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



Under the revised outcome targets. With high relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategies,
substantial efficacy, and modest efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately Satisfactory (4).

A split rating is applied based on the disbursement shares of 12% before restructuring in February 2018
(US$1.83 million was disbursed), and 88% after restructuring (total financing was US$14.8 million). The overall
outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory, the weighted value is 4 (12%*3 + 88%*4 = 3.88).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Exposure to natural disasters. There is a substantial risk to the sustainability of investments, given
that tropical cyclones and associated heavy rains are expected to be intense in future and 80% of the Samoa
coastline is rated as sensitive to erosion, flooding and landslips. Given the increasing frequency and intensity
of extreme weather and climate events, there is a substantial risk that the WCR upgraded through this
project could be affected within its lifespan (ICR paragraph 66).

Technical risk. The project activities included road safety features such as sealing shoulders, installing
signage and providing thermoplastic line marking, rumple strips and additional safety furniture. A post road
safety audit conducted under the ongoing Emerging Road Access Project (ERAP) on WCR, indicated that
some drains and driveway culverts are a high risk safety concern. To address this issue, the ERAP extended
its closing date by six months from April 30, 2021, to October 29, 2021 to allow for repair of the critical drains
and culverts on the WCR. There is a moderate risk to development outcome that these activities might not
be completed on time.

Institutional risk. The project supported LTA to have maintenance strategy to enhance the climate
resilience of its road network, as well as new methodologies, techniques and software, and the institutional
capacity to plan and manage the road network more effectively. The ICR, however, does not discuss
financing risks pertaining to operation and maintenance (O&M) of the road.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design appropriately included both "hard infrastructure" activities (rehabilitating the WCR) and "soft
  infrastructure" activities aimed at the institutional strengthening of the Land Transport Authority (LTA) to
  manage the road network. This project was prepared based on the experiences with prior Bank-financed
  projects (discussed in section 3). Lessons incorporated at design included an assessment by an
  engineering consultant to assess flood risks and flood management options for ensuring that the physical
  investments incorporate natural hazard and climate risks, and involving communities early during
  implementation to avoid potential conflicts with community-held property and owners of free land (PAD,
  paragraph 27). The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the LTA in charge of

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



  implementing the project. The LTA had executed many Bank-funded road projects. A consulting firm was
  to support the LTA in day-to-day project management (PAD, paragraph 10).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including moderate risks associated with uncertainties related
  to the engineering design, LTA's capacity to roll out the vulnerability assessment across Samoa, and
  possibility of delays given that temporary land acquisition could be required in some instances. With
  mitigation measures, the overall risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, page 10). The
  arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in
  section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry. One, the project overestimated the institutional
  capacity of the LTA, given that the project involved activities in several locations along WCR, which
  required greater resources. This contributed to delays during construction; and two, there were
  shortcomings in M&E design (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twenty one supervision missions were conducted during project implementation. The ICR (paragraph 49)
 notes that for most of the implementation period, supervision mission were carried out quarterly (rather
 than semi-annually). Although there were three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime of
 about eight years, the continuity of leadership was more or less maintained, as the incoming TTL was
 working as a Co-TTL with the outgoing TTL in the first occasion and the outgoing TTL/ Co- TTL continuing
 as TTL/Co TTL for the second phase of this project. The mid-term review (MTR) was held as scheduled in
 August 2017.

 The government's decision to fully rehabilitate parts of the WCR and switching WCR's surfacing from chip
 seal to asphalt increased design and supervision costs. These factors eventually led to shrinking the
 project scope. Given the delays in the initial years of the project, the supervision team appropriately
 restructured the project, based on the recommendations of the MTR (including reducing the scope of
 project activities, and extending the closing date). This aided in completing the reduced scope of project
 activities. The team also made an attempt to improve the M&E indicators. The team appropriately declared
 ineligible expenditure, and the support provided by the team aided in fiduciary and safeguards
 compliance (discussed in section 10).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Management Company (PMC) was in charge of M&E. There were several shortcomings in the
 M&E design. Several of the original PDO outcome indicators (the length of the sealed shoulders, number of
 drainages, and length of roads rehabilitated) were only measuring outputs. Likewise, the PDO 2 indicator -
 adoption of the vulnerability assessment - was not adequate as an outcome indicator.

 All the original outcome indicators were replaced with new indicators, with the project first
 restructuring. The new key outcome indicator under PDO1- the number of km of road that were
 rehabilitated to climate resilience standards - was improved only marginally; it remained output-oriented
 and descriptive. The other key outcome indicator - the number of new projects which incorporated the
 recommendations of the vulnerability assessments - was appropriate for monitoring PDO 2. Targets were
 specified for activities added with the restructuring such as the length of coastal protection channels and
 length of vegetated coastal scour protection.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paragraph 46) notes that PMC's support in terms of monitoring indicators was limited in the
  initial years. Hence, the responsibility for M&E was transferred to the Transport and Infrastructure Sector
  Coordination Division (TISCD). However, there were delays in submission of semi-annual project reports
  by TISCD, as the outgoing PMC did not prepare the semi-annual reports for the period of January 1,
  2019 to June 30, 2019. This contributed to difficulties in monitoring the actual project status during this
  time. The ICR (paragraph 52) notes that while TISCD did submit the report using data provided by the
  LTA in a new template developed for the project, the handover from the PMC to TISCD, meant that were
  some gaps in the project history.

  There were issues with quality control in reporting. The ICR (paragraph 53) notes that while the target
  value for the first PDO indicator was changed from 12.5 km in November 2019 to 10.64 km in May 2020,
  the value was revised without a formal project restructuring. The ICR notes there was lack of clear
  reporting on the sites by PMC.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (paragraph 54) notes that the target value for the first PDO indicator (improved climate
  resilience of the WCR and two intermediate indicators (roads rehabilitated and length of sealed
  shoulders) could have been revised through the second restructuring in May 2020.

  In sum, M&E is assessed as modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category B (partial assessment) project. Two safeguard
   policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OB/BP 4.12) (PAD, page vii).

   Environmental Assessment. The potential adverse environmental impacts such as increase in dust, noise
   and sediment runoff during construction of the WCR road, were expected during the construction phase. An
   Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP), based on Samoa's Code of Environmental Practice (COEP), was
   prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 55). The ICR (paragraph 56) notes that the
   Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed during
   implementation.

   The ICR (paragraph 57) notes that environmental safeguards compliance was overall satisfactory,
   with environmental hazards and risks well-managed at construction zones. Dust control during the dry
   season was mitigated by diligent use of spray truck. Barriers were installed at school access points to
   prevent children from traversing into construction zones. Fences were also installed around all
   voids/excavations, at drainage crossings and other hazards along the road.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The PAD (paragraph 57) reported that permanent land acquisition was not
   expected as most physical works activities were to take place within the existing road reserve. However,
   easements for drainage works could be required for improving drainage. A Land Acquisition and
   Resettlement Framework (LARF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 58).

   The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that compensation for seven persons by the WCR for loss of land and non-
   land assets including crops, was paid prior to commencement of works. Compensation was paid to several
   project-affected persons on drainage easements for WCR. A Grievance and Complaint Logging System
   (GCLS) was developed and used during implementation. Complaints relating to boundaries of the road
   reserve and compensation rates for trees and crops were addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. An assessment of financial management was conducted at appraisal. The
   assessment concluded that the financial arrangements were adequate, subject to appointment of an
   appropriated qualified consulting firm to manage the financial requirements of the project (PAD, page 28).

   There was one financial issue during implementation about the excessive burn rate of the Project
   Management Company which led to some ineligible expenses (ICR, paragraph 61). The team clarified that
   work performed and invoices revealed misapplication of the Time and Material contract. While invoices for
   the contract as of September 2016 were submitted with accompanying timesheets and invoiced charges
   were based on the timesheets, no steps were taken to address some that were submitted without
   timesheets and charged at the maximum monthly amount rather than for the actual
   time worked. Following investigations of contract invoices, approximately US$19,300 was declared as


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



   ineligible expenditure on November 14, 2016. This issue was resolved and since then, there were no
   financial issues. The team clarified that the audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment was conducted at appraisal. The PAD (paragraph 52) notes
   that Samoa has good internal controls on procurement and the Government and LTA were familiar with
   Bank's processes and procurement guidelines.

   The ICR (paragraph 59) notes that the decision to jointly procure the PMC for this project and another
   ongoing Bank project contributed to delays in the initial years. This issue was rectified, and procurement
   was assessed as moderately satisfactory until project closure. The ICR does not report any case of mis
   procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Low capacity environments may require longer implementation periods. The implementation
timeline of five years for this project proved to be unrealistic and the closing date was extended by a
cumulative 28 months. The lesson is that the standard five-year implementation period may not be
sufficient for small island states with low implementation capacity.

2. Identification of Right-of-way before commencing design and design optimization based
on visual inspection can help in reducing land acquisition delays. Significant delays were
experienced in the initial years of this project, due to the uncertainty over the extent of the legal right
of way for WCR.


                                                                                                        Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Enhancing Climate Resilience-West Cst Rd (P126504)



3. Remote supervision of civil works can be done under an emergency like the COVID-
19; however this cannot permanently replace actual physical supervision. In this project the
impact to disruptions caused by COVID -19 was mitigated by fortnightly meetings with the Land
Transport Authority. Nevertheless to properly supervise the technical aspects of such projects, it is
important for engineers and safeguards specialists to visit the actual project road regularly.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and concise. The theory of change provided in the ICR clearly shows the causal links between
project activities, their outputs and outcomes and explicitly states the assumptions under which these outcomes
are likely to be realized. The ICR candidly discusses the issues with monitoring and evaluation. The ICR is
internally consistent, with logical linking and integration of the various parts of the report. The ICR provides
relevant information on the continuity of leadership and quality of audits. The lessons from the experience of
implementing this project respond to the specific experiences of this project. Given that the project scope was
reduced rather significantly through the first restructuring, the ICR appropriately conducts a split rating of
objectives.

One shortcoming of the ICR is that it did not include the actual cost of project components.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
