     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0022637

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P145965                                  Human Development Systems Strengthening

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of            Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1110,IDA-H9360,TF-A1960,TF-         31-Dec-2018                                         49,874,738.67
 A2421

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Apr-2014                              31-Dec-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          15,000,000.00                                   11,079,750.00

 Revised Commitment                           54,503,713.62                                   10,846,357.18

 Actual                                       49,874,738.67                                   10,085,417.70




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt     Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the June 19, 2014 Financing Agreement between the government and IDA (Schedule 1, p. 5), the
   proposed project development objective (PDO) is "to strengthen select management systems for education
   and health services in targeted geographic areas in the Recipient’s territory.” The design document presents
   the same statement (PAD, pp. 8 and 30).



                                                                                                Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



   The PDO did not change throughout the project’s life. However, PDO-level indicators and targets were
   revised as a part of the project’s Additional Financing, approved in March 2016. Notably, two new PDO
   indicators were added to reflect two new areas of project support introduced under the Additional Financing.
   One new PDO indicator, stakeholders’ endorsement of a national logistics management information system
   (LMIS) strategy based on pilot testing, was introduced to track expanded support of essential drugs logistics
   and, at the same time, replaced two original indicators, respectively: the capacity and functions of the Drugs
   Regulatory Division, and the quality of essential drugs procurement capacity. The other new PDO indicator,
   development and endorsement of a strategy for a national civil registry and vital statistics (CRVS) system,
   was introduced to track progress of this new area of project support. The project’s Additional financing also
   modified the description of three original PDO indicators, but neither the measures nor the targets were
   changed. None of these changes warrant a split rating methodology.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Apr-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Original Components:

   The project’s three components were to finance: (i) technical assistance for tools development and
   enhancing the use of data in planning and management; (ii) equipment provision; (iii) capacity development;
   (iv) data dissemination; (v) studies; (vi) website development for data exchange among stakeholders; and
   (vii) project management and communications.

   Component 1: Information Systems (original estimate of $8.44 million + $32.08 million in Additional
   Financing, amounting to a revised component estimate of $40.52 million; actual cost: $40.52 million)
   to enable data-driven decision-making for more efficient resource use and improved human development
   outcomes.

   Subcomponent 1.1: Education Program Information Management System and Geographic
   Information System (GIS) School Mapping was to improve the governance, quality, and decentralization
   of education information and initiate education system mapping. Areas of focus included: (i) developing a
   data management protocol; (ii) establishing provincial education statistics units in targeted provinces; (iii)
   upgrading and decentralizing information collection and reporting capacity; (iv) enhanced use of data for
   decision-making; and (v) ensuring wider, more user-friendly dissemination of data for broader stakeholder
   participation in planning and management. The project was to build on the national population and
   household census, partly supported by the Bank-financed Catalytic Project to Strengthen the National
   Statistical Institute, especially the census of all social sector infrastructure, including education facilities

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



(public and private) and the use of geo-positioning to link infrastructure to populations. The initial phase was
to focus on infrastructure, with the possibility of adding other GIS-based information and data. Donor
support was to complement the Bank’s support. (See also Efficacy sections on “Rationale” and
“Attribution.”)

Subcomponent 1.2: Health Information Management System (HMIS) and GIS Health Infrastructure
Mapping was to enable data-driven, quality, and decentralized decision-making through improved health
information management and health mapping. Areas of focus included: (i) upgrading information collection
and reporting capacity of existing structures; (ii) enhanced use of data for decision-making; and (iii) ensuring
a wider, more user-friendly dissemination of data for broader stakeholder participation in planning and
management. Technical assistance to the central level and to three provinces (Equateur, Katanga, and
Kinshasa), including health zone level, was to encompass public and non-governmental facilities. As for the
education sector, the project was to build on the national population and household census, whose 2014
mapping phase would include a census of all social sector infrastructure, including public and private health
facilities and pharmacies.

Subcomponent 1.3: Service Delivery Indicator (SDI) Surveys was to complement information collected
through sector management information systems by providing service delivery report cards on education
and health care, based on the perspective of users. Two rounds of SDI surveys, one at the project’s start
and one in the project's fourth year, were to be national in scope and encompass both public and private
facilities. Survey design and implementation were to encourage the involvement of all donors for education
and health and the joint undertaking, with local partners, of analysis and dissemination to stimulate a
feedback loop.



Component 2: Systems for Safe Essential Medicines (original estimate of $3.71 million + $9.0
million in Additional Financing, amounting to a revised component estimate of $12.71 million; actual
cost: $12.71 million) to enhance the capacity for safe and effective essential medicines provision.

Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening the Regulatory System was to strengthen the regulatory functions of
Ministry of Health's (MOH) Pharmacy and Medicines Directorate (DPM) and support its transition to a more
autonomous regulatory authority. A performance-based consultancy was to build staff capacity, including: (i)
a business plan to transition DPM into a more autonomous, better resourced regulatory authority; (ii) a
feasibility study to guide the establishment of a National Quality Control Laboratory; (iii) training of internal
evaluators and inspectors (using World Health Organization resources); and (iv) the establishment of new
regional centers of training and excellence.

Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening the Public Procurement System was to strengthen the capacity of
FEDECAME, a not-for-profit organization that manages procurement on behalf of MOH’s National System
for Procurement and Distribution of Essential Medicines. A performance-based consultancy was to support:
(i) establishing a five-year business plan for activities scale-up and financial sustainability; (ii) strengthening
the prequalification process; (iii) improving FEDECAME’s organization and management; and (iv) advocacy
to increase the current rolling capital for drugs procurement.

Subcomponent 2.3: Strengthening Public Supply Chain Management was to support MOH in
assessing the capacity of its National System for Procurement and Distribution of Essential Medicines
(SNAME) and exploring options for more flexibility and efficiency. An experienced consulting firm was to


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



  assess strengths and weaknesses in a few provinces; explore a province-based design; cost various
  options; and propose an appropriate public-private mix.

  Component 3: Analytical Products (original estimate of $2.85 million; actual cost: $2.85 million) to
  ensure access to high quality analytical products for informed decision-making and systems development
  for social protection; and to enable DRC to learn from and share lessons. An initial work program, identified
  by the Ministries of Social Affairs and of Labor, Employment and Social Insurance, was to focus on:
  vulnerability assessment; DRC's experience with risk pooling mechanisms for health services access; a
  feasibility study of Social Promotion Centers’ potential roles for social protection; and a labor market study
  focusing on skilled manual labor.

  Revisions to Components

  Initiated under the January 2016 project restructuring, and then substantially boosted with the approval,
  three months later, of Additional Financing, the following two new areas of support were added to the
  project.

        Under Component 1, a new subcomponent on CRVS (estimated at an additional $32 million).
        Under Component 2, new activities supporting the quality assurance of medicines in the private
          market and the design and testing of an LMIS for essential medicines (estimated at an
          additional $9 million).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost.

  The original project cost was estimated at $15 million (SDR 9.7 million), all of which was to be financed by a
  proposed IDA Grant. The revised estimated project cost was increased to $56.08 million, thanks to
  Additional Financing in the amount of $41.08 million, which was approved in March 2016. Of the Additional
  Financing acquired, $32.08 million was allocated to Component 1 to support the strengthening of the CRVS
  system, and $12.71 million was allocated to Component 2 to support the development of an LMIS for
  essential medicines.

  Financing and Borrower Contribution.

  The Additional Financing amount of $41.08 million was financed by: an IDA Grant of $30 million (SDR 21.8
  million); a grant from the Global Financing Facility of $10 million; and a grant from the Japan Policy and
  Human Resources Development Fund (PHRD) of $1.08 million. Data in the World Bank’s system reveals
  that: (i) the original IDA grant was 95 percent disbursed (SDR 8.75 million of the SDR 9.7 million grant
  amount); (ii) the Additional Financing IDA grant was 90 percent disbursed (SDR 19.54 million of the 21.8
  million grant amount); (iii) the Global Financing Facility was 92 percent disbursed ($9.24 million of the $10
  million grant amount); and (iv) the Japan PHRD was 79 percent disbursed ($0.85 million of the $1.08 million
  grant amount). The ICR (p. 24) reports that $3.46 million was returned out of the total financing amount of
  $56.08 million. No Borrower Contribution was planned or provided.

  Key Dates.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



   The project was approved on April 23, 2014 and became effective nine months later on January 20,
   2015. On January 12, 2016 the project was restructured to add two new activities aimed at strengthening
   CRVS and the development of a LMIS for essential medicines. Additional Financing, approved in March
   2016, enabled the full financing of these new activities, providing an additional $32.08 million for CRVS
   under Component 1 and an additional $9.0 million to LMIS under Component 2. The Additional Financing
   also involved a revision of the results framework, a two-year extension of the IDA grant closing date (from
   December 21, 2018 to December 31, 2020), a revision of implementation arrangements and disbursement
   estimates, and the strengthening of project procurement and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The mid-
   term review took place on July 30, 2018.

   In addition to the (above-cited) two-year extension of the original IDA grant , closing dates of other financing
   sources were extended to allow adequate time to complete critical activities. In November 2018, the closing
   date of the IDA grant for Additional Financing was extended by 20 months to August 31, 2020. The PHRD
   grant (TF-A421) was extended by 14 months to June 30, 2020 in June 2019, and extended a second time
   to August 31, 2020. The project closed on December 31, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO is highly relevant to current country conditions. At the time of project design, human
development was deemed a policy priority for the government. However, social sectors (education, health,
and social protection) received inadequate funding, and budget execution in these sectors was
low. Expenditures on service delivery were inefficient, with key components neglected, such as the
strengthening and decentralization of management information systems and their use in management and
decision-making at all levels of the system. The government had also expressed an interest in
complementing program information systems with survey data to understand bottlenecks to service
delivery. The Bank’s 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) corroborated data challenges for
evidence-based policy design and monitoring, and emphasized the need for statistical infrastructure (maps,
census, household surveys). It highlighted opportunities for quick wins and building cumulative and virtuous
cycles for achieving DRC’s development goals through the building of inclusive institutions and
strengthening governance. The SCD’s assessment culminated in recommendations to increase good
governance and service delivery at the central and decentralized levels to improve human development
indicators. It also pointed to the need to increase health sector resource efficiency by addressing issues of
unpaid service delivery staff and essential drugs unavailability, the later rooted in inadequate systems and
capacity for their procurement and distribution.

The PDO is substantially relevant to the current development priorities of the country. It is aligned
with DRC’s National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP) 2019-23 first pillar on improving human capital
and social/cultural development. The pillar’s objective is to contribute to social inclusion in DRC and
includes priority targets for improved access to quality health and education services. Prominent among the
NSDP’s priority objectives are those aiming for improvements in public health, pharmaceutical regulation
and supply chain, and quality of health information. The plan also mentions the importance of strengthening
health system governance through improved legislation, regulation, and monitoring of norms and
guidelines, all within the context of the decentralization program. DRC’s National Health Development Plan
articulates these same development objectives. While the NSDP’s objectives in education and social

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



               protection are not as explicitly aligned with the PDO, DRC’s Strategy for Education and Training (2016-
               2025) and National Policy for Social Protection (2015-2030) include pillars on governance aimed at
               strengthening the application of norms, promoting transparent mechanisms for resource management, and
               improving M&E. Moreover, national policy and strategic documents do not explicitly refer to CRVS as a
               priority within the human capital agenda, but ICR mission interviews revealed that the government
               requested CRVS support because of the persistent challenges in access to quality data and its critical
               importance in guiding policy formulation across sectors. The government was especially interested in
               resources for CRVS to improve birth registration and the importance of real-time data to inform decision-
               making.

               There is no Bank strategy for DRC currently in effect at this time, but there is one under advanced
               preparation. The PDO is highly relevant to the Bank’s vision of its new strategy in DRC, as reflected
               in its 2020-23 Country Partnership (CPF) Concept Note, and in the shaping of a new CPF for 2021-
               26. Drawing heavily on the 2018 SCD’s findings and recommendations, noted above, the Bank’s new
               strategy is anticipated to include strong emphasis on human development, underpinned with the
               strengthening of governance, information management and data for decision-making, social services
               decentralization, and poverty alleviation for improved human development outcomes. The CPF 2020-2023
               Country Partnership Concept Note acknowledged that World Bank Group investments have had mixed
               impact and that efforts to strengthen institutional capacity and to stimulate key reforms have had limited
               effect. In response, it proposed two relevant pillars. Pillar II was to apply a special lens and provide a
               comprehensive set of engagements to create synergies, focused on ten of DRC’s 26 provinces. Pillar V
               was to make substantial shifts in resource allocation in favor of human and social capital development and
               related reform areas, including governance and decentralization, in essence a doubling of resources for
               human development compared to the previous twenty years (ICR, p. 13). As the new CPF (now
               programmed for the period 2021-26) takes shape, these pillars continue to be prominent. In FY20 the Bank
               committed $1.65 billion to investments in social sectors, human capital development, strategic governance,
               and related reforms. It opened liaison offices in Goma (North Kivu province) and Kananga (Kasai Central
               province) to bring the Bank’s support closer to the decentralized service delivery focus of its work.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen select management systems for education and health services in targeted geographic areas in the
                             Recipient's territory

                             Rationale
                             Outcomes


                                                                                                                          Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)




      By the project’s closing date, 100 percent of education provinces in targeted areas had developed
         annual work plans and reports, based on improved education information system data available on the
         Internet, surpassing the target of 90 percent of educational sub-provinces. More specifically, the
         project supported the development of annual work plans and published the information for 182
         education subdivisions on the websites of the Ministry of Education.
        On the other hand, only 71 percent of health zones in targeted areas had developed annual work
         plans and reports based on improved health information system data available on the Internet, falling
         short of the 90 percent target. In part, the shortfall in achieving the target overall was due to the later
         addition of 169 health zones covered by PHRD financing, of which only 54.1 percent achieved the 90
         percent target. This means that the health zones supported by the IDA grants achieved a higher than
         71 percent level. Among other reasons for the shortfall were the late procurement of a non-
         governmental organization to support the additional health zones, and COVID-19 related disruptions
         that undermined timely deployment in the field.
        The target of completing 80 percent of priority action points identified in the first SDI action plan was
         not achieved because neither of the two envisaged SDI surveys was completed. These surveys were
         envisaged to complement health and education management information systems data by providing
         the perspectives of the users of these services.
        The development of a CRVS strategy was started under the project, but not completed by the project’s
         closing date, falling short of the target to have it completed and endorsed. Nevertheless, the
         project advanced the pilot of an electronic CRVS system in Limete (urban area in Kinshasa) and
         initiated the same pilot in Banza (rural area in Ngungu-Kongo Central). Project activities did provide an
         initial basis for ongoing stakeholder dialogue and substantially boosted the number of children with
         birth certificates.
        The project has developed robust platforms for decision-making and better service delivery at all
         levels of the health and education systems. Together, investments in information management
         systems promoted the efficacy and quality of education and health service delivery through the
         delivery of specific work plans, which were routinely monitored and assessed. The GIS platform,
         established only for health facilities (and not for health and education facilities, as planned), holds the
         potential to inform strategic decision-making of policy makers, guide priority-setting for improving
         service quality and access, and provide real-time data in the public arena for the use of others. While
         ultimately only established for health (and not education) facilities, its effective use could be catalytic
         for the establishment and use of integrated data platforms and spatial visualization for improved
         service delivery.
        Project support contributed substantially to improvements in the strategic, legal, regulatory, and
         planning frameworks and processes for essential medicines in DRC. With project support,
         stakeholders endorsed a strategy for a national LMIS based on pilot testing, fully achieving the
         target.
        The project reached a total of 1.4 million beneficiaries, surpassing the target of 600,000. Forty-nine
         percent of these beneficiaries were female, exceeding the target of 45 percent. As noted above, the
         only beneficiaries counted were children whose births were registered. Additional beneficiaries not
         counted under this indicator included beneficiaries of technical assistance and training and improved
         systems, and a range of stakeholders who had new or improved access to quality information.

Attribution

The ICR did not assess attribution. The PAD notes that there were other donors complementing the Bank as
the largest supporter of system strengthening efforts. Investments in strengthening systems for essential

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



                            medicines regulation, procurement, and logistics were undertaken in coordination with, and complementary
                            to, the contributions of other partners, including Global Fund, USAID, UNFPA, and the European Union. WHO
                            has played an important overall advisory role for essential drugs, and the recommendations emanating from
                            its 2014 study to strengthen the Pharmacy and Medicines Directorate shaped the Bank’s support.

                            A 10-21-21 meeting with the project team provided more insight. The health facility mapping exercise was
                            supported jointly with another Bank-financed project in DRC (health system strengthening) and with the
                            Global Fund and USAID. Virtually all other outcomes were largely attributable to this project, albeit with some
                            contributions of, and coordination with, other partners. There was (and still is) a strong donor coordination
                            platform in DRC, which is quite large and extremely active. The ICR (p. 22) does note, nevertheless, that this
                            platform has coordination gaps that can lead to fragmentation of donor efforts in some cases. It is chaired by
                            WHO, with the co-chair position filled on a rotating basis. The platform is composed of a number of subgroups
                            focused on, among others, medicines, health management information systems, and governance. The Bank
                            took the lead, under the project, in providing conceptual and technical assistance in strengthening the drugs
                            logistics information system and in establishing the CRVS. The Bank’s project also took the lead in evolving
                            the thrust of support not just on information systems as ends in themselves, but especially on the use of these
                            systems for improved governance.

                            Counterfactual

                            The ICR did not assess the counterfactual, but the Bank team provided insight during its 10-21-21 meeting
                            with IEG. The project designed and supported brand new initiatives and undertakings, including: the launch of
                            the CRVS system and acceleration of birth registration; the piloting and strengthening of the drugs logistics
                            information system; and the strengthening, consolidation, and decentralization of health and education
                            management information systems. In the absence of the project: (1) there would be no CRVS and
                            government would be lacking essential information embedded in this system; and (2) there would be
                            continued, multiple, duplicative efforts of various donors to acquire and distribute essential drugs and to
                            collect and use social sector data. Most significantly, in the absence of the project, there would have been
                            much less transparency and accessibility of data in the public arena and no progress in the development of a
                            culture of the use of data and evidence for management and decision-making. The project’s outcome was not
                            merely focused on improved systems and data. Rather, its emphasis and measurement were on the use of
                            data for planning and management. In the absence of the project, the involvement of – and forged links
                            between – the various stakeholders of information systems, embedded in system strengthening activities,
                            would not have been established.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While falling short of some of the targets, the project has developed robust platforms for information sharing,
                            decision-making, and better service delivery at all levels of the health and education systems. Together,

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



  investments in information management systems promoted the efficacy and quality of education and health
  services through the development and delivery of specific work plans, which were routinely monitored and
  assessed. Project support substantially developed CRVS capacity through the advancement and pilot testing
  of a draft strategy, improved coverage and resolution of CRVS-linked feedback cases, and the issuance of
  birth certificates to almost 1.3 million children. Substantial investments in the drugs sector strengthened
  systems for regulation, procurement, and logistics.

  Among the moderate shortcomings in efficacy were lower than expected levels of health zones producing
  annual work plans and reports based on information systems data; the failure to complete the first of two SDI
  surveys before project closing; and the failure to have the CRVS strategy completed and endorsed prior to
  closing, notwithstanding the positive influence of the pilot and advanced draft on CRVS strengthening and
  significant acceleration of birth registration coverage.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Social Sector Efficiency Gains. Because of the nature of this project (supporting information systems, data-
driven management and decision-making, and capacity building, all producing indirect benefits that would, in
turn, contribute to more efficient service delivery), an end-of-project cost-benefit analysis was not undertaken.
Nevertheless, the ICR’s ex-post economic analysis did appropriately assess the salient efficiency gains
generated by project’s investments.

The project design was efficient, with investments focused on activities with great potential for generating
significant efficiency gains in the social sectors. It took into account findings in the literature about the
contributions of information systems and drugs logistical systems for improving sector efficiency. Indeed, it was
efficiency gains in the social sectors that drove the project’s design, and these gains were substantially
achieved. The project has played and will continue to play a catalytic role for targeting and guiding larger Bank
investments in health and education, estimated at about US$426.5 million (approved and in the pipeline), and its
products and outcomes also stand to influence the technical and financial support of other donors through better
information and evolved policy and sector environments. Strengthened information management systems and
capacity have improved transparency in the collection and use of data, contributing to greater accountability and
nurturing a greater sense of comfort to invest in DRC.

Among the specific efficiency gains achieved with project support are the following. First, the project contributed
to the establishment of viable data critical for health and education performance tracking and to well-performing
financial and information flows between the different layers of the education and health systems, enabling
evidence-based planning and efficient resource allocation and management. Second, the project has
contributed to a better functioning CRVS system. The ICR cites various sources in the literature that highlight a
range of potential benefits of viable CRVS: people’s improved sense of inclusion and government’s ability to
safeguard human rights and identify and address health needs of the population; strengthened government
accountability to monitor progress in achieving social sector goals; support of social protection schemes and



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



responses to emergencies and crises; and causal links between CRVS performance and health and education
outcomes.

Third, the strengthened regulatory system, public procurement mechanisms, and public supply chain
management for essential drugs have, collectively, contributed to a steady supply of medicines, supporting
equitable distribution patterns, maintaining low retail prices, and safeguarding quality standards. The information
technology-supported system allows the direct flow of demand and order information from health facilities to the
central supply agency. Sustaining these gains would ensure an efficient drug provision and distribution system,
which will, in turn, secure efficiencies and cost savings and save lives. Existing literature cited in the ICR (p. 18)
documents the centrality of a well-functioning supply system in low-income countries to the quality of health
service provision, particularly reductions in the duration and frequency of stockouts. Fourth, the six studies on
social protection have the potential to contribute to efficiency gains in the sector, including: improved
performance in centers for social promotion; public expenditure efficiency gains; more efficient options for risk-
pooling for expanded access to health care; and jobs creation and labor market competitiveness. Data
generated from these studies will contribute to an evidence-based Social Protection Strategy and guide priority
setting to protect the most vulnerable.



Implementation Efficiency. The project disbursed 94 percent of its envelope, including two IDA grants and
Trust Funds, over a period of 5 years, 11 months. This is a considerable feat, given that Additional Financing,
introduced in 2016, was almost triple the amount of the original credit and introduced new, substantial areas of
support (CRVS and essential drugs logistics system), and most of the activities were completed with a two-year
extension. There were, however, some shortcomings in implementation efficiency, particularly: the failure to
complete even one of two planned SDI surveys and consequent missed opportunities for their use in analysis
and decision-making; and the failure to implement the GIS mapping of education facilities in targeted areas. For
the most part, technical assistance, recruited through a non-competitive process, performed well and provided
critical value-for-money. The performance of UNESCO was marred by an underachieved indicator on education
information systems (specifically GIS-mapping of education facilities).

During implementation, the project implementation unit (PIU) undertook various actions to course-correct
implementation issues, including delayed procurement, poor contract management, and gaps in financial
management. Decisions to reinforce the PIU team with the recruitment of a deputy coordinator and an M&E
specialist significantly improved its performance, but added to the project’s administrative costs. Project
efficiency was undermined by a number of factors (ICR, pp. 22-23), including: a ten-month delay between
approval and first disbursement; challenges in coordinating some of the activities with other Bank-financed
projects and activities; some fragmentation in efforts and collaboration within the health donor platform; frequent
changes in task team leaders and their effect on the Bank’s performance; the closing of schools, borders,
lockdowns and travel restrictions, and disruptions of normal operations, brought about by COVID-19; and a
protracted unstable political environment, especially surrounding presidential elections and their aftermath. The
ICR mission’s interview with PIU staff revealed that they were overwhelmed with the execution of micro activities
(payment of per diems, organizing workshops for line ministries, among others), deterring their ability to deliver
properly on big ticket items of oversight and coordination. Procurement performance was also negatively
affected by the fragile country context and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, p. 25).

Nevertheless, the PDO was substantially achieved and the project was able to use 94 percent of all financing,
including significant additional financing more than tripling the original project cost, and the undertaking of new



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



components (returning only $3.5 million of a total of $56.1 million) in the space of a two-year extension of the
original closing date..


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO is highly relevant to country conditions and to the new Bank strategy in the country (CPF Concept
Note). It is substantially relevant to the government’s development priorities, as articulated in its various
strategies and plans. But its relevance to national priorities is rated as “high” considering that the PDO is pivotal
to the achievement of the government’s human capital development goals, and interviews with government
officials reveal strong appreciation of their critical importance. Notwithstanding moderate shortcomings in
reaching some targets, the project achieved substantial efficacy: with the development and use of data and
information systems for improved health and education sector governance; a draft, pilot-tested strategy for
CRVS strengthening and a substantial boost in birth registrations; strengthened systems for essential medicines
regulation, procurement, and logistics; and the generation of data and knowledge about social protection needs
and performance for improved policies, approaches, and outcomes. Project efficiency was
substantial. Investments contributed to a range of efficiency gains in health and education sector planning,
management, and resource allocation, and in the cost, availability, affordability, and equitable distribution of
essential medicines.

While relevance, efficacy, and efficiency are all rated to be substantial, overall outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory, taking into account moderate shortcomings in achievement of some outcome targets and in
implementation efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)




The overall country context poses a general – and substantial – risk to development outcomes, specifically:
the pervading socio-political fragility of DRC, weak governance, high levels of fraud and corruption, and
limited availability of qualified local vendors (consultants and firms) and staff to provide technical support and
follow-up and to keep the systems running. There are also general concerns about the ability of the
government to finance incremental recurrent costs of the enhanced systems, processes, and capacities
supported by the project, as well as its commitment to sustain the momentum of these activities. The risk is
particularly acute for those activities and outcomes that were only partially achieved prior to project closing.

First, the SDI surveys were not completed by the project’s closing date, and so their results (providing the
perspectives of users of services, and complementing data generated through strengthened information
systems) have not been incorporated into strategic documents, as intended. However, Bank-Executed Trust
Funds have been identified to support data analysis and the finalization of the report for the first SDI survey,
in partnership with the government. Long-term solutions to network saturation constraints will require large
internet bandwidth (e.g., optic fiber) in order to expand and sustain the operation of information systems, at
national and decentralized levels.

Second, shortcomings in the completion of CRVS-related activities under the project also pose a threat to the
full achievement and sustainability of outcomes post-project. The CRVS reform strategy was not completed.
As a consequence, a ministerial decree instituting the CRVS national steering and coordination committees
(responsible for overseeing adherence with the national CRVS strategy and for facilitating coordination of
stakeholders across 15 ministries) was disregarded. Resubmitted to the Prime Minister’s Office for signature
in 2018, the decree remains unsigned. A plan to amend the family code to integrate the confidentiality of
CRVS personal data is unlikely to happen beyond the project’s closing. While birth registration campaigns
did reach targets, not all birth certificates could be provided to parents. Measures were taken under the
project to finalize birth certificate distribution through school administrators and chiefs. A follow-up process is
needed to address birth certificate fraud. Additional birth registration catch-up campaigns are sorely needed,
but unlikely to be sustained by the government because of their high costs.

Third, while strengthening the supply chain for essential medicines contributed substantially to project
outcomes, there were a number of shortcomings in the implementation of related activities. Trainings in the
Strategy for Supply Chain Management of Essential Medicines did not materialize. The rehabilitation of the
national pharmaceutical laboratory could not be completed during the project, so was passed on to the
Regional Disease Surveillance Systems Enhancement (REDISSE) program. A business plan and
administrative and technical manuals for the national medical store network were completed but not fully
operationalized. This poorly-funded network receives almost no government funding, and governance is still
weak.

The ICR does not provide an assessment of the incremental recurrent costs of sustaining the systems,
processes, and capacities developed under the project (including operations, oversight, and maintenance),
or of the government’s ability or commitment to cover these costs. A meeting with the Bank team (10-21-21)
provided more insight. Financial sustainability remains a challenge, given the fragile country context and its
limited fiscal space. This was corroborated by interviews with many stakeholders during the ICR mission. It
was also anticipated as an issue at the project’s design stage, which rated risks for governance and
sustainability as high. It will take additional time for the government to recognize fully the value of strong,
reliable information systems for achieving its human development goals. Additionally, limited fiscal space has
created an environment of acute competition for domestic funding in a fragile country with urgent and vast
socio-economic needs. Business plans and budgets emanating from the project include the costs of systems


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



operation and maintenance, as well as the costs of continued activities. Other sources of financing have
been identified to support these costs, during an interim period. There is financial and technical support for
these needs under ongoing Bank-financed projects. The health systems strengthening project is supporting
health information systems; and REDISSE is continuing support for the drugs logistics management
information system and related activities. Moreover, the Bank has a strong portfolio of social sector projects
in the pipeline. There is also considerable scope for many other development partners to provide continued
support. Sustainability of these systems and capacities will remain a challenge in the short- to medium-term,
and will need continued active support and advocacy in order to strengthen further the government’s
appreciation of the value added of these systems and its commitment to their sustainability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The value of the project was its potential to strengthen country systems in order to improve the delivery of
  services for the poor and enhance sustainability. The project was strategically focused on this
  challenging, pivotal constraint to DRC’s goal of improved human development outcomes, in a fragile, low-
  capacity, conflict-afflicted country. The design built on the work of other development partners and other
  Bank activities (support to census, governance, and decentralization of education information systems in
  selected provinces). The design also focused on the Bank’s comparative advantages, including working
  through cross-sectoral country systems, in-house technical expertise (including pharmaceuticals), and
  effective sector dialogue. Moreover, the design appropriately drew on:lessons from analytic work and
  previous Bank-supported interventions and was grounded in the previous Country Assistance Strategy,
  which influenced its strategic selectivity to maximize chances of success. Exploration of various
  alternatives culminated in the choice of a multisectoral approach, with central government
  coordination. This ultimately limited opportunities for contracting technical agencies and non-
  governmental organizations to provide technical assistance to the various levels of government.

  The project’s design as a standalone operation (versus an additional financing to existing operations)
  aimed to ensure greater visibility and impact of planned interventions and reduce the risk they would be
  relegated to the background. A shortcoming in the design was that there was little discussion or
  exploration of the choice of lending instruments. In retrospect, a cross-sectoral systems and capacity
  building project of this nature may have been better designed as a development policy operation (DPO)
  or an operation with disbursement-linked indicators. These options may well have accelerated reform
  implementation. It is also possible that a DPO may have paved the way for enhanced sustainability after
  project closure.

  Project M&E was well designed, with its PDO indicators focused on utilization of data for planning and
  decision-making and on improvements in essential drugs supply chain management, and equally
  appropriate intermediate indicators. Risk assessment was realistic. Implementation arrangements were
  also appropriate to the context of a potentially challenging project, involving four line ministries, in a low-
  capacity, fragile country context. Roles and responsibilities were judiciously distributed across: a high-
  level Steering Committee; the Ministry of Finance, as coordinating agency; the four line ministries
  (Health; Education; Social Affairs, Labor and Employment; and Social Safety), in line with their technical
  responsibilities and specialized departments’ mandates; and the PIU. Adjustments were made, as


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



     needed, during implementation, including the reallocation of procurement and payment responsibilities
     from line ministries to the PIU.



     Quality-at-Entry Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Except for the last supervision mission, less comprehensive than planned because of COVID-19
 constraints, Bank supervision was conducted regularly and proactively. An Implementation Status and
 Results Report (ISR) was produced for each semester of project implementation for a total of 13 ISRs. The
 Global Financing Facility (Trust Fund manager of the PHRD financing) participated virtually, focusing on
 CRVS activities. Locally-based Bank staff also participated in supervisions. Aide-memoires and
 management letters were detailed, of high quality, and candid in their reporting on
 performance. Notwithstanding a few slight mismatches between ISRs and aide-memoires regarding the
 gravity of issues raised, restructurings and additional financing were completed in a timely manner,
 reflected the project’s needs, and maintained a results focus. Both the Bank team and project-financed
 firms provided technical assistance in M&E, financial management, procurement, safeguards, capacity
 building, and governance.

 Bank staff turnover was high, with four Accountability and Decision-Making (ADM) Task Team Leaders
 (TTLs) during the five-year implementation period). Changes in TTLs brought changes in specialties, and
 only one was based in DRC, from the start of 2018 to the end of 2019. The PIU expressed its appreciation
 of the field-base of that TTL and noted that this improved collaboration and the identification and resolution
 of bottlenecks. One of the co-TTLs (who later became ADM TTL) was a pharmacist, whose skill set
 accelerated the achievement of medicines-related outputs and outcomes. The PIU noted during an ICR
 interview that frequent changes in the TTL, and the time it took the incoming TTLs to understand the
 project, negatively influenced the timeliness of technical reviews and provision of non-objections by the
 Bank. The Bank’s involvement in certain activities (e.g., validation of datasets and deliverables) was
 perceived as micromanagement, which contributed to other challenges, such as prolonged implementation
 of technical assistance, the high costs of contracts, and tense relationships with some vendors.

 While transition arrangements for some activities that could not be completed prior to closing were passed
 on to other financing sources, there is no mention in the ICR of transition arrangements to ensure the
 continuity of systems, processes, capacities, and activity, both in terms of commitment of government and
 stakeholders and in terms of the financing of incremental recurrent costs associated with operations and
 maintenance. However, the Bank team explained (10-21-21 meeting with IEG) that these indeed were
 considered and that they are lining up, from various (Bank and non-Bank) sources, bridge financing of the
 costs, alongside a continued strategy of technical support, dialogue, advocacy and demonstration effect to
 raise further the government’s appreciation, commitment, and, eventually, financing of these essential
 systems.

 .




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework and the indicators, established at the design stage, were adequate for monitoring
 project progress and outcomes. Three initial PDO-level indicators measured evidence-based management
 and decision-making informed by data emanating from education and health management information
 systems and SDI surveys, which were to provide the perspective of users of services. The remaining two
 indicators tracked, respectively, improvements in the drugs regulatory functions and the quality of
 procurement of essential medicines. Intermediate outcome indicators were also well chosen, with logical
 links to the outcome indicators. The results framework in the PAD provided the indicator name, specified
 the unit of measure, established the baseline and cumulative target values for each project year, and
 specified the frequency of data collection, source of data, and the agency responsible for data
 collection. When substantial Additional Financing was approved in March 2016, the results framework was
 appropriately revised to refine some indicator definitions (without changing their meaning), add, drop, and
 replace indicators (PDO and intermediate-level), and increase targets, all with a view to reflect new and
 expanded areas of intervention (CRVS and essential medicines regulation, procurement, and logistics
 system).



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIU and Bank teams effectively ensured that most data was made available in a timely manner in
  support of sound project monitoring. The PIU was regular in producing a quarterly implementation report,
  which updated progress, highlighted challenges, and proposed next steps for each project
  subcomponent. The quarterly reports were more frequent than many other projects, which typically issue
  reports on a semi-annual basis. Project reports coinciding with the Bank’s ISRs also reported on
  deliverables to update the project results framework. A specific monitoring framework was designed for
  CRVS activities, which reported on key activities and related milestones. While progress reports
  highlighted challenges, such as procurement delays and low buy-in of some beneficiaries and
  stakeholders, they were not sufficiently updated to reflect delays in vendor reporting.



c. M&E Utilization
  The increased availability of better quality data (generated from improvements to health and education
  management information systems), their wide dissemination through the Internet, and their use for
  management and decision-making at decentralized levels, all contributed to the evidence-based design
  of Annual Work Plans of health districts. Information generated by regular monitoring and reporting of
  project progress informed the restructurings and Additional Financing. The SDI surveys, and related
  follow-up on priority actions plan (a PDO-level indicator), could not be completed prior to project closing,

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



  which was a missed opportunity to access and act upon the perspectives of those who use health and
  education services.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project focused on institutional capacity building at national, provincial, and sub-provincial levels. As
   such, it was classified as a Category C project, with no environmental or social safeguards policies
   triggered.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The project’s audit reports were unqualified and submitted in a timely
   manner throughout implementation. This achievement was due in part to the presence of a full-time
   internal auditor in the PIU. At the mid-term review stage, an in-depth review confirmed that FM systems still
   met minimum Bank requirements. Of the US$56.08 million funding allocated to the project, $3.46 million
   was returned. The ICR asserts that a prompt reevaluation by the project team of services to be delivered
   may have facilitated the full use of these funds. The ICR also notes a few FM shortcomings: unjustified
   advances to vendors; checks made to individuals instead of firms; accounting updating and reconciliation
   delays; and people in charge of activities not commenting on internal audit reports. The Bank’s final
   reporting on FM was delayed by over a year, up to three months after the closing date.

   Procurement was challenged by the combination of the fragile country context and the ongoing COVID-19
   pandemic. The processing and management of high-value contracts with UNESCO and the Ministry of
   Education (for acquisition of the information system) and with CIVI.POL (for CRVS) faced delays, caused
   by weak cooperation with the Ministry of Education and sudden school closures in the wake of COVID-
   19. A year was lost recruiting a qualified firm to conduct the SDI surveys, with a first round of procurement
   ultimately deemed unsuccessful. Cooperation was lacking between MOH and the hired firm, especially due
   to the reluctance of MOH to share data, which delayed the firm’s ability to develop the survey sample
   frame. Some procurements were ultimately dropped from the plan, given the inadequate time remaining to
   complete them. The PIU was not consistent in its use of the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
   Procurement system for processing and recording procurements, required by the Bank. The procurement
   risk was consistently rated substantial throughout implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Over and above the capacity building of the four beneficiary ministries under this project, the PIU and the
   Ministry of Finance (where the PIU was housed) acquired new project implementing capacities, particularly

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



   in the areas of multisectoral coordination, M&E, and fiduciary functions. The hiring of consultants and firms
   included those from developed and developing countries, the latter bringing substantial African
   experience. Project-financed study tours (to Cote d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, Uganda, and
   Zambia), the learning from other good practices (Madagascar and Tanzania), and the attendance at a
   conference in Zambia inspired capacity building and systems designs for CRVS and essential
   medicines. Together, the technical assistance, study tours, and conference attendance financed under the
   project provided unique opportunities for both North-South and South-South exchange.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are a subset of the lessons presented in the ICR, reworded by IEG to be more
succinct:

      A multisectoral project aimed at improved systems, capacity, and transparency risks being
       undermined by stakeholders with conflicting stakes and interests, especially if these were not
       assessed at the design stage. In retrospect, a political economy analysis would have enabled
       the anticipation, mitigation, and better management of incidents of lack of support and
       interference that arose during the project, especially regarding CVRS reform and the
       increased autonomy of essential medicines acquisition.
      Failure to conduct a careful and systematic assessment of the various lending instruments
       and their relative strengths and drawbacks during the design phase can be a missed
       opportunity for choosing the right instrument that will produce optimal results. This is
       especially true for a multisectoral operation, focused on institution building in a fragile, low-
       capacity environment. In retrospect, instruments that may have better supported the project’s
       objectives included disbursement-linked indicators, development policy lending, and Identity
       for Development (ID4D).
      The proper range and mix of staff expertise required for a complex, multisectoral operation,
       as well as their in-country location, are critical for quality Bank support to project design,
       implementation, and the achievement of results, especially in a low-capacity country. High


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



         staff turnover, an imbalance or underrepresentation of requisite technical skills, and changes
         in TTLs (and in their expertise) all can undermine dialogue, problem-solving, and results.
        It is possible to support the continuity and resilience of a project supporting reforms and
         institution building, but only if necessary proactive measures are taken. This was
         demonstrated by other projects and tasks that were able to continue meetings, including new
         project preparation. This project, however, could have done more to consolidate important
         results, even under COVID-19 restrictions, especially the greater use of information
         technology for monitoring, validation of deliverables, building of stakeholder ownership, and
         online training.
        Information technology holds great potential for facilitating survey work. The under-
         exploitation of this potential can undermine the timeliness, efficiency, and quality of survey
         results. The paper-based data collection method used for the SDI survey caused significant
         delays that ultimately cut short analysis, report writing, and use of survey results for services
         improvement. Electronic methods (for example, Computer-Assisted Personal Interview)
         could have accelerated recording of data and analysis.

IEG’s review offers one additional lesson:

        Attention to sustainability is critical during project design and throughout
         implementation. This involves the continued tailoring and prioritizing of interventions to fit the
         government’s interest and commitment and its ability to finance incremental recurrent costs
         post-project. It also involves advocacy work to raise the interest, appreciation, and
         commitment of government and stakeholders to project activities and results and recognition
         of their contributions to national goals. Such dialogue, advocacy, and demonstration effects
         may take more time than the life of one project and would thus require continued effort for
         several years post-project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Quality of Evidence and Results Orientation. The ICR is clear and systematic in its presentation of the
evidence. The results orientation is strong, with an appropriate emphasis on the ultimate use of data, systems,
and instruments for improved management and decision-making. Moreover, the discussion of efficacy is well
built around the project’s results chain, establishing the links across inputs, outputs, intermediate outcomes,
and outcomes. One minor shortcoming is that a number of shortfalls in the undertaking and completion of
project activities, mentioned in the Risk to Development Outcome section, are not included in the Efficacy
section.

Quality of Analysis. The building of the efficacy discussion around the project’s results chain supported a
quality analysis. Both the achievements and the shortcomings are discussed and explored, shedding light on
factors that facilitated and undermined project performance and results. This was particularly challenging (but


                                                                                                        Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)



successfully done), given the institution-building nature of the project and the complex country context. The
analysis is candid and insightful.

Quality of Lessons. The ICR’s strong evidence and analysis culminated in useful and relevant lessons for
DRC, as well as for other countries. The first lesson, however, about the political economy analysis, might be
more explicitly linked with the evidence. IEG added to this ICRR an additional lesson about the importance of
vigilant and continued attention to sustainability, which was prominent in the ICR’s analysis.

Internal Consistency, Adherence to Guidelines, and Conciseness. This ICR is well written and cogent, and
respectful of the guidelines. One inconsistency between the efficacy section and Annex 1 was followed up with
the TTL: two different end-result values are presented for the sub-indicator measuring the share of PHRD-
funded health zones that developed annual work plans and reports based on improved health and education
information systems data, which would be made available on the internet: 51.4 percent (Efficacy section, p. 14)
and 54.1 percent (Annex 1 Results Framework).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
