     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022687

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P107137                                   BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                   Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50040,IDA-57120,IDA-57130             30-Apr-2017                                         95,730,598.46

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jul-2011                               31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            99,759,466.40                                              0.00

 Actual                                        95,730,598.46                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Richard Anson              J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA, 2011) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, 2011), was to: “improve access to sustainable basic infrastructure and services for
   the most disadvantaged rural Communities selected in some of the poorest municipalities of the Recipient” (or
   referring to Bolivia).

   While the Community Investment in Rural Areas Project (PICAR) had three level-2 restructurings (following
   the additional financing/AF), the PDO remained the same. There were some adjustments in a few of the

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



   outcome and output indicators and targets, with respect to the same PDO and components, as described in
   section 2 (e). Since the targets were revised upwards, per the ICRR guidelines, there is no need for a split
   rating.

   For purposes of assessing the extent to which the PDO was achieved (in Section 4), this review parses the
   PDO into two objectives:

   Objective 1: to improve access to basic infrastructure and services for the most disadvantaged rural
   communities selected in some of the poorest municipalities of Bolivia; and

   Objective 2: to sustain basic infrastructure and services for the most disadvantaged rural communities
   selected in some of the poorest municipalities of Bolivia.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1 - Community Capacity Building: (Original allocation: US$13.5 million; Actual: 6.99 million). This
   component aimed at supporting communities to enable them to identify, prepare, implement, operate, and
   maintain community investment subprojects (under Component 2) through providing to: communities
   technical assistance (TA), training, institutional strengthening, awareness campaigns for cross-cutting
   themes; and to participating municipalities/local entities focused TA to support and supervise the planning
   and implementation of subprojects and to ensure compliance with applicable technical standards.

   2 - Community-Driven Development Investment (Original allocation (with AF): US$ 80.1 million; Actual:
   US$96.55 million). This component aimed to empower local selected communities through financing the
   provision of community investment grants to participating communities for community investment
   subprojects identified, prioritized and implemented by communities (under Component 1), based on a CDD
   approach. Community subprojects included a wide range of activities, including an open menu of social and
   economic investments, based on a demand-driven approach (e.g., rural infrastructure, basic services,
   vulnerability-reduction, food security and nutrition enhancement, and management of natural
   resources). Communities were expected to co-finance a minimum of 10 percent (in kind) of the cost of their
   subproject.

   3 - Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (Original allocation: US$13.5 million; Actual: 10.8 million). This
   component aimed to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Rural Development and Land
   (MRDL) and its decentralized unit EMPODERAR, and a Project Coordination Unit (PCU, central and
   regional branches), for sound management (including planning, procurement, financial aspects),



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



  coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system of the Project, through provision of the required TA
  support, operational funding, studies, audits, and TA support.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  (i) Project Cost: The total project cost at approval was US$43.0 million (including US$3.0 million as
  contribution from beneficiary communities). Together with the Additional Financing (AF, of US$64.1 million),
  the total project costs were US$107.1 million. The actual project cost at closing was US$114.3 million (or
  about 107% of estimated total project costs). The difference was due to some changes in the costs of
  components, including increased contributions from participating communities (see ICR, Annex 3).

  (ii) Financing: At approval, the IDA credit (IDA-50040) was US$40.0 million, with beneficiary communities
  contributing a counterpart amount equivalent to US$3.0 million. The AF provided an additional US$60.0
  million (through two IDA Credits: IDA-57120 for $55.7 million; IDA-57130 for US$4.3 million). By the closing
  of the project, total financing (and disbursements) was US$114.3 million (with total IDA of US$95.7 million
  and community counterpart of US$18.6 million).

  (iii) Borrower/Recipient Contribution: At approval, the local participating community counterpart
  contribution was US$3.0 million; at project closing, the actual community contribution increased to US$18.6
  million) (ICR, Annex 3).

  (iv) Dates: The project was approved on July 21, 2011, became effective on November 23, 2011. A mid-
  term review was carried out in September, 2014. The original closing was April 30, 2017, with the actual
  closing date being December 31, 2020 (i.e., an extension of 44 months).

  (v) Restructurings and Significant Changes During Implementation: The project had three level-2
  restructurings (especially following the mid-term review, and the subsequent AF). While the PDO and 3
  components were not revised, several PDO indicators and their targets were revised and increased as part
  of the AF (e.g., original PDO indicator was replaced by 3 intermediate result indicators; revision and
  disaggregation of no. of direct project beneficiaries; introduction of improved access to infrastructure and
  services). The main revisions and their rationale of the restructurings/changes were as follows (ICR, paras.
  22-30):

  (a) Restructuring #1 (June 2019): The significantly reduced implementation period of the AF left insufficient
  time to provide adequate technical support during the initial operational and maintenance phases of
  investments in accordance with the agricultural production calendar. The objective of this restructuring was
  to strengthen the technical assistance and support provided to community beneficiaries to better ensure
  post-project sustainability of investments and to extend the closing date by 5 months. The extension and
  the reallocation of proceeds allowed the Project to better respond to expectations and demands generated
  during the community participatory planning (CPP) and to reach an additional 45 eligible communities;

  (b) Restructuring #2 (April 2020): Socio-political turbulence related to the contested results of the late 2019
  general elections required a second extension of the closing date by 3 months. The transition to a new
  administration had repercussions on project implementation, including the delay by Ministry of Economy
  and Finance (MEF) in transferring project financial resources to the accounts of the corresponding
  beneficiary communities. As a result, implementation of the last group of 131 subprojects was delayed and
  their completion was at risk. The extension of the closing date also allowed the Project to meet the demand-

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



   driven investments of 87 additional communities, equivalent to 2,721 families, by fully completing their
   subprojects; and

   (c) Restructuring #3 (July 2020): Mobility restrictions and health risks derived from the COVID-19 pandemic
   compromised the delivery of supplies and the provision of technical assistance (TA) according to the
   established implementation schedule, requiring a third and final extension of the project closing date by five
   months. This allowed the Project to adapt to the new circumstances by providing close follow-up and TA,
   with improved measures and protective equipment to guard against COVID-19.

   Rationale for Restructurings: The ICR provides sound explanations for the above cited restructurings and
   corresponding changes (ICR, paras. 25-29); the changes did not modify the project’s PDO, and underlying
   theory of change (which was reconstructed in the ICR, Figure 1). The main reasons for the AF and resulting
   restructurings included: (i) scaling-up project activities; (ii) addition of Pando Department, due to its high
   level of vulnerability to food insecurity and its numerous indigenous population; (iii) difficulty in measuring a
   “social capital index”, which was eventually replaced by 3 relevant separate indicators, thereby enhancing
   clarity; (iv) addition of relevant performance indicators to emphasize subproject completion and
   sustainability. All of the indicators involved increased targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were substantially relevant to addressing the country’s key developmental
challenges and to contributing to the achievement of the country’s developmental strategies (e.g., National
Development Plans (2006-2010, and 2010-2015); National Agricultural Strategy for Agriculture and Rural
Development; Government’s Decentralization Policy, especially to reduce extreme poverty and inclusion of
marginalized groups, especially indigenous). The project also was and remained during implementation
strongly aligned with and addressed key elements and pillars of the Bank’s analytical and strategy work and
investment projects, including: Interim Strategy (2010 and 2011); Poverty Reduction Strategy; Country
Partnership Framework (CPF, for 2016-2020, especially pillars 1 and 2); Agricultural Public Expenditure
Review (2010); Rural Productivity Study (2011); lessons from relevant projects in the rural and social
sectors, including (prior to and during project period): Rural Communities Project; Indigenous Peoples
Development Project; Rural Alliances Project; Second Participatory Rural Investment Project; Land for
Agricultural Development Project; Innovation and Agricultural Services Project.

More specifically, the design of this project (PICAR) emphasized the following unique aspects to
complement and reinforce the relevance of its objective to the Government’s and Bank’s poverty reduction
agenda in Bolivia (ICR, paras. 1-8, 31-37): (i) targeting some of the poorest and most vulnerable rural
communities not reached by other projects, including targeting of indigenous population and low income
geographical areas; (ii) addressing the needs of the extreme poor and marginalized rural communities
(rather than producer organizations or municipalities), at a much more granular implementation scale,
including being the first Bank project working with an indigenous local/municipality government; and (iii)
working in synergy within the broader development activities pursued by municipalities. Most importantly,
the ICR noted that this Project was designed to be the first operation in Bolivia to operate through direct
transfer of investment funds to and for self-management by rural communities.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



               While the project’s objectives were highly relevant to the development strategies of both the government
               and the World Bank, the aim to only “improve access to sustainable infrastructure and services” for the
               most disadvantaged rural communities reflected a low level of ambition. This review concluded therefore
               that the relevance of the project’s objective was at best “substantially” relevant to the needs of the target
               beneficiaries.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to basic infrastructure and services for the most disadvantaged rural communities
                             selected in some of the poorest municipalities of Bolivia.

                             Rationale
                             While the project’s original design included a results framework in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), it
                             did not include a theory of change (ToC) because it was not required at the time the PAD was written. The
                             ICR reconstructed a ToC for the project, which was consistent with its overall PDO, core outcomes and
                             components (ICR, Figure 1). The ICR highlights the rationale for addressing the main constraints (ICR, paras.
                             2 - 8) to providing improved access to basic infrastructure and services for marginalized and indigenous rural
                             population.

                             Theory of Change: The ToC emphasizes the strategies and associated activities/inputs and outputs toward
                             generating the main PDO outcome of improved access to basic infrastructure and services for the most
                             disadvantaged rural communities selected in some of the poorest municipalities (see ICR, para. 9 and Figure
                             1). The prioritized inputs included: (a) carrying out various activities involving community capacity building,
                             including: gender-sensitive participatory planning/consultations to identify and agree on priority needs in
                             targeted areas; provision of gender-sensitive training activities to strengthen communities’ capacities to
                             manage their entire subproject cycle; and (b) community investment grants to finance community prioritized
                             needs with respect to the menu of infrastructure/service options; providing design TA, providing O&M training;
                             and conducting accountability mechanisms. These inputs generated the outputs, such as completed
                             community participatory plans and subprojects. Resulting outcomes were improved access to basic
                             infrastructure and services. Expected longer-term outcomes were contributing to reduction of extreme poverty
                             and inclusion of marginalized groups.

                             Key Outputs (ICR, Annex 1: original and revised targets during restructuring(s) are noted below):

                                        No. of community participatory plans: original target: NA; actual: 996;
                                        No. of community subprojects: target: 1,000; actual: 2,197; Percent of Target: 219%;

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)




      No. of completed subprojects: revised target (2015): 1,758; actual: 2,197; Percent of Target: 125%;
         (ICR shows the disaggregation by the various types of completed subprojects/No. of beneficiaries);
             o 488 irrigation subprojects, for 73,638 beneficiaries;
             o 129 road improvement subprojects for 29,866 beneficiaries;
             o 1,303 agricultural productive investments for 206,970 beneficiaries;
             o 199 water and sanitation subprojects for 40,500 beneficiaries;
             o 29 rural electrification with solar panels subprojects for 3,709 beneficiaries;
             o 49 other types of investments for 7,936 beneficiaries.

Key Outcomes (ICR/Annex 1: original and revised targets during restructuring(s) are noted below):

      Beneficiary community improvement in Social Capital Index (as %, comprised of 4 sub-indicators):
         original target: 75% (in years 2-5); this indicator was dropped as part of project restructuring (2015),
         too complex to track and compute, and replaced by three other performance indicators, covering both
         objectives; see below marked with *);
        No. of direct beneficiaries: original target: 150,000; revised target (2015): 350,000; actual: 362,619;
         Percent of Revised Target: 103.6%;
        Percentage of female beneficiaries: original target: 45%; actual: 49.7%; Percent of Target: 110%;
        Percentage of indigenous beneficiaries: original target: 85%; actual: 92%; Percent of Target: 108%;
        Percentage of female heads of household: original target: 20%; actual: 49.7%; Percent of Target:
         110%;
        No. of beneficiary communities categorized as “Type A” classification (communities located in the
         poorest municipalities of Bolivia, based on indicators of “poverty and vulnerability”, ICR, para. 13):
         total: 3,058 communities; actual: 1,284 communities: Percent of total: 42%;
        Improved access to basic infrastructure and services in targeted communities (as follows):
               o No. of Months/mths per year/yr. of additional road access: target (2015): 3 mths/yr; actual: 3
                 mths/yr; Percent of Target: 100%;
               o No. of hectares of new/improved irrigated area: target (2015): 1,400 ha.; actual: 2,611 ha.;
                 Percent of Target: 187%;
               o Km. of fences constructed: target: 480 km. (2015); actual: 2,809 km.; Percent of Target: 585%;
               o Cubic meters of additional safe potable water per day: target (2015): 400 cubic meters per day;
                 actual: 523 cubic meters per day; Percent of Target: 130%;
        Percent of subprojects satisfactorily completed implementation* (including accounting/audits): target
         (2015): 80%; actual: 100%; Percent of Target: 125%;
        Percent of completed subprojects whose technical and fiduciary audits have no substantial remarks*:
         target (2015): target (2015): 90; actual: 98; Percent of Target: 109%;
        Percent of community members satisfied with subproject outputs: target: 75%; actual: 94%; Percent of
         Target: 125%;
        Percent of women satisfied with subproject outputs: target: 75%; actual: 96%; Percentage of Target:
         128%;

The efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is rated Substantial, because the targets for providing
access to basic infrastructure to the most disadvantaged rural communities in some of the poorest
municipalities, and marginalized members within beneficiary communities were reached, and in most cases,
exceeded.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To sustain basic infrastructure and services for the most disadvantaged rural communities selected in some
of the poorest municipalities of Bolivia.

Rationale
Similar to Objective 1, the rationale for Objective 2 is reflected in the project’s original design and in the
Theory of Change/ToC reconstructed in the ICR (paras. 9-13, and Figure 1), with respect to the various types
of project-funded activities/inputs which contributed to generating sustainable outputs and resulting in
sustainable outcomes (see key indicators below). The project’s restructurings also contributed to achieving
sustained outputs and outcomes, thereby contributing to the longer-term objectives of reduced extreme
poverty and enhanced inclusion of marginalized groups.

Key Outputs (ICR, Annex 1):

      No. of beneficiaries trained in project management: target (2015): 14,000; actual: 23,282; Percent of
         Target: 166%;
        Percentage of women trained in project management: target: 40%; actual: 53%; Percent of Target:
         132%;
        No. of beneficiaries engaged in Subproject Implementation Committees: target: 7,800; actual: 8,966;
         Percent of Target: 115 %;
        Percentage of female beneficiaries engaged in Subproject Implementation Committees: target: 50;
         actual: 66%; Percent of Target: 132 %;
        No. of Rounds Completed of Beneficiary Satisfaction Survey: target: 3; actual: 3; Percent of Target:
         100%;
        No. of Evaluations for Mid-Term Reviews/MTRs: target: 2; actual: 2; Percent of Target: 100%;
        No. of Final Project Evaluation: target: 1; actual 1; Percent of Target: 100%;
        No. of Gender and Social Final Evaluations: target: 1; actual 1; Percent of Target: 100%;

Key Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1):

      No. and Percentage of subprojects completed and operational for 12 months or more at the time of
       project closure (as a strong proxy indicator of adequate O&M and likely subproject sustainability): No.:
       1,960 subprojects; Percentage of total subprojects financed by project: 89.2% (out of 2,197
       subprojects)
      Percentage of subprojects fully functional (12 months after completion but before closing date, as
       indicator of sustainability of infrastructure and services subprojects): Original target: 70%; revised
       target (2015): 75%; Actual: 99.7%; Percent of Revised Target: 132%;
      Percentage of completed subprojects whose technical and fiduciary audits included no
       “substantial remarks”, implying that subprojects showed adequate O&M and were sustainable* (ICR,

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



                                    Annex 1): target (2015): 90%; actual: 98%; Percent of Target: 109%; (based on final financial and
                                    operational audit, conducted in 2020); and
                                   Percentage of beneficiaries which perceived “very good” and “good” O&M of subprojects executed by
                                    the communities (based on final beneficiary satisfaction survey/2020: 90% (ICR, Annex 7, Table 2).

                            In addition to the above performance indicators, the project supported various activities which contributed to
                            sub-project sustainability and broader community development in target communities, (ICR, para. 45 and 46,
                            and findings of the various project evaluations/beneficiary assessments, summarized in the ICR, Annex 7):

                                   Asset sustainability, since the project supported community-level training and “communities were
                                    sufficiently empowered and organized to assume responsibility for subproject O&M, particularly for
                                    productive infrastructure and micro-irrigation subprojects” (ICR, para. 45);
                                   Fiscal and environmental sustainability, through delegating O&M responsibilities to beneficiary
                                    communities, and supporting various types of training in project management, including O&M of
                                    community subprojects;
                                   Strengthening some of the productive organization/producer associations in some of the beneficiary
                                    communities, including training for the sustainability of the subprojects (ICR, para. 45);

                            Provision of technical assistance/TA to “boost the sustainability of project investments” and to provide “post-
                            investment TA”, which enhanced the prospects for strong subproject sustainability (ICR, para. 45).

                            In summary, the efficacy with which objective 2 was achieved is rated “Substantial”, as reflected in meeting or
                            exceeding all of the above expected outputs and outcomes, in addition to the additional project-supported
                            interventions to enhance strong subproject O&M and sustainability, and the supporting evidence, as cited in
                            the ICR.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the extent to which the original objectives (which remained the same), and their original
                            and revised targets arising from the 4 restructurings (and mainly following the MTR, in 2015) were achieved is
                            rated Substantial. The targets for the main outputs and outcomes for both objectives were exceeded in
                            almost all cases (21 out of 26 performance indicators, while meeting the other 5 targets), and included an
                            increase in the level of ambition arising from the AF. In addition, the project contributed to enhanced
                            capacities of various community-based groups, which are likely to have contributed to subproject
                            sustainability, and supported by the various sources of evidence cited above.




                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Overall, the project’s performance and results demonstrated an efficiency rating of Substantial, based on various
evidenced-based tools and analyses applied and presented in the ICR (ICR, paras. 51 – 59, and Annex 4
presents further details). The methodology used to assess efficiency involved applying financial and economic
analyses to 64 “representative” subprojects (out of a total of 2,197 subprojects financed by the project, randomly
chosen), involving 5 main types of subprojects, and drawing on results of mid-term evaluation and beneficiary
satisfaction surveys. The comparative results of the quantitative analyses are summarized in Table 1:

Table 1: Summary of Average Efficiency Measures for 64 Randomly Chosen CDD Sub-projects

              Efficiency Measure                    PAD             AF               ICR
  1) Financial Rate of Return/FRR (20 yrs)                                         15.7 % *
  2) Economic Rate of Return/ERR (20 yrs.)          13%           13.9%            18.8 % *
  3) Financial Rate of Return/FRR (20 yrs)                                         17.7% **
  4) Economic Rate of Return/ERR (20 yrs.)                                          21.0 **
  5) Financial Rate of Return (based on
                                                                                    19.9%
increased beneficiary benefits of 20%)
  6) Net Present Value (financial) US$ M                                         $11.3 million
  7) Net Present Value (economic)                                                $24.5 million
  8) Benefit Cost Ratio (financial)                                                  1.17
  9) Benefit Cost Ratio (economic)                                                   1.33

* Includes direct and indirect project costs, including TA;

** Excludes project management/TA costs.

The ICR conducted a disaggregated analyses of various enterprises, which showed favorable results, including:
(a) Communal and women’s subprojects showed positive returns; (b) Investments for road infrastructure
improvement, micro-irrigation systems and productive infrastructure showed positive returns, given their direct
relation to improved agricultural productivity and access to markets; (c) Sanitation and electrification subprojects
did not have positive returns on investment in economic and financial terms given they have no direct
connection to agricultural activities in rural areas, and have their own benefits and costs. The profitable
investments were found in all geographical areas/departments, except for Oruro, where economic and financial
indicators were below the cost of capital and social discount rate, and where fewer micro-irrigation subprojects
were financed. See Annex 4 of the ICR for further details.

Cost-effectiveness.Indicators of cost-effectiveness generated by the ICR show that the Project had positive
results compared with similar projects implemented by governmental institutions (see ICR, Annex 4, Table
9). Differences in unit costs in this project for infrastructure ranged from: (a) 18 percent less for micro-irrigation
(incremental hectares); (b) to 31 percent less for sanitation (connection to the sanitation system); and (c) 69
percent less for electrification (grid connection). The ICR also highlights design aspects which contributed to the

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



project’s efficiency and cost-effectiveness, given Government requirements for: limiting the percentage of
operational costs of public projects (not to exceed 10% of project costs); requiring local government budgets to
include O&M funds for infrastructure; and requiring O&M responsibilities to be borne by beneficiary communities.
The ICR provides positive evidence of the project’s implementation and O&M efficiencies and mechanisms with
respect to involving the beneficiary communities (ICR, paras. 57-59).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                13.90
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                             18.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating is based on the assessment of the 3 dimensions as summarized above, namely:

(1) Substantial rating for Relevance of Objectives: Based on the project initial and continued (throughout
implementation) strong alignment with: Government’s national, regional and agricultural policies, strategies and
targets; and the Bank’s country partnership strategy (CPSs), analytical reports for the agricultural and social
sectors, poverty reduction and project portfolio involving the relevant sector (as cited above) the rating of the
relevance of the project’s objective would have been high. However, the project’s level of ambition was low,
especially in the light of the magnitude of social and economic requirements of the beneficiary
communities. Therefore, the relevance of the objective has been rated substantial;

(2) Substantial rating for Efficacy. which reflected: the results of the project’s 4 restructurings (especially
following the AF in 2015); an increase in the level of ambition of various performance indicator targets; and
meeting and exceeding most of the performance targets for the two complementary objectives, also supported
by supplemental evidence presented in the ICR, and cited above (especially ICR, paras. 43 – 45);

(3) Substantial rating for Efficiency, as reflected by the ex-post financial and economic quantitative analyses
of a sample of representative subprojects, complemented by a favorable cost-effectiveness of investments, and
qualitative/comparative assessments.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Overall, there is “Moderate” risk to sustaining the project’s outcomes, especially because the four main risks
highlighted are, according to the ICR, likely to occur but are outside the direct control of the Project (ICR,
para. 97). Moreover, while the project design and implementation aimed to address some of the underlying
risk factors, the ICR was not specific, nor is there an explicit follow-up program/project to address the risks
and consolidate the gains made with the project’s support.

    a. “Substantial” Risk of Unsustained Appropriate Government Policies and Programs: The social capital
       and capacity of communities for enhanced local governance fostered by PICAR could fade if
       Government policy and supporting programs were to move away from sustaining community driven
       development and decentralization policies and programs; addressing this factor also can help reduce
       the other risks;
    b. Moderate risk of the effect of the aging of the population and migration trends: During the next
       decade the proportion of working age population in beneficiary rural communities will fall. This will be
       exacerbated by increased rural to urban migration, with the possibility that the project’s infrastructure
       can no longer be adequately operated and maintained; the project’s proposed mitigation measures
       may not be sufficient;
    c. “Moderate” risks in market trends: The risks associated with likely changes/fluctuations in prices,
       production quality, and timing of delivery for honoring contracts hamper the communities’ ability to
       maintain and sustain the expanded infrastructure and services;

“Moderate” risks of environment/climate change: It is likely that climate change trends in Bolivia will threaten
the ease of ensuring adequate O&M, and hence ensuring sustainability of the project’s infrastructure and
services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The quality-at-entry of PICAR is rated Satisfactory with minor shortcomings, based on the following
  evidence (ICR, para. 94):

  (i) Project design and operational methodology benefited from applying and customizing relevant design
  lessons (e.g., CDD participatory approach; empowerment processes/mechanisms of communities),
  arising from two decades of World Bank-supported community-driven operations throughout Latin
  America and beyond, and from the Bank’s previous successful engagement with the client through its
  operational arm (i.e., EMPODERAR);




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



  (ii) The Project’s PDO and Results Indicators reflected a modest level of ambition, since PICAR focused
  on improving access to sustainable infrastructure and services, rather than also including more specific
  objectives and result indicators on achieving improved well-being/quality of life of the target population;

  (iii) Design and inclusion of an Impact Evaluation Study was unrealistic and overly ambitious, and did not
  address the Government’s reluctance for the inclusion of the IE, although subsequently, the project
  included beneficiary surveys;

  (iv) Sound poverty, gender, and social development aspects were incorporated in the project design, with
  the Bank’s team playing a proactive role to incorporate relevant lessons and to include as part of the risk
  assessment, while recognizing the risk mitigation measures were relatively weak;

  (v) Environmental risks were properly assessed as part of project preparation, and all the relevant
  environmental safeguards were triggered;

  (vi) Project implementation arrangements were well assessed and designed, based on a deep
  understanding of the context and a solid operational proposal;

  (vii) The project design addressed the most relevant project design and implementation risks, including:
  relevant preparation studies; assessment of the political and social context at various levels; direct
  transfer of funds to beneficiary communities to minimize bureaucratic hurdles; measures to shield project
  from “political interference” and “elite capture”; measures to enhance community human capital
  capacities.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was Satisfactory, based on the candid evidence provided in the ICR (para. 95)
 and the other project documentation, especially the Implementation Support Reports/ISRs, MTR report and
 the supporting two project evaluation studies, which reflected a constructive Bank role.:

 Three aspects of the Bank’s supervision were noteworthy:

 (i) The World Bank’s Project Team/members’ focus was solid: proactive, timely, supportive, collaborative
 and results oriented (including timely/regular missions, with adequate skills mix, continuity of TTLs, and
 responsiveness to project needs, including 4 project restructurings and 3 closing date extensions to enable
 completion of subprojects, and inclusion of technical support from FAO experts with respect to agricultural
 productivity and an innovative M&E system);

 (ii) Bank Team’s supervision reporting closely tracked performance targets to ensure strong links with
 results and to reflect candid project performance assessments and identification of challenges. The ICR
 highlighted the design shortcomings, namely the lack of clear and measurable project benefit indicators,
 the design flaws of the proposed IE study, and the Bank’s role in re-adjusting the project’s Results


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



 Framework, introduction and use of several project evaluations to help guide implementation and ensure
 strong results and technical inputs to help ensure a comprehensive and useful M&E system;

 (iii) Bank team’s supervision of fiduciary (financial management and procurement) and environmental and
 social safeguards aspects were well managed by experienced World Bank specialists posted in country,
 and working effectively with HQ colleagues and Government counterparts.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the M&E system was well designed to track project activities and performance indicators and
 targets involving technical, fiduciary, safeguards and administrative processes and systems, based on the
 following evidence presented in the ICR, with the aim of enabling informed and timely decisions and
 institutional learning (paras. 80-81), including:

 (i) generating a database in parallel with the subproject cycle; (ii) using a milestone logic to enable close
 subproject follow up; (iii) geo-referencing the location of subprojects; (iv) identifying existing community
 infrastructure; (v) generating necessary information according to different tiers of analysis; (vi) generating
 implementation tools for the technical staff; and (vii) following-up on consulting contracts executed by
 communities.

 At the same time, the ICR is candid in highlighting four M&E design shortfalls, including: (i) “unambitious”
 PDO, with weak indicators which were not aligned with the PDO, given that the project focused on access,
 rather than enhanced outcomes arising from expanded access; (ii) some targets lacking ambition, as
 reflected by significant overachievement of some targets; (iii) overly complex core indicator (social capital
 index), which was replaced by three separate outcome indicators; and (iv) overly complex design of the IE
 study, which had to be replaced by smaller evaluation studies and beneficiary assessments (which proved
 to be useful).



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of all planned and adjusted (especially IE) M&E activities was satisfactory, and the Geo-
  referenced Management Information System (GMIS) worked effectively, based on evidence presented in
  the ICR (paras. 82-84):

  (i) Information on all result indicators was collected consistently and was of sound quality, including entry
  profiles at the community level, notwithstanding the inadequate baseline information; (ii) all Project

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



  information was managed through the GMIS, enabling the Project to effectively monitor activities and add
  to a repository of large volumes of administrative, financial, and technical data across projects managed
  by EMPODERAR. As a result, a rich database of information on social, administrative, and financial
  aspects was created; and (iii) both MTRs were informed by a sound project evaluation, conducted by an
  independent third party.

  As stated above, the IE was not implemented prior to the AF due to technical factors, and was dropped
  thereafter. There were 3 main reasons: complexity; inadequacy of data gathering; and Government
  resistance to allocate adequate resources (which also reflected technical and financial problems arising
  in another IE of a previous project).

  Accordingly, the Bank team took an active role in working out and agreeing with Government
  comprehensive alternative arrangements/tools to the IE by designing and implementing: (i) a
  comprehensive evaluation by a third party in two phases, supported by a sound evaluation methodology,
  tools and beneficiary surveys, with respect to achieving the objectives and key targets; (ii) two mid-term
  evaluations of project performance; (iii) an in-depth economic analyses of subprojects for the AF; and (iv)
  a final evaluation of gender and social dimensions.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR presents positive evidence on the effective utilization of the results of the project’s M&E system,
  including (ICR, para. 85):

  (i) Commissioned evaluations and data collected by the PIU Central and Regional Offices were used for
  preparing the project progress reports, which were submitted to the line ministries and to the World
  Bank;

  (ii) The progress reports provided important inputs for the World Bank’s participatory implementation
  support missions;

  (iii) Project management used the M&E data, which was integrated the GMIS, for monitoring
  implementation progress, FM, procurement, disbursements, making course corrections, tracking results
  indicators and outcomes, and for updating the economic and financial analysis;

  (iv) The Project was an early adopter of geo-referencing M&E data in rural development in Bolivia. Over
  its lifetime, a major geo-referenced database of communities, beneficiary households, infrastructure and
  other assets was assembled as part of M&E operations. This dataset is the most extensive and in-depth
  of its kind in Bolivia.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



The project was classified as an environmental category B project (partial assessment), and triggered the
following Bank safeguard policies (ICR, paras. 87 – 91):

(i) OP/BP 4.01 for Environmental Assessment: Component 2, had potential short-term negative
environmental impacts. EMPODERAR prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and an Integrated Pest Management Manual. Both were consulted locally and publicly disclosed in
May 2015;

(ii) OP/BP 4.04 for Natural Habitats: Most subprojects were implemented in areas under agricultural
production already. Eighteen subprojects were implemented in buffer zones of National Protected Areas.
The PCU ensured compatibility of habitat use, based on an agreement with the National Service for
Protected Areas;

(iii) OP/BP 4.09 for Pest Management: The project carried out specific and appropriate actions to promote
adoption of environmental management practices to avoid and/or minimize the risk of pesticide use and
improve waste management;

(iv) OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources: The Project did not finance any subproject with known
potential negative impacts on physical cultural resources, sacred and/or religious sites; also, the ESMF
included measures to avoid works on cultural sites;

(v) OP/BP 4.36 on Forests: The project screening mechanism had the capacity to identify subprojects with
significant potential negative impacts on forests;

(vi) OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams: It was triggered as a precautionary measure even though no construction
or rehabilitation of any dam was financed;

(vii) OP/BP 4.10 on Social Safeguards: The Project was designed based on OP 4.10 principles given that
Indigenous Peoples (IP) were most of the direct project beneficiaries, and included an indigenous Peoples
Plan (IPP) and consultations with the relevant population groups and community participation guidelines in
the subproject cycle;

(viii) OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement: No significant involuntary resettlement or land acquisition
took place;

PICAR developed a participatory gender strategy and action plan, and ensured women’s participation in
sub-project prioritization by having women-only consultations, which effectively channeled their priorities in
sub-project decision making.

Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): Satisfactory subproject grievance redress mechanisms (GRM)
were developed and implemented in line with the Project’s provisions for grievance redress. Three
complaints were received from beneficiary communities and all of them were effectively resolved (ICR,
para. 91).

Overall, the Project was in full compliance with the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard
policies and with the ESMF (ICR, para. 87).




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  (i) Financial Management: There was good progress, based on following evidence (ICR, para. 92):

  (a) FM reviews conducted during regular supervision missions verified that an adequate FM system was in
  place to provide reliable, accurate and timely information that the World Bank credit proceeds were being
  used for their intended purposes;

  (b) The project FM rating was consistently Satisfactory, with the exception of ISR sequences 20 and 21
  given the socio-political disturbances related to the contested 2019 general elections and the ensuing
  transition to a new administration, including the delay by the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance
  MEFP in transferring the financial resources to the accounts of the corresponding beneficiary communities;

  (c) The FM reviews also recognized the adequacy of FM staffing, accounting, and internal control systems,
  maintenance of supporting documents on the Project and implementation of auditor recommendations for
  the annual audit;

  (d) Quarterly financial reports with acceptable quality were submitted on time;

  (e) Annual audited financial reports were submitted to the World Bank with unqualified (clean) audit
  opinions. The project accounting systems were observed to be in order and payments were well-controlled.
  The independent performance audit was a good practice which provided another layer of control in addition
  to the checks on outputs performed by the Project and the supervising consultants.

  (ii) Procurement Aspects: There was good overall progress, based on following evidence (ICR, para. 93):

  (a) Procurement activities were carried out in accordance with Bank guidelines;

  (b) Procurement Guidelines and Project Operational Manual (POM) were publicly available;

  (c) Core procurement principles of economy and efficiency were considered in the POM;

  (d) The procurement regulatory system as defined on paper was applied consistently in practice;

  (e) EMPODERAR had a clear system of accountability included in the POM, defining responsibilities and
  delegation of authority regarding procurement decisions;

  (f) EMPODERAR, with confirmed capacity, was responsible for the procurement activities and the
  contracting processes, while also providing support to beneficiary communities;

  (g) Realistic procurement plans were aligned with budgeting and prepared routinely, formally approved and
  followed-up on during implementation.

  (h) Turnover of procurement staff was minimal;

  (i) EMPODERAR oversaw defining technical specifications and terms of reference, also participated in
  committees evaluating bids and proposals and managing each signed contract. The procurement plan on


                                                                                                Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



  the Systemic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement system (STEP) was up to date regarding contract
  execution with only sporadic pieces of documentation yet to be uploaded;

  (j) There were no cases of mis-procurement and the final procurement audit did not identify any
  procurement issues; and

  (h) During implementation, Procurement Post Reviews were conducted, no ineligible contracts or serious
  issues were found that would be considered fraud or corruption.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Not Applicable



d. Other
  The ICR highlighted 3 other positive aspects contributed by the project: gender, poverty reduction and
  scaling-up of CDD approach. While recognizing some attribution challenges with respect to the precise role
  and contributions of this project to poverty reduction, and their linkages to various aspects of Component
  2/Subprojects, the nature/scope of these “other” benefits are summarized below, based on evidence
  presented in the ICR (paras. 61-64).

  (i) Gender (para. 61): PICAR is an exemplary story of encouraging rural women to take the lead in their
  communities and organizations and lift themselves and their families out of poverty (ICR has a
  reference/link to specific WB blog with details as a case study). The Project created dedicated spaces for
  the active participation of indigenous women throughout the Community Participatory Planning (CPP) cycle.
  These spaces enabled women to assume new responsibilities and roles, exercising important positions in
  the different committees and their subprojects with equal conditions in comparison to their male
  counterparts (e.g., active roles in the vital subproject social control and administrative committees; 45% of
  project-financed subprojects are managed by women).

  (ii) Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity (para. 62): Based on the project’s participatory approach
  and processes and evidence to designing, implementing and financing subprojects, the project met some of
  the international guiding criteria and good practices and processes for achieving poverty reduction. Project
  evidence shows that PICAR “ignited local interaction necessary to build capable, responsive, and
  responsible communities, in line with the dimensions pointed out by the literature on Social Capital”.
  Beneficiaries surveyed as part of the evaluation studies confirm that PICAR has been a highly participatory
  Project which has resulted in better integration of the community, while promoting solidarity and
  cooperation. Participating communities built on/intensified the traditional ayni in the highlands and the minká
  in the valleys, an old tradition of practicing solidarity and reciprocity for the common good (te ayudo, me
  ayudas). Notwithstanding these positive process-related benefits, the ICR did not provide specific evidence
  on the changes of household incomes and resulting poverty reduction.

  (iii) Scaling-Up and Benefits of CDD Approach (paras. 63-64): PICAR established the viability of the
  CDD approach in Bolivia, going from the Initiation stage to the Scale Up stage. Moreover, the ICR highlights
  another related benefit, which enhances the prospects for sustainability of the subprojects, namely: the
  implementation mechanism of community participatory planning (CPP) strengthened rural communities’

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



   capacity for joint decision making and self-management. The Project-funded CPP activities provided the
   tools and the training (e.g., learning by doing) for communities to become agents of their own development
   by: supporting participatory (and gender sensitive) decision-making to identify, prioritize, implement and
   operate and maintain subprojects; strengthening local capacities; fostering transparent control and
   management of transferred resources and accountability. As noted already, all these project-supported
   attributes and actions contributed to the project’s sustainability.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents eight lessons arising from this project (ICR, paras. 98 – 105), including project-
specific aspects and aspects applicable to other countries. This ICRR focuses on consolidating key
elements of the eight lessons into four strategic lessons arising from this project, which focus on
aspects which are potentially relevant for other similar CDD-type of projects.

(a) Lesson 1: “Leveraging” the enhanced roles and capacities of key actors to Scale-Up and
Sustain CDD approaches and Sustainable Results: A lesson from this project is the
importance devoting substantial financial and technical resources to strengthening the
complementary roles of relevant key actors (in this case, three actors) in the design, implementation
and O&M of the project/subprojects (ICR, paras. 98, 102 and 101):

(i) EMPODERAR (the Government project coordination/management entity), with respect to
ensuring: proper application of the subproject criteria and fostering strong CDD approaches by the
target beneficiary communities; adequate autonomy and accountability; technical soundness and
stability of management and staff; accordingly, such an entity can play a vital role in scaling-up the
CDD approach at national level, while fostering strong coordination and collaboration with other
relevant actors;

(ii) participating targeted communities, which were empowered in specific ways to design, implement
and sustain the subprojects, including subproject cycle management of resources and fiduciary
responsibility, based on community participating planning (CPP) strategies and processes, and
therefore, demonstrate the viability of scaling-up sustainable CDD approaches to development;

(ii) gender/women, guided by a gender strategy especially in their roles to prioritize community
needs and sound implementation and O&M of project-financed subprojects, taking a CDD approach;

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



accordingly, ensuring an active role of women in each participating community will enhance the
prospects of successful scaling-up the CDD approach and investments for poverty reduction.

(b) Lesson 2: Strategic Role of Geo-Referenced Management Information System/MIS (ICR,
para. 99): The lesson in this project is this type of MIS system provided a useful tool for enabling
project management to ensure: effective project implementation and M&E; the generation of a major
geo-referenced database of communities, beneficiary households, infrastructure and other assets,
which was assembled as part of an effective M&E system, and thereby providing a useful tool for
enhanced project management decision-making and a useful data base for enhancing project
management.

(c) Lesson 3: Operationalizing Various Complementary Dimensions to “Sustainability” of
CDD Projects (ICR, para. 103): The project highlighted the lesson of the importance and relevance
of operationalizing various complementary dimensions to achieving sustainability, especially for
CDD-type of projects, including assigning an active role of women in the CPP cycle. These
elements, which comprise positive lessons for similar projects, include:

(i) The project promoted social sustainability by building on existing local-level institutions and forms
of government, laying the ground for decentralized conflict resolution. Social sustainability is the
bedrock on which other forms of sustainability rest;

(ii) PICAR delivered asset sustainability (infrastructure and services) because communities were
sufficiently empowered and organized, including assigning an active role of women in the beneficiary
community organizations/committees, to assume full responsibility for O&M, particularly for
productive infrastructure and micro-irrigation subprojects;

(iii) the project demonstrated the importance of and practical approaches to promoting fiscal and
environmental sustainability, which involve additional transfer of responsibilities to beneficiary
communities to reinforce long-term management of resources, including O&M and assigning an
active role of women in the local community committees, within a decentralized approach and policy
framework to sustainable development.

(d) Lesson 4: Importance of Working Out/Agreeing Early Appropriate Evaluation
Approach/Tool (ICR, paras. 104 & 105): Given the strategic importance of a sound evaluation
system/tools to assess the results of the project on targeted beneficiaries and public policy (e.g.,
retention of population in rural areas), and therefore the potential role and rationale of scaling up the
project’s investments to other parts of the country, the project demonstrated the project lesson of the
importance of working out and agreeing early (preferably during design phase and year 1) on the
most appropriate evaluation tools and approach to the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BO PICAR Comm. Investment in Rural Areas (P107137)



  This was $114 million project in which the sustainability of commnunity subprjects of various kinds was an
  important objective. While short term sustainability was arguably confirmed for the majoriy of subprojects
  before the project's closing date, long term sustainability in the poor target communities will, despite its
  importance, be a considerable challenge. It is for this reason that an assessment of the long term
  sustainability of the subprojects financed by this CDD operation is recommended.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the quality of the ICR is Substantial. The ICR is well written, consistent with the ICR guidelines,
analytical and results-focused (including the Theory of Change/ToC, Economic and Financial Analyses/EFA,
albeit with a small subproject sample size), candid, concise, and generally supported by adequate evidence to
justify the various assessments, proposed ratings and project lessons arising from project experience.

The following three aspects of the ICR would have further enhanced its clarity and strong prospects for
robust/sustainable results:

(a) the section on the project’s contribution to poverty reduction was quite general, and did not include
empirical evidence arising from the various evaluation studies and beneficiary assessments;

(b) the section on project risks (ICR, para. 97) highlights relevant risks, but provides limited specificity on the
most relevant risk-mitigation measures which the project and Bank can support; and

(c) while the project’s CDD approach promoted the sustainability of the project-financed subprojects and
the need and potential for scaling-up the project’s subprojects, the ICR was not explicit about the Bank’s
specific intentions to provide a follow up Phase 2 project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 20 of 20
