     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022660

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145554                                     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of               Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-H9260                                  31-Dec-2020                                          26,722,506.69

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2014                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         26,722,506.69                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project development objective of the Democratic
   Republic of Congo (DRC) Financial Infrastructure and Markets Project was "to modernize the payments
   infrastructure and increase the availability of term financing to micro, small, and medium enterprises
   (MSMEs)."

   For the purpose of this ICR Review, the project objective is parsed into two parts:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



         To modernize the payments infrastructure.
         To increase the availability of term financing to micro, small, and medium enterprises.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components.

   Modernization of Payments Infrastructure for Inclusive Finance (US$7 million estimated at appraisal,
   US$9.3 million disbursed by closing) supported the modernization of the country's financial
   market infrastructure through the establishment and implementation of: (a) an Automated Transfer System
   (ATS) – an integrated system with both real-time gross settlement (RTGS) and automated clearinghouse
   (ACH) capabilities to clear and settle all interbank electronic payments; (b) a Central Securities
   Depository (CSD) – a facility to hold securities which would enable securities transactions to be processed
   by book entry (the facility might additionally incorporate comparison, clearing, and settlement functions); (c)
   the Network Infrastructure – the telecommunications network to process payments between all parties to
   the payment system; and (d) a National Payments Card Retail Switch – a platform to process and
   clear electronic payments, providing interface and inter-operability among all financial institutions. In
   addition, this project component would provide technical assistance, training, and advice to the central
   bank, Banque Central du Congo (BCC), to support the implementation of the technologies and
   functionalities of the physical infrastructure supporting the national payments system.

   Technical Support to Financial Market Development (US$7 million estimated at appraisal, US$7.5
   million disbursed) supported the provision of technical assistance to three sets of institutions to help develop
   selected sectors in the country's financial system: (a) the BCC – to implement a robust intervention and
   resolution framework for microfinance institutions (MFIs), employ the core banking system in data
   management and analysis for the supervisions of MFIs, and organize apex institutions of MFIs and
   networks of cooperatives in each province for better surveillance and regulation; (b) the non-government
   organization Fonds pour l'Inclusion Financiere en Republique Democratique du Congo - Association sans
   but Lucratif (FPM ASBL) – to finance capacity-building at MFIs, financial cooperatives, and commercial
   banks that service MSMEs and entrepreneurs with a special focus on the agribusiness sector and
   underserved areas as well as on gender balance and youth employment); and (c) the government – to
   implement the recommendations of the joint Bank-International Monetary Fund (IMF) Financial Assessment
   Program (FSAP) on building a sustainable mechanisms for MSME financing, including by restructuring the
   development bank Societe Financiere de Developpment (SOFIDE) into a viable intermediary financial
   institution capable of raising new funds for long-term lending and supporting the Ministry of Finance (MOF)
   to implement reforms in the financial sector.

   Line of Credit for Medium to Long Term Finance (US$15 million estimated at appraisal, US$9.9 million
   disbursed) supported the pilot phase (first phase) and the scale-up phase (second phase) of a line of credit



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



   to intermediary financial institutions for medium-term and long-term on-lending to private MSMEs for capital
   investment and capacity expansion projects.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost SDR19.6 million (US$30 million equivalent) at
   appraisal. Actual total cost was US26.7 million.

   Project Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association grant of
   SDR19.6 million (US$30 million equivalent) to the Democratic Republic of Congo. The amount of US$26.7
   million was disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution. There was no financial contribution to the project from the government

   Dates. The project was approved on March 18, 2014, became effective on September 3, 2014, and closed
   as scheduled on December 31, 2020.

   Restructuring. The project was restructured twice. The first restructuring in August 2016, with
   US$7.9 million disbursed, changed the results framework for the project. The second restructuring in June
   2018, with US$16.4 million disbursed, changed the project components and costs and reallocated the
   project funds across disbursement categories.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Relevance to Country Challenges. The project development objective was relevant to development
challenges in the DRC with respect to a national payments system, MSME finance, and banking and
microfinance institutions.

      The DRC lacked a basic financial market infrastructure. The national payments system was the
       least developed among African countries and could not reliably settle accounts, clear payments, and
       process funds between traders, businesses, investors, banks, and the government. Cash remained
       the most widely used payment medium by consumers, accounting for 70 percent of most
       transactions. Stand-alone automatic teller machine (ATM) services were offered by most banks, but
       there was no inter-operability between delivery channels and customers. Credit cards issued by
       international financial firms were supported by only a few banks, and the few point of sale (POS)
       services in the country were available only in large retail outlets. Domestic interbank transactions
       within the capital could take 3-4 weeks to clear checks and wire transfers; the transactions
       were fraught with erroneous settlements, delayed payments, and fraud. Overall, the poor national
       payments system hampered efficient commerce and finance.
      The ability of MSMEs, which dominated the private enterprise sector, to spur activity, boost incomes,
       and generate employment was hampered by access to finance problems. Access to finance was
       cited as the biggest constraint to business growth by 54 percent of all firms in the DRC Enterprise

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



                         Survey - 2013. Only 9 percent of small enterprises (with 5-19 workers) and 13 percent of medium
                         enterprises (with 20-99 workers) had a bank loan. Only 7 percent of small enterprises and 11
                         percent of medium enterprises had access to a bank to finance their working capital needs and only
                         3 percent of small enterprises and 7 percent of medium enterprises had access to a bank to finance
                         their capital investment plans.
                        Financial intermediation remained largely under-developed. Banks, which dominated the financial
                         system (18 banks accounted for 95 percent of the financial system), were relatively small and
                         principally engaged in rudimentary operations, collecting mostly demand deposits in US dollars from
                         corporates and providing mostly short-term financing to the same corporates for short-term needs
                         and export-import activities. Albeit small, the microfinance sector – consisting of two banks
                         specializing in MSME lending, 119 savings and loan cooperatives, and 23 microfinance institutions –
                          was growing fast, collecting US$294 million of deposits, providing US$162 million of loans, and
                         serving over one million clients by 2013. Still, the majority of the country remained under-served by
                         banks, much less by microfinance institutions.


Relevance to Government Priorities. The project development objective was consistent with the
government’s priorities.

                        The Republic of the Congo Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 2011-2015 (GPRSP2)
                         advanced four "strategic pillars" for the country's development – strengthening governance and
                         peace; diversifying the economy, accelerating growth, and promoting employment; improving
                         access to basic social services and strengthening human capital; and protecting the environment
                         and fighting against climate change. This project's development objective was consistent with the
                         first strategic pillar of the GPRSP2 (pages 56-58), specifically with the goals to "improve the
                         business climate," "promote the private sector," and "improve financial intermediation."


Relevance to Bank Strategy. The project development objective was aligned with the Bank Group
strategy in the DRC.

                        The Country Assistance Strategy for the Democratic Republic of Congo for the Period FY2013-
                         FY2016 (CAS) committed Bank Group support to the country's development agenda organized
                         around four "strategic objectives" – to increase state effectiveness and improve good governance,
                         to boost competitiveness to accelerate private-sector-led growth and job creation, to increase
                         access to social services and raise human development indicators, and to address fragility and
                         conflicts in the eastern provinces. The project development objective was aligned with the second
                         strategic objective of the CAS, specifically with the target outcome for "an enhanced business
                         environment for private sector development." According to the CAS (pages 29-30), the Bank Group
                         would provide analytical and advisory services "strengthening the capacity of SMEs to take
                         advantage of business opportunities and to effectively and efficiently manage their existing
                         businesses" and financing to "relaunch the private sector, increasing SME's access to finance and
                         supporting the development of the financial sector."


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating


                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To modernize the payments infrastructure.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change/Results Chain. The construction and activation of an ATS, RTGS, ACH, CSD, network
                infrastructure, and National Payments Card Retail Switch would lay down the basic infrastructure for a
                modern national payments system in the DRC. The development, deployment, and adoption of an effective
                national payments system – the set of instruments, banking procedures, and interbank transfer systems that
                ensure the circulation of money – should help improve financial intermediation, financial inclusion, and the
                conduct of monetary policy. The results chain for this outcome (depicted in Figure 1 in the ICR) assumed
                that: (a) the financial institutions would be willing to integrate their systems in a coordinated manner into the
                national system and be guided under the supervision of the BCC; and (b) the settlement of transactions
                denominated in US dollars and other foreign currencies would remain feasible under international rules and
                standards.

                Outputs. The project fully achieved two, partially met another two, but failed to meet one of the five output
                targets defined for the objective to modernize the payments system before the project closed.

                      A National Payment System (NPS) Department is operational, meeting the target. The NPS
                         Department was established, its staff trained, and equipment purchased with the support of the
                         project.
                        An Automated Transfer System (ATS) is operational, meeting the target. The ATS was operational
                         beginning in March 2017.
                        The number of banks and other financial institutions connected to the ATS/CSD of the National
                         Payment System (NPS) was 16 by project closing, partially meeting the target of 22.
                        A National Payments Card Retail Switch company was not established, failing to meet the
                         target. The Société Monétique Interbancaire du Congo (SMIC), which was designed to manage the
                         National Payments Card Retail Switch, was not operational by the project closing date, although the
                         project supported the development of the laws and the work plans and financed the purchase of
                         equipment for the new organization. Meanwhile, the BCC established an interim team to manage the
                         National Payments Card Retail Switch.
                        The number of financial institutions and mobile network operators connected to the National Payments
                         Card Retail Switch was 11 by the project closing date, partially meeting the target of 23. Of the 11
                         banks connected to the system, five banks had system connections that were fully operational, while
                         six banks had system connections that were still in the testing stage.




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



Outcomes. The project achieved three and partially met one of four outcome targets defined for the
objective to modernize the payments system.

      The number of annual transactions denominated in US dollars that were made through the RTGS was
       80,351 the year before the project closing date, exceeding the target of 70,800. The number of
       transactions represented operations of the RTGS only between March and December 2019. The
       BCC stopped the settlement of US dollar transactions through the RTGS in December 2019, upon the
       request of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Investigations by local and international non-
       governmental organizations revealed that Congolese banks were exposed to international money
       laundering schemes used to conceal the proceeds of corruption in the mining industry.
      The number of annual transactions denominated in Congolese francs (CDF) that were made through
       the RTGS was 361,021 by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 144,216.
      The number of annual transactions denominated in US dollars that were made through the ACH was
       105,435 the year before the project closing date, failing to meet the target of 6,352,666. The number
       of transactions represented operations of the ACH only between March and December 2019. Like in
       the RTGS, the BCC stopped settlement of US dollar transactions through the ACH in December 2019,
       upon the request of the U.S. Department of the Treasury. Investigations by local and international
       non-governmental organizations revealed that Congolese banks were exposed to international money
       laundering schemes used to conceal the proceeds of corruption in the mining industry.
      The number of annual transactions denominated in CDF that were made through the
       ACH was 4,540,635.by the project closing date, exceeding the target the target of 458,080.

By the project's close the domestic and international payments infrastructure had been modernized. The
extent to which Objective 1 was achieved is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the availability of term financing to micro, small, and medium enterprises.

Rationale
Theory of Change/Results Chain. The provision of a line of credit, supported by long term Bank funds, to
intermediary and participating financial institutions would enable the financial institutions – commercial banks,
financial cooperatives, and microfinance institutions – to extend term financing to MSMEs for productive
projects. In addition, the provision of technical assistance to the financial institutions, as well as to the
monetary authority and financial supervisor, would help develop the institutional and regulatory framework for
MSME finance and hence help sustain term lending to MSMEs. This results chain assumed that: (a)
creditworthy MSMEs were seeking but not receiving long-term credit from the formal financial system, (b)
financial institutions were not providing long-term credit to MSMEs because of the lack of long term funding
and restrictive prudential liquidity rules that reflected the high level of dollarization of the economy, and (c)
other constraints, including high credit risk and high collateral requirements, were not as binding as liquidity
constraints or were being addressed by other interventions.

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)




                            Outputs. The project fully achieved four and partially achieved one of five output targets defined for the
                            objective to increase the availability of term financing to MSMEs.

                                  The portfolio review of SOFIDE was completed, meeting the target. The organizational and financial
                                     audit of the SOFIDE was completed in 2016. The audit confirmed the findings of the joint Bank-IMF
                                     DRC FSAP which concluded that the SOFIDE was not viable as a development finance institution.
                                    The portfolio-at-risk at microfinance institutions and cooperatives improved from 12.4 percent in the
                                     baseline to 8.8 percent by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 9 percent. The
                                     improvement reflected two developments: (a) the implementation of BCC Instruction No. 44 which
                                     ordered microfinance institutions to restructure credits, while the central bank suspended certain
                                     prudential requirements; and (b) the decisions by microfinance institutions to constrain credit in the
                                     second quarter of 2020 when the economic downturn peaked, thus moderating credit risk problems.
                                    The percentage of MFIs and cooperatives that provided information on their portfolio-at-risk rose from
                                     87.8 percent in the baseline to 96 percent by the project closing date, meeting the target of 95
                                     percent.
                                    The percentage of microfinance institutions and cooperatives that provided quarterly regulatory
                                     financial statements (balance sheets and profit and loss accounts) rose from 82.4 percent in the
                                     baseline to 96 percent by the project closing date, exceeding the target of 90 percent.
                                    The volume of loans to MSMEs disbursed under the project was US$10.5 million by the project
                                     closing date, partially meeting the target of US$24 million. According to the ICR (page 32), the
                                     shortfall against the target (US$24 million) reflected the limited levels of fund recycling so far. The
                                     ICR also warned that it would be difficult if not impossible to collect data on second and subsequent
                                     rounds of lending to verify progress against the target after the project closing date.

                            Outcomes. The project achieved the two outcome targets defined for the objective to increase the
                            availability of term financing to MSMEs.

                                  The number of MSMEs that received a loan through the project was 2,531, exceeding the target of
                                   2,500.
                                  The share of women-owned MSMEs that received a loan through the project was 68 percent,
                                   exceeding the target of 50 percent.

                            At the project's close the availability of term financing to micro, small and medium enterprises had increased
                            and the two outcome indicators were achieved. The extent to which Objective 2 was achieved is rated
                            substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)




  Rationale
  The project fully achieved two, partially met another two, but failed to meet one of the five output targets and
  achieved three and partially met one of four outcome targets defined for the objective to modernize the
  payments system. The project fully achieved four and partially achieved one of five output targets
  and achieved the two outcome targets defined for the objective to increase the availability of term financing to
  MSMEs.

  The overall efficacy with which the project's PDO was achieved is rated substantial



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency. The Project Appraisal Document (pages 27-28) did not compute an economic rate of
return (ERR) for the full project or for the first and second project components, but estimated an ERR of 15.8
percent for the line of credit, the third project component accounting for 50 percent of the project cost.

The ICR did not estimate an ERR for the full project either, or for any of the project components noting that
"Economic benefits arising from the line of credit are difficult to quantify given the limited information about the
impact of sub-projects financed by the line of credit" (Annex 4, paragraph 3). On the other hand, the ICR
considered cost effectiveness and provided the following information (Annex 4, paragraph 2): (a) the first project
component, the national payments system modernization (US$9.3 million), cost more than other recent
payments system modernization projects such as in the Azerbaijan Capital Markets Modernization Project
(US$7.7 million), the Kyrgyz Republic Payments and Banking System Modernization Project (US$4.5 million),
and the Sierra Leone Financial Inclusion Project (US$3.9 million) but this project in the DRC had a much larger
scope than the comparator projects; and (b) the financial rate of return (FRR) for the third project component,
the line of credit, was 4.1 percent, computed as the weighted average interest rate charged by the intermediary
financial institutions in their loans to the participating financial institutions. The FRR cited by the ICR was, of
course, not comparable to the ERR estimated by the PAD.

Operational Efficiency. Some 89 percent of the project funds in US dollar terms was disbursed. The project
closed as scheduled.

Evidence regarding the efficiency of this project was weak. The assessment of the cost-effectiveness of the
improved payments system was not convincing. The national payments modernization projects used as
comparators had varying scopes of work. No metric of cost efficiency was used or proposed. And, a high
disbursement rate is not necessarily an indicator of efficiency. This ICR Review therefore rates the efficiency of
this operation as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     50.00
Appraisal                                                  15.80
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project development objectives were relevant to the country's development challenges with the national
payments system, the financing for MSMEs, and financial intermediation by banks and microfinance
institutions. The project objectives were also consistent with the government's priorities and the Bank's country
strategy in the DRC. The overall efficacy of the project was substantial. The degree of achievement of the first
objective to modernize the payments infrastructure was substantial, with the project fully achieving three and
partially meeting one of four outcome targets. The degree of achievement of the second objective to increase
the availability of term financing to MSMEs was also substantial, with the project fully achieving two outcome
targets. The efficiency of the project was modest. There was little evidence in the ICR to judge the economic
efficiency of the project.

There were moderate shortcomings in the project's achievement of efficiency and, therefore, the overall
outcome of this project is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the sustainability of the development outcomes of this project are assessed as substantial-to-
high across a wide array of risk categories.

Security Risk. The DRC remains in a medium-intensity conflict situation, and is listed as one of 39
states and territories in the Bank's List of Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations for FY22. The DRC is only
slowly emerging from long periods of strife, including two civil wars over 1996-2003 and numerous conflicts
since then, that have devastated the nation, the economy, and society. Violence and rebel activity still
threaten stability, with sizable portions of the eastern part of the country largely under the control of
various militia groups. There is distrust of the security forces and the international peacekeeping mission.

Political Risk. The new coalition government of 24 political parties formed in 2019 remains fragile, as

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



coalitions and alliances have always been shaky in the DRC. Jockeying for political advantage ahead of the
presidential elections in 2023 is expected to intensify. A draft bill that seeks to alter the rules for presidential
candidacy risks dividing the coalition into opposing factions ahead of the elections.

Institutional Capacity Risk. Institutional capacity risk is typically high in FCV-affected countries in both the
public and private sectors, and the DRC is not an exception. The SMIC was designed as a partnership
between the BCC and private financial institutions to manage the National Payments Card Retail
Switch. The SMIC has not become operational, while the BCC, which was tasked to supervise the system,
has stepped in as the interim operator, a function that conflicts with its role as supervisor. Meanwhile,
the Fonds pour l’Inclusion Financière en République Démocratique du Congo (FPM SA), which acted as the
intermediary financial institution that managed the line of credit in its pilot phase, provided short-term rather
than long-term loans and did not supply the data required in the partnership agreement to assess the impact
of the line of credit operations. FMP SA was dropped as the intermediary financial institution in the scale-up
phase, and its function was assumed by the BCC.

Macroeconomic Risk. The DRC economy was severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, with
non-mining GDP contracting by 1.3 percent and the fiscal deficit reaching 2.1 percent of GDP. Monetary
financing of the deficit caused an exchange rate depreciation of 13.2 percent between April and August 2020
and pushed inflation to 15.7 percent in August 2020. The DRC obtained approval of a three-year US$1.52
billion Extended Credit Facility (ECF) arrangement from the IMF in July 2021, with an immediate
disbursement of US$216.9 million to shore up the country's international reserves. The arrangement
supports the government's medium-term reform program aimed at maintaining macroeconomic stability,
increasing fiscal space, and promoting a sustainable and private sector-led economic growth. According to
the IMF, the near-term economic outlook remains uncertain and dependent on the evolution of the pandemic
as well as on a stable political environment.

Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) Risk. The offshore system
for the settlement of US dollar payments that was developed by this project would be of limited use if the
DRC does not improve its AML/CFT system. The settlement of US dollar payments is not typically a key
feature of national payments systems, but differs in the DRC, where the US dollar is the primary currency
used in settling financial transactions. However, the BCC stopped settlement of US dollar transactions in the
RTGS and ACH in December 2019, upon the request of the U.S. Department of the Treasury (see Section
4). The country's current AML/CFT regime presents significant deficiencies and is not compliant with the
2012 Financial Action Task Force (FATF) standards, according to the mutual evaluation report prepared by
the Groupe d'Action Contre le Blanchiment d'Argent en Afrique Centrale (GABAC).

Banking Sector Risk. The DRC’s financial system remains small (assets are equivalent to only 11 percent
of GDP) and financial institutions continue to face considerable risks when lending to MSMEs. Commercial
banks are challenged by low profitability, high non-performing loan ratios, and deficiencies with banking
supervision. The volumes mobilized by the project addressed a small fraction of the overall financing needs
of MSMEs. The ability of MSMEs to secure term financing from formal financial institutions are hampered by
banking sector risks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                         Page 10 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Foundations. The project design was informed by the findings of the joint Bank-IMF
  FSAP conducted in 2013 and discussed in, among others, the IMF DRC Article IV Consultation of
  2014. Drawn from the FSAP, the IMF DRC Financial Sector Stability Assessment Report of 2014 called
  for more progress in developing the payments system, facilitating the use of financial services, and
  consolidating and strengthening the microfinance sector.

  Lessons from Earlier Operations. The project aimed to strengthen the early gains made by the DRC
  Private Sector Development and Competitiveness Project (PSDCP) (P0117744) with the national
  payments system, bank governance, and microfinance development.

        The PSDCP (2003-2014) had initiated the development of the national payments system to
         strengthen financial intermediation. This Financial Infrastructure and Markets Project would
         finance key elements of the system infrastructure – the ATS, RTGS, ACH, CSD, network
         infrastructure, and National Payments Card Retail Switch.
        The PSDCP had collaborated with Germany's Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau and the United
         Nations Development Programme to establish the FPM ASBL as a non-profit organization that
         would deliver technical assistance to financial institutions. For this Financial Infrastructure and
         Markets Project, the FPM ASBL would act as the executing agency for technical assistance
         activities that aimed to build the institutional capacity of MFIs, financial cooperatives, and
         commercial banks to service MSMEs.

  Technical, Operational, and Safeguards and Fiduciary Plans. The Bank made adequate plans for the
  implementation of the project that were described in sufficient detail in the PAD (Annex 3 -
  Implementation Arrangements, pages 57-73) and incorporated in the Financing Agreement.

        As detailed in the Financing Agreement (page 19), a Project Operations Manual specified: (a) the
         work program for the first year of project implementation; (b) the M&E indicators to be used;
         (c) disbursement arrangements for the project funds; (d) the procedures for procurement of
         goods, works, consulting and non-consulting services; the processing of payments for operational
         costs; and the conduct of training and workshops, financial management, and audits; and (e)
         the functions and responsibilities of the Project Coordination Unit.
        As detailed in the Financing Agreement (page 18), a Line of Credit Operations Manual prescribed
         the eligibility criteria for the intermediary financial institution and participating financial institutions;
         the positive and negative list of MSME projects that could be financed by the line of credit; and
         templates for the partnership agreement (between the government and the intermediary financial
         institution) and the on-lending agreements (between intermediary financial institution and
         participating financial institutions).
        As detailed in the PAD (Annex 3), the institutional and implementation arrangements were fairly
         specific at project design, taking into account weak capacities and previous coordination failures
         in the DRC public sector: (a) the project would be anchored within the MOF; (b) a Steering
         Committee chaired by the Minister of Finance and with representatives from the BCC, the
         Association of Congolese Banks, FPM ASBL, the selected intermediary financial institution, the
         private sector, and civil society would provide strategic guidance; (c) the Cellule d'Exécution des
         Financements en Faveur des Etats Fragiles (CFEF) under the MOF would serve as the Project
         Coordination Unit and be responsible for overall project coordination, M&E, and financial


                                                                                                           Page 11 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



       management; (d) the Cellule de Gestion des Projets et des Marchés Publics (CGPMP) under the
       MOF would be in charge of procurement; and (e) the BCC would be the executing agency for the
       first project component; the BCC, FPM ASBL and CFEF, for the second; and the selected
       intermediary financial institution, for the third.

Risk Assessment and Mitigation Measures. The PAD (Annex 5 - Operational Risk Assessment
Framework, pages 83-86) assessed the operational risks to the project and recommended mitigation
measures that were adequate to address the risks.

      Stakeholder risk was considered substantial – civil servants who were key
       to project implementation lacked performance incentives. To mitigate the risk, a project terms of
       reference with clear deliverables and responsibilities was prepared. To cultivate a "performance
       culture", annual evaluations were to be conducted with a focus on individual and organizational
       performance.
      Institutional capacity risk was assessed as substantial – the implementing agency lacked the
       technical capacity to implement the project activities in a timely manner. To mitigate the risk, the
       project coordination unit at the MOF that was established with the assistance of the African
       Development Bank and that previously managed the DRC Western Growth Poles Project
       (P124720) would act as the project coordination unit for this project. Procurement and financial
       management specialists were appointed; a Project Operations Manual was drafted; and capacity
       building workshops were organized early on.
      Project design risk was rated substantial – the project was relatively complex due to the
       large number of activities and the large number of stakeholders, which created coordination
       risks. To mitigate the risk, experts from development partners, non-government organizations,
       and the private sector were tapped to support the implementation of the project.
      Project monitoring risk was considered substantial – monitoring capacities were weak overall. To
       mitigate the risk, an M&E system that could quickly collect data to enable the adoption of
       corrective measures was established. A mid-term review was planned to assess progress toward
       the project objectives and offer recommendations and corrective measures to improve results
       delivery.

Some Deficiencies. There were some shortcomings at appraisal.

      Many results indicators were not defined and the cost of the National Payments Card Retail
       Switch was under-estimated. These were to be addressed at restructuring.
      The willingness of all financial institutions to integrate into the National Payments Card Retail
       Switch was not verified ex-ante. During project implementation, banks that owned the private
       payment switch Multiplay were reluctant to cooperate with the integration, delaying the adoption of
       the new switch and the organization of the SMIC. The banks have since submitted to system
       integration testing.
      The continued settlement of US dollar transactions was readily assumed. As noted earlier, the
       BCC halted US dollar transactions in the RTGS and the ACH in December 2019 upon the request
       of the U.S. Department of the Treasury.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank supported the implementation of the project through regular implementation support missions.

 The Bank filed 11 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) over the six-year duration of the
 project, or about two a year, the average for Bank projects.

 The Bank conducted the mid-term review (MTR) in June 2017.

 According to the ICR (page 20):

       The implementation support missions provided "timely guidance" to the government to address
        project implementation challenges. The Bank requested more frequent meetings with the
        government after the implementation performance (IP) rating was downgraded from satisfactory to
        moderately satisfactory in mid-2015.
       Following the MTR, the Bank requested the MOF to improve the project implementation
        arrangements to address two pressing problems, with positive results: (a) the CFEF had not
        allocated sufficient resources to the project – the second restructuring increased the amount of
        project funds for project management; and (b) FPM SA, which acted as the intermediary financial
        institution for the pilot phase of the line of credit, had extended short-term rather than long-term
        loans and had not supplied the data required under the partnership agreement – an audit was
        conducted of the pilot phase, following which the FPM SA was dropped as the intermediary
        financial institution for the scale-up phase of the line of credit.
       The Bank acted proactively to restructure the project twice, the first time in August 2016 to change
        the results framework and the second time June 2018 to change the project components and costs
        (see Section 2.D).
       Changes to the Bank task team leadership were managed well. In the two cases of leadership
        changes, the incoming task team leader was provided sufficient time to familiarize himself with the
        project and to engage with the government's development partners.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document (pages 32-38) identified nine output indicators and six outcome indicators
 to measure the degree of achievement of the project objectives. However, the PAD failed to define seven
 of the nine output indicators and one of the six outcome indicators.

 The Project Coordination Unit at the MOF was responsible for the project M&E, assisted by the Project
 Executing Unit at the BCC. For this purpose, the Project Coordination Unit would employ an M&E
 specialist.



b. M&E Implementation
  The restructuring of August 2016 revised the results framework of the project to better align the choice of
  results indicators with data availability and the M&E capacities of the executing agencies – the final
  results framework had ten output indicators and six outcome indicators. While improved, the results
  framework still lacked indicators to measure vital aspects of the project, according to the ICR (page 18),
  including indicators to measure: (a) the cost and the time to process payments in the national payments
  system; (b) the maturities of the MSME loans granted from the line of credit – to verify the provision of
  term financing to MSMEs; and (c) loan repayments – to indicate the quality of bank intermediation.

  According to the ICR (pages 18-19), M&E implementation was overrun with problems.

        It took the Project Coordination Unit some time to set up the M&E system.
        It was difficult to collect the M&E data from the FPM SA which acted as the intermediary financial
           institution for the pilot phase of the line of credit (see Section 7).
        The BCC did not enforce the requirement that disbursement requests be supported by the list of
         MSME projects to be financed.
        Hence, M&E data could not be reported until the second half of project implementation, after the
         BCC replaced the FPM SA as the intermediary financial institution for the scale-up phase of the
         line of credit (see Section 7).
        And, the government could only submit annual rather than bi-annual reports as required in the
         Financing Agreement.

  Monitoring and evaluation was rated unsatisfactory in the ISRs until October 2018. It was upgraded to
  moderately satisfactory in March 2019 and through to the last ISR in June 2020.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 19), the Project Coordination Unit could only report on annual rather higher-
  frequency data early on. Hence, it took time for the M&E data to be useful as a management tool. The
  M&E data were, however, ultimately useful for the preparation of the ICR.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the Project Appraisal Document (page 29), this
   project was not expected to have adverse environmental and social impacts overall. The first and second
   project components focused on institutional support and did not include direct investments in infrastructure
   or in land acquisition that could induce adverse impacts. For the third project component, however, the line
   of credit to MSMEs could involve land acquisition through third-party (MSME) investments. Consequently,
   the Bank would apply International Finance Corporation (IFC) performance standards in lieu of
   Bank safeguard policies, following OP 4.03 - Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities which
   allowed the Bank to apply the IFC standards to project components that were designed, owned, constructed
   or operated by a private entity. The project was classified as an environmental assessment category FI-2
   based on "the anticipated knowledge that the on-lending activities under the third project component may
   lead to sub-projects that have potential limited adverse environmental or social risks or impacts that are few
   in number, generally site-specific, largely reversible, and readily addressed through mitigation
   measures." The following IFC performance standards would apply: Performance Standard 1 (Assessment
   and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts); Performance Standard 2 (Labor and
   Working Conditions); Performance Standard 4 (Community Health, Safety, and Security); and Performance
   Standard 5 (Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement). To implement the standards, the executing
   agencies would assess the environmental and social risks of transactions and require borrowers and
   investees to comply with these standards.

   According to the ICR (page 19), the Project Coordination Unit prepared an Operations Manual that
   subscribed to the IFC performance standards and which guided environmental and social risk management
   during project implementation. However, the Project Coordination Unit was not able to hire an
   environmental and social risk management specialist until mid-2018. Hence, the Bank lacked the
   information to assess the effectiveness of the environmental and social risk screening of MSME sub-
   projects. Compliance with safeguards was not rated for this project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The Financing Agreement required the procurement of goods, works, and non-consulting
   services to follow the Bank's Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and Non-consulting Services
   under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers, dated January
   2011. Procurement of consultant services would follow the Bank's Guidelines: Selection and Employment
   of Consultants under 1BRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers, also dated
   January 2011. According to the ICR (page 19), the project did not face any significant procurement issue
   during project implementation. Procurement was rated moderately satisfactory in the last ISR (June 2020).

   Financial Management. The Financing Agreement required the disbursement procedures to follow the
   International Development Association General Conditions for Credits and Grants, dated July
   2010. Moreover, the government would have to submit to the Bank quarterly interim unaudited financial
   statements for the project not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. The
   government would also have its annual financial statements audited and submit the audited financial

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



   statements to the Bank not later than six months after the end of each fiscal year. According to the ICR
   (page 19), the project did not face any significant financial management compliance issue during project
   implementation. Financial management was rated moderately satisfactory in the last ISR (June 2020).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  This Review rates the efficiency
                                                                                  of the project as modest, as
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  there is little evidence in the ICR
                                                                                  to assess economic efficiency.
                                                                                  This Review considers the
                                                                                  quality of the project's design to
                                                                                  have been only moderately
                                                                                  satisfactory because of design
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  shortcomings at appraisal..
                                                                                  Shortcomings during supervision
                                                                                  also resulted in a moderately
                                                                                  satisfactory rating.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the Implementation Completion Report (page 21), with some
adaptation.

Dollarization presents an opportunity to leverage Bank funds to mobilize private capital for
lending to micro, small and medium enterprise. In this project, the US dollar line of credit was
highly valuable to banks and other financial institutions in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where
the US dollar is the primary currency used in settling financial transactions. The Bank could have
used this opportunity to require co-financing by the participating financial institutions in the line of
credit operation that aimed to provide term financing to micro, small and medium enterprises. The
strategy would have been feasible, according to the Implementation Completion Report, because of
the high level of dollarization of the economy. This project, however, did not require co-financing by
the participating financial institutions which could have mobilized savings in the economy, including


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



US dollar savings, for term lending to micro, small and medium enterprises..

Adherence to international Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of
Terrorism standards is vital to the successful operation of national payments systems,
particularly payments systems that process multiple currencies. In this project, the Banque
Central du Congo halted the settlement of US dollar transactions in the real-time gross settlement
system and the automated clearinghouse system upon the request of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury. The mutual evaluation report prepared by the Groupe d'Action Contre le Blanchiment
d'Argent en Afrique Centrale, based on a mission in August 2018, found the Democratic Republic of
Congo to be non-compliant with 15 of 40 Financial Action Task Force recommendations. According
to the report, the country's Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism system
remained relatively ineffective, despite the commitment of the political authorities – there were
notable shortcomings in the implementation of key mechanisms including national coordination, the
definition of a supervision policy emphasizing the risk-based approach, and the supervision of
financial institutions and designated non-financial businesses and professions. Future fulfillment of
the Financial Action Task Force recommendations could help unlock the real-time gross
settlement and automated clearinghouse systems to US dollar transactions settlement.

The costs of complex information technology systems for a national payments infrastructure
can be easily under-estimated and must be rigorously calculated and evaluated. In this
project, the cost of the National Payments Card Retail Switch was far higher than originally
estimated. The number of institutions that had to be connected to the system and their willingness
and capacity to conduct the system integration activities were easily overlooked. The much larger
scope of the customization that was required raised the cost of developing and deploying the
information technology infrastructure.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Consistency with Guidelines. The ICR was prepared consistent with OPCS guidelines, with complete
sections and adequate coverage of topics as required by the guidelines.

Conciseness. The account of the project's performance is well informed and concisely presented. The
discussions are comprehensive but to the point.

Results Orientation. The assessment of efficacy of the project was outcome-oriented and based on the degree
of achievement of the results and outcome targets. The assessment was also candid – the settlement of US
dollar transactions in the RTGS and ACH was halted due to AML/CFT issues; the SMIC, tasked to manage
the National Payments Card Retail Switch, was not operational; and the FPM SA, selected to intermediate the
line of credit, performed poorly in the pilot phase and was replaced by the BCC.



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DRC:Financial Infrastructure and Markets (P145554)



Quality of Evidence. The ICR cites three shortcomings at appraisal, meriting a rating for Bank performance at
entry of moderately satisfactory. The ICR cites five shortcomings with M&E implementation, which deserved
only a modest rating. These ratings were well-based on the evidence available.

Quality of Analysis. The quality of analysis was substantial and candid. Recent adverse macroeconomic
developments, the rudimentary state of the banking system and AML/CFT issues, governance and institutional
capacity problems, and the dollarization of the economy and the complexity of IT projects affected the
implementation of the project.

Lessons. The lessons were based on evidence and analysis. The lesson on co-financing was drawn from the
analysis of the efficacy of the second objective, the lesson on AML/CFT, from the analysis of key factors during
implementation, and the lesson on IT costs, from the analysis of significant changes during implementation.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
