     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0022439

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P113844                                  Manila Wastewater Management Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Philippines                              Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81620                               30-Jun-2017                                      275,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-May-2012                              30-Jun-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         275,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                          275,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                      275,000,000.00                                            0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator       Group
 Fernando Manibog          Dileep M. Wagle              Ramachandra Jammi            IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) of the Manila Wastewater Management Project (MWWP) is "to
   improve wastewater services in selected sub-catchments of Metro Manila and surrounding areas." (Schedule
   1, page 5 of the Loan Agreement dated May 31, 2012)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                              Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The MWWP was structured to support the water Concessionaires—the Manila Water Company Inc (MWCI)
   and Maynilad—to increase their coverage of wastewater collection and treatment and septage
   management, with a view to contributing to the environmental improvements in Metro Manila and water
   quality in Manila Bay. These project implementing agencies were private-sector entities. The project’s
   investments assisted the Concessionaires in meeting their service obligation targets under their Concession
   Agreements. The eligible investments, which were identified by the time of appraisal, included wastewater
   collection and treatment and septage treatment. The project also financed consulting assignments for
   project implementation support, such as feasibility studies, construction supervision, reporting on
   environmental and social safeguards, public awareness campaigns, and project performance and audit
   reports.

   The project's investments were fully integrated in the business plans of MWCI and Maynilad, which were
   regulated by the Metropolitan Works and Sewerage System (MWSS).

   The MWWP had two main components:

   Component 1: Investments in Wastewater Services by MWCI (Appraisal estimate, US$193.4 million; actual
   cost, US$239.4 million).

   This component included MWCI investments and technical assistance in wastewater collection and
   treatment in the east zone, covering goods, works, and non-consulting and consulting services. Component
   1’s two main parts include:

   (a) construction of a sewage treatment plant and associated sewage lines covering North and South Pasig;
   and

   (b) other wastewater management investment sub-projects agreed upon among the Guarantor (GOP), the
   Borrower (LBP), MWCI, and the Bank.

   Component 2: Investments in Wastewater Services by Maynilad (Appraisal cost, US$178.3 million; actual
   cost, US$137.5 million)

   This component consisted of Maynilad’s investments and technical assistance in wastewater collection and
   treatment, and septage management in the west zone, covering goods, works, non-consulting and
   consulting services. At the 2012 appraisal, the following sub-projects were pre-identified, subject to meeting
   eligibility criteria for Bank financing:

   (a) construction of a sewage treatment plant and associated wastewater conveyance systems in the
   Talayan area of Quezon City, and in Pasay City;

   (b) rehabilitation of a sewage treatment plant in the Ayala Alabang area of Muntinlupa;



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



   (c) construction of a sewage treatment plant and associated wastewater conveyance systems in Muntinlupa
   and in Valenzuela;

   (d) construction of a septage treatment plant in the southern part of Metro Manila; and

   (e) other wastewater management investment sub-projects agreed upon among the Guarantor, the
   Borrower, Maynilad, and the Bank.

   There were no changes in the basic scope of the components. However, these adjustments were made: (a)
   under Maynilad-integration of Biological Nutrient Removal (BNR) in two Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs);
   (b) under MWCI-replacement of North and South Pasig conveyance system subprojects with University of
   the Philippines and Marikina conveyance system subprojects; (c) changes in subproject scope; and (d)
   some cost increases.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. At appraisal, the total project cost estimate was US$371.75 million, of which US$193.42
   million was for MWCI (Component 1) and US$178.33 million was for Maynilad (Component 2). At closing,
   the actual cost was US$503 million, of which US$239.4 million was for MWCI (Component 1) and US$263.6
   million was for Maynilad (Component 2).

   Project Financing. The Borrower is the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), with guarantee from the
   Government of the Philippines (GOP). The Sub-Borrowers are MWCI and Maynilad. Of the total actual
   project cost of US$503 million, the Bank financed US$275 million, while MWCI and Maynilad
   financed US$228 million.

   Borrower/Recipient Contribution. There was no LBP contribution. Of the total US$228 million contributed by
   the Concessionaires, MWCI financed US$101.9 million and Maynilad financed US$126.1 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 15, 2012 and became effective about five months later on
   October 19, 2012. A midterm review was carried out on January 30, 2014 The project had two
   restructurings, both Level II. The first restructuring was on June 14, 2014, when the closing date was
   extended by two years from the original closing date of June 30, 2017 to June 30, 2019. The second
   restructuring was on June 27, 2019, when the closing date was extended again by one additional year, and
   adjustments were made in the disbursement arrangements and implementation schedule. The project's
   closing date was extended by a total of three years to the actual closing date of June 30, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



Rationale
The MWWP’s PDO is of high relevance to the development priorities and strategies of the Philippines. At
appraisal, Metro Manila was generating about two million cubic meters of wastewater per day. Only 17%
was treated prior to being discharged into different water bodies. The PDO is directly aligned with the
Manila Bay Sustainable Development Master Plan (MBSDMP) 2040. To reduce pollution load in Manila
Bay, the MBSDMP seeks to increase investments in infrastructure for wastewater collection and treatment,
enforce stricter pollution laws, and expand public awareness of the negative health and environmental
impacts of untreated wastewater. The MBSDMP’s longer-term goal is to improve ecological conditions of
Manila Bay and thereby benefit surrounding residents by improving their health, socio-economic status, and
access to environmental goods and services. Thus, in the shorter term, the PDO is relevant to the overall
plan of increasing wastewater coverage in Metro Manila in order to clean up Manila Bay.

In addition to the PDO's relevance to helping meet the overall obligations of MWCI and Maynilad to
increase wastewater treatment capacity for Metro Manila, the PDO is aligned with the need to comply with
the Supreme Court ruling to clean up Manila Bay. The PDO is also relevant to the continued
implementation of the Clean Water Act of 2004, which aims to protect the water bodies from domestic,
commercial, agricultural, and industrial pollution.

Moreover, the PDO is relevant to the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2017-2022 and its specific
emphasis on the need to rehabilitate and restore degraded natural resources and protect fragile
ecosystems. The PDP’s preparation was guided by Ambisyon Natin 2040, which was approved in October
2016. As a statement of the Philippine national vision, Ambisyon Natin 2040 presents the country’s long-
term goal of building a prosperous, predominantly middle-class society, and aiming specifically to increase
per capita incomes three-fold by 2040, ending poverty, and promoting health for the Filipino population.

The PDO is highly relevant to the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) of the World Bank Group
for the Philippines, FY2019-2023. The PDO is fully aligned with the CPF’s focus area on Competitiveness
and Economic Opportunity for Job Creation, which seeks to remove bottlenecks and expand opportunities
for employment, livelihoods, and private and financial sector development. More specifically, the CPF has
cited the lack of basic infrastructure in solid waste and wastewater management as an important hindrance
to the expansion of tourism and private investments (CPF, paragraph 21), thus restricting business,
livelihood and employment opportunities. In line with Objective 6 under this focus area, the Bank is helping
GOP improve the efficiency of infrastructure services, thereby stimulating local economic growth and
creating jobs.

Finally, as a public-private operation, the MWWP’s PDO is highly relevant and fully supports the Corporate
Commitment of the World Bank Group on Maximizing Finance for Development. While the project had a mix
of public and commercial financing, its operation was fully private. According to the ICR (paragraph 72):
“The project demonstrated an innovative model that facilitated operational efficiency through the private
sector and applied an economic approach toward investments through the tariff and regulatory systems
already in place.”

In terms of previous Bank involvement, the MWWP is fully in line with the support that the World Bank has
been providing for Metro Manila's overall urban development. The Bank's support for the metropolitan
area's development was channeled through urban water and sanitation projects that has spanned four
decades and included a significant amount of activities related to institutional support for Local Government
Authorities.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve wastewater services in selected sub-catchments of Metro Manila and surrounding areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. As a conventional infrastructure project, the MWMP's theory of change (TOC) presented
                             on page 8 of the ICR is straightforward, robust and valid, although it is to be noted that the critical
                             assumptions and/or key risks were not included. The inputs and outputs, which consist largely of sewage
                             treatment plants (STPs) of a specific designed capacity and their associated conveyance systems, can be
                             expected to lead directly to the expansion of wastewater treatment capacity. Rehabilitation of STPs, septage
                             treatment plants, and other investments are also directly linked to delivering this capacity expansion. In turn,
                             the expanded capacity can be expected in the short- to medium-term to result directly into reduced biological
                             oxygen demand (BOD) in collected wastewater and populations benefiting in the catchment areas of the
                             project, thus achieving the project's development objective of improving wastewater services in selected sub-
                             catchments of Metro-Manila and surrounding areas. Over the longer term, the project would causally
                             contribute to the over-arching goals of improving public health, increasing property values, and the reduction
                             of pollution in Manila Bay. The planned activities and physical interventions are adequate and properly
                             sequenced to achieve the PDO.

                             PDO achievement. Improvements of wastewater services were going to be measured in terms of two PDO
                             indicators, which are appropriate and adequate: (i) the reduction of BOD in collected wastewater; and (ii) the
                             number of population served in the catchment areas that would benefit from the project.

                             (i) BOD reduction

                             The project exceeded its targeted reduction of BOD in collected wastewater: from a zero baseline and
                             compared with 3,556 tons as the target, the actual achievement was 6,403 tons of BOD reduction (180
                             percent of the target). The first two investment were the rehabilitation of the Ayala-Alabang STP and the
                             construction of the Talayan STP in 2015, which at that time treated a combined volume of 3,663,964 cubic
                             meters of wastewater and removed a total of 335 tons of BOD. These volumes have increased steadily as
                             these STPs continued operating. Subsequently, additional wastewater investments were completed, namely,
                             the South Septage Treatment Plant (2015), the Pasay STP (2018), the Marikina conveyance system (2018),
                             the University of the Philippines conveyance system (2019), and the North and South Pasig STP (2019).
                             These completed wastewater investments resulted in cumulative treatment of 68.4 cubic meters of
                             wastewater and removal of a total of 6,403 tons of BOD by October 30, 2020. (ICR, paragraph 27) Broken
                             down by concessionaire, MWCI removed 2,054 tons of BOD from collected wastewater, exceeding its target
                             of 1,708 tons by 20%, while Maynilad removed 4,349 tons of BOD, exceeding its target of 1,848 tons by

                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 16
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



                  135%. Three STPs remained to be completed when the project closed. As required, the STPs comply with
                  effluent standards for BOD and other pollutants such as Total Suspended Solids, Chemical Oxygen Demand,
                  Oil and Grease, and Total Coliform, among others. A higher treatment efficiency and more BOD removal
                  were achieved during the process of removing these pollutants.

                  According to the ICR (paragraph 34): “The water quality of receiving water bodies has started to show
                  improvements. MWCI and Maynilad STP operational data show that the overall average BOD concentration
                  for influent entering the completed STPs (94.58 mg/L) does not meet the water quality standard for BOD
                  concentration of 50 mg/L. However, after treatment, all discharges from the completed STPs consistently
                  meet or exceed the minimum effluent quality requirements. The overall average BOD concentration in the
                  effluent coming from the STPs is 5.09 mg/L."

                  (ii) Population served

                  The project also substantially achieved the targeted number of population in the catchment area benefited by
                  the project. The wastewater investments of MWCI and Maynilad benefited a total of 1,492,308 and 496,154
                  population equivalent, respectively, in the catchment area. This represents 124% of MWCI's target of 1.2
                  million beneficiaries, While Maynilad's achievement is 38 percent of its targeted 1.29 million beneficiaries,
                  further increases are expected. An additional 353,846 beneficiaries would be added with the commissioning
                  of Cupang STP by December 2020, thereby reaching 850,000 beneficiaries, or 66% of the target. The
                  expected completion of Valenzuela and Tunasan STPs in 2021 will further increase the number of
                  beneficiaries to 1,465,385 or 114% of the target (ICR, paragraph 28 and Table 2).

                  Additionally, the operation of the South Septage Treatment Plant has benefitted 1.45 million people in Metro
                  Manila (in the cities of Pasay, Paranaque, Las Pinas, and Muntinlupa) and in Cavite province (the
                  cities/municipalities of Bacoor, Imus, Cavite, Rosario, Noveleta, and Kawit).

                  In summary, the project at closing has benefited 1,988,462 people, or 80 percent of the total target of 2.49
                  million beneficiaries. The completion of Cupang STP will increase the total number of beneficiaries to
                  2,342,308, or 94 percent of the total target. When all STPs are completed during 2021, the project will have
                  benefited a total of 2.96 million people -- or 119 percent of the total project target.

                  It is important to note that "The remaining ongoing subprojects are part of the overall service obligations of
                  Maynilad and MWCI, as outlined in the Concession Agreements and corresponding business plans. MWCI
                  and Maynilad are therefore obliged to complete and deliver these investments, as their completion is linked to
                  performance achievements and tariff adjustments." (ICR, paragraph 31)




                  Rating
                  Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           The project's efficacy in achieving the PDO is substantial. The project exceeded its targeted BDO reduction
           in collected wastewater. Upon completion of all the subprojects in 2020/2021 (delayed in part due to COVID-
           19), the project would also exceed its targeted number of beneficiaries. Completion is assured under the
           terms of the concessionaire's agreements. This rating also takes into account the definition of the
           "substantial" rating in the IEG and OPCS guidelines, as follows: "The project almost fully achieved its
           objective (or intended outcomes), or is likely to do so."




           Overall Efficacy Rating
           Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis. The project's economic analysis was properly conducted and methodologically sound in
both the PAD and the ICR. The PAD's calculation of the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) covered five
STPs and 91 percent of total project costs. The ICR's EIRR calculation covered the same five STPs and 91
percent of total project costs, with the following adjustments: actual (instead of estimated) capital and operating
& maintenance (O&M) costs were used, as well as actual land prices and tariffs.

The ICR's economic analysis indicates that the project generated positive net economic benefits, with the EIRRs
of the wastewater subprojects being significantly higher than the 10 percent discount rate that was
used. Moreover, the EIRRs were also higher than those that were estimated at appraisal, although costs
increased by 35 percent due to changes made during implementation. Specifically, a project with greater
implementation readiness that was also part of the MWSS Master Plan was substituted for a project that was
encountering delays; the substitute project had a higher cost structure but also had higher benefit streams. The
ICR's weighted EIRR average was 16 percent, compared to the appraisal ERR average of 14 percent. The ICR
conducted sensitivity analysis using a benefit stream that was 20% lower than the base case, which reduced the
EIRR to 12%, which was still higher than the 10 percent discount rate used. These calculations excluded the the
significant positive externalities that the project is expected to generate in terms of water quality and public
health improvements, increased values in the tourism and commercial fishing sectors, and the enhanced
recreational value of Manila Bay. More specifically, the EIRR calculation would have been higher had it included
benefits from the more recent government regulation to incorporate a higher level of Biological Nutrient Removal
in the design and operations of the facilities.

The ICR also demonstrated that the MWMP investments were more cost-effective compared to the estimated
investment cost of US$250 per capita (i.e., actual costs divided by the total population equivalent) to construct
STPs and conveyance systems and improve septage management, based on a World Bank study (2013). Per-
capita investment costs under the MWMP were lower compared to this benchmark estimate. More specifically,
against the US$250 cost per capita from the Bank study, the comparative investment cost per capita for the



                                                                                                          Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



MWMP were as follows: Pasig North and South STP (US$132.47); Talayan STP (US$66.20); Valenzuela STP
(US$ 241.66); Pasay STP (US$140.63); and Muntinlupa STP (US$135.00).

The ICR (Annex 4: Efficiency Analysis) also indicates the "built in" efficiency through the regulatory and tariff
systems that are already in in place. More specifically, "the Concession Agreements with MWCI and Maynilad
were designed to ensure full cost recovery of capital investments and operation and maintenance costs through
the existing tariff mechanism. Tariffs are adjusted mandatorily through rate rebasing every five years. Rate
rebasing is a process that determines the level of rates for water and wastewater management services that
permits the concessionaires to recover over the life of the concession (2037) their operating, capital
maintenance, and investment expenditures."

Administrative and Implementation Efficiency. While recognizing the foregoing economic analysis, however, it is
important to note that project implementation was delayed by three years. This resulted from the stalled sub-
projects of the N&S Pasig conveyor system, which necessitated their replacement by the UP and Marikina sub-
projects in the Master Plan, which involved higher costs to deal with soft soil conditions and earthquake/flooding
risks. Given the delays, the costs of the other original subprojects had also increased. The delays to obtain
permits from the concerned LGUs in N&S Pasig might have been foreseen given the long experience of
Maynilad and MWCI in these types of projects as well as the Bank's experience that had been built up from
previous project support.

On balance, while taking into account the three-year delay and higher costs, both of which were appropriately
captured in the EIRR calculation, the project's efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     91.00
 Appraisal                                                 14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     91.00
 ICR Estimate                                              16.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project's objectives is high. The project's efficacy in achieving its development objectives
is substantial. The project's efficiency is substantial. The project's overall outcome is satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 8 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are low to negligible risks in the operation and maintenance of the sewage treatment plants
(STPs). The ICR (paragraph 80) indicates that the subprojects were constructed with acceptable quality.
Their technical design considered geotechnical risks. Since STP commissioning, sufficient manpower was
deployed in order to ensure adequate knowledge transfer between the Design-and-Build contractor and the
concessionaires. Organizational capacity, including O&M systems and procedures, is adequate. A cost
recovery mechanism, which is critical to sustain the operation of the STPs, is in place. The tariff-setting
exercise includes both capital investments and operating costs.

There are moderate risks in the maintenance of conveyance systems. STP operational efficiency may
be affected by the known challenges if maintaining conveyance systems. According to the ICR (paragraph
81), MWCI and Maynilad have allocated resources for maintenance costs; however, maintenance will
continue to require (i) extensive information and education campaigns and (ii) close coordination and
continued engagement with barangay and city LGUs, the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority, and
the Department of Public Works and Highways.

There are low to moderate risks of not completing the remaining ongoing subprojects in the near
future. As of the ICR preparation, three STPs are near completion and 21.59 kilometers of conveyance
system subprojects still remain to be completed. The ICR (paragraph 82) presents the likelihood of
completion as follows:

(a) MWCI and Maynilad: As part of their commitments under the Concession Agreement, the implementing
agencies are obliged to complete the remaining ongoing subprojects. Moreover, they are required to comply
with the World Bank’s technical and safeguards requirements. MWCI and Maynilad have fully integrated
these subprojects in their business plans, which serve as the basis for full cost recovery and tariff
adjustments. MWCI and Maynilad would need to continue engaging with the respective LGUs.

(b) Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP): As a financial intermediary, LBP is required to continuously monitor
the activities it has financed. Thus, it has committed to continue monitoring the remaining civil works to
ensure that the STPs become fully operational. LBP has an Environmental Policy Relative to Credit Delivery
that requires accounting officers to monitor compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations
until the loan is fully paid by the client. The Loan Agreement also requires the implementing agency to
continue to submit monitoring reports for the remaining subprojects until these are fully completed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The MWMP’s quality at entry was moderately satisfactory. On the one hand, the Bank team clearly
  articulated the project’s strategic relevance at entry, focusing on how it supported the GOP’s national

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



  priorities. The project’s concept and design were geared to support the implementation of the Clean
  Water Act and the Supreme Court decision to clean up Manila Bay. The project’s design was adequately
  grounded in the country and sector realities and benefited from extensive analysis of wastewater
  management issues; moreover, while carefully identifying and selecting project activities, it was also
  flexible. The design incorporated measures to improve efficiency, and also enhanced the maximizing-
  finance-for-development approach in order to facilitate the private sector’s entry in wastewater
  management service provision. The Bank team also incorporated lessons learned from the Bank’s long-
  term engagement in the sector. The Results Framework was valid, logical and articulated clearly. The
  M&E framework and data collection/reporting arrangements were adequate. The Project Appraisal
  Document (PAD) shows that the appraisal of fiduciary and safeguards aspects were adequate, and
  significant efforts were made to enhance implementation readiness (e.g., identifying pre-eligible
  subprojects).

  However, some of the risk assessments were optimistic. For example, risks related to stakeholder
  support and obtaining local permits were underestimated and proved to be difficult during
  implementation, thus leading to a three-year delay. Also, despite its High risk rating at appraisal, land
  acquisition and right-of-way issues proved to be most challenging and hindered the project's
  advancement in its earlier years. The risk that available contractors for large-scale infrastructure would
  be limited was also not identified during appraisal, but emerged during the early years of implementation.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (paragraph 78), the Bank’s supervision focused on resolving critical implementation
 issues with a view to achieving the PDO. The ICR indicates that the “task Team provided just-in-time
 advice, recommended actions, and brokered several dialogues with different stakeholders to help the
 implementing agencies address implementation issues.” During implementation, the team also provided
 support on fiduciary and safeguards concerns. At the midterm Review, the Bank team focused on major
 issues and implemented measures to accelerate implementation. The team also supported innovations in
 the delivery of wastewater management services. For example, the team adopted the use of a Design-
 and-Build modality and trenchless construction methodology and encouraged the use of solar panels and
 reuse of treated wastewater. The team supported the two project restructuring activities, as needed. The
 implementation support Aide Memoires adequately reflected the ongoing challenges, for which the Bank
 team provided concrete recommendations to address them. The project ratings in the ISRs were
 appropriate and the discussions of issues were candid.

 However, there were minor shortcomings that ultimately resulted in a 3 year delay on project completion.
 As outlined in the section on project efficiency, the delays could and perhaps should have been foreseen
 given the the long experience of Maynilad and MWCI in these types of projects as well as the Bank's
 experience that had been built up from previous project support. Therefore, while the Bank team
 demonstrated an adaptable management approach that addressed the delays while also improving
 sustainability, the speed with which these responses were instituted was problematic.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



 Thus, Bank supervision is rated satisfactory and overall Bank supervision is Moderately Satisfactory given
 the limitations in design.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The quality of M&E design was substantial. The two PDO indicators were appropriate and adequate for
 capturing the information needed to assess performance and determine whether the PDO of improving
 wastewater services was being achieved, within the framework of the project’s Theory of Change. The
 BOD reduction indicator measured improvements in water quality and has been in use by GOP as a major
 parameter for monitoring domestic pollution load. The indicator on the beneficiary population measured the
 increased access to wastewater services among Metro Manila residents. The M&E design avoided
 unnecessary complexity and was straightforward, having benefitted from having the data collection,
 consolidation, and analysis arrangements already in place. For example, at appraisal, the methodology for
 data collection, as well as the baselines and targets, were already available. According to the ICR
 (paragraph 62), "Project monitoring was embedded in the existing arrangements and procedures for
 monitoring (a) concessionaire performance and compliance with the Concession Agreements; (b)
 performance of the water and sanitation sector; and (c) environmental compliance."



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation performance was substantial. The measurement of BDO reduction was based on
  actual operational data. However, for measuring the population equivalent of the project’s beneficiaries,
  the methodology of the Bank and the implementing agencies diverged. The agencies used the actual
  population in the catchment areas instead of the methodology agreed at appraisal and in the PAD, i.e.,
  STP treatment capacity divided by wastewater generation per capita of 130 liters. This was corrected in
  the final year of implementation. MWCI, Maynilad, and LBP used project data to prepare the Semi-Annual
  Progress Reports (SAPRs), which included information on (a) progress in meeting targets in the Results
  Framework, (b) physical progress of subprojects, (c) status of procurement activities, (d) social and
  environmental compliance, (e) financial management, and (f) progress of MWCI and Maynilad in
  achieving the Concession Agreement targets. Albeit with some delays, the SAPRs were submitted to the
  Bank and GOP’s regulatory and oversight agencies, i.e., MWSS, National Economic and Development
  Authority, and Department of Finance. MWCI and Maynilad also regularly submitted Environmental
  Compliance Monitoring Reports to DENR, with copies to the Bank for subsequent disclosure. LBP
  submitted quarterly Loan Status Reports to the Department of Finance. Finally, in line with the over-




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



  arching goal of cleaning up Manila Bay, MWCI and Maynilad submitted quarterly status reports of related
  activities to the Supreme Court.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was substantial. M&E results formed the basis for discussions between GOP and the
  Bank during the implementation support missions. M&E information also informed the decisions of GOP
  and the Bank, e.g., during the first and second project restructuring. At completion, M&E information was
  used as evidence of project achievements as well as implementation challenges and constraints.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The ICR (paragraphs 68 and 71) states that the project complied with the Bank's environmental and social
   safeguards, and assigned satisfactory compliance ratings for each safeguard policy. The project, which
   triggered Operational Policy (OP) 4.01: Environmental Assessment and OP 4.04: Natural Habitats, was
   classified as a Financial Intermediary operation for environmental safeguards OP purposes.

   Environmental Safeguards

   Prior to appraisal, LBP prepared and disclosed an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework
   (ESSF). At appraisal, candidate subprojects for Phases 1 and 2 were verified through site visits as well as
   environmental and social screening that included site selection criteria. Since the subproject sites were in
   residential areas in Metro Manila, all the locations of the STPs had to comply with the zoning plans and
   locational clearances issued by the LGUs. After site selection, each STP was subjected to an environmental
   assessment (EA) to identify any potential impacts and ensure the inclusion of Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMP) in their design and costing. All EAs ere published between 2011 and 2014.
   This same approach was applied to the conveyance systems that expanded the capacities of drainage
   networks to connect new areas.

   The North and South Pasig investment were classified as Category A, i.e., requiring a full environmental
   assessment, given the large-scale STP’s potentially significant environmental impact. Maynilad’s STP
   subprojects were classified as Category B, i.e., requiring partial assessments. The ESSF set out all the
   environmental and safety due diligence that were required from all activities during the construction
   phase. Both MWCI and Maynilad prepared and submitted regular Self-Monitoring Reports and Compliance
   Monitoring Reports to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources. LBP and the Bank received
   copies. According to the ICR (paragraph 69), the “mitigating measures identified in the respective ESMPs
   were implemented [and] there were no adverse environmental impacts reported onsite.” Moreover, “MWCI
   and Maynilad have properly managed the environmental impacts encountered during construction, as
   demonstrated by the adequate implementation and monitoring of their respective ESMPs.” A Grievance



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



  Redress Mechanism addressed issues such as noise and traffic disruption “in a satisfactory and timely
  manner by both concessionaires through their contractors on the ground.”

  An independent auditing firm conducted annual Third-Party Environmental Audits to evaluate the
  compliance of MWCI and Maynilad with the conditions in their ISO 14000 certifications and respective
  Environmental Compliance Certificates.

  For the almost-completed STPs, LBP and the concessionaires have committed (until completion of
  conveyance systems and their connection to the STPs) to submit and publicly disclose the environmental
  monitoring reports, which will cover “the proper operation and adequate treatment of the influent for each
  STP according to the design of the STPs and in compliance with the water quality standards under the
  Clean Water Act of 2004.” (ICR, paragraph 70)

  Social safeguards

  The project triggered the Bank’s safeguards policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). During
  appraisal, the social safeguards documents for Phase 1 subprojects were found to be compliant with OP
  4.12. For Phase 2 subprojects, a Resettlement Policy Framework in the ESSF outlined the various land
  acquisition modalities and procedures that LBP, MWCI, and Maynilad needed to follow to comply with OP
  4.12. From project startup until closing, there were significant land acquisition and right-of-way issues,
  which were resolved but caused much implementation delay. Teams within MWCI and Maynilad handled
  social safeguards issues; moreover, each one had their own grievance redress mechanisms to address
  complaints. The “willing-buyer, willing-seller” modality was followed for all land acquisitions. The ICR
  (paragraph 71) indicated that “Procedures for land acquisition and resettlement in the ESSF were complied
  with, including in the relocation of 21 informal settler families in Tunasan STP and in Cupang STP.” MWCI
  and Maynilad produced Land Acquisition Reports, Due Diligence Reports, and Resettlement Completion
  Reports, which were reviewed by the Bank to ensure compliance with the ESSF, and publicly disclosed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. The ICR (paragraph 74) indicates that “Procurement activities were implemented following
  the World Bank Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the approved Procurement Plan.” . MWCI
  and Maynilad integrated the project activities in their operations. Procurement mainly followed International
  Competitive Bidding (ICB) procedures, and the commercial practices followed by the two concessionaires
  were in line with the World Bank Procurement Guidelines. Although procurement activities were timely
  during the first two years of implementation, delays occurred during the middle of the project period due to
  delays in land acquisition and issues related to obtaining permits for the conveyance systems. Also,
  procurement for the North and South Pasig conveyance system was hindered by the limited availability of
  contractors for large-scale infrastructure projects and by the excessive bids in one conveyance system


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



   contract package. Despite these delays, all procurement activities were completed, and this ICR Review
   concurs with the ICR rating that overall procurement was satisfactory.

   Financial Management (FM).

   The ICR (paragraph 76) indicates that “The project complied with the World Bank’s financial management
   policies and requirements.” FM capacity and arrangements were adequate, and the internal controls as
   well. While FM performance was satisfactory in the project’s initial three years, it became moderately
   satisfactory at the mid-term due to low project disbursements and delays in submitting interim financial
   reports. Otherwise, there was regular and timely submission of project and entity financial statements. The
   Commission on Audit rendered clean (unqualified) opinions. This ICRR concurs with the ICR's rating of FM
   performance as satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                There were shortcomings in
Bank Performance               Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                project design.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paragraphs 83-85) provided three lessons based on the project’s implementation
experience. These are presented below, with some adaptation of language:

Engagement needs to be sustained to help shape solutions and achieve development results
in the urban water and sanitation sector. The Bank has supported the development and
implementation of GOP’s major wastewater management strategies over the past 40 years. Through
lending support, learning initiatives, as well as policy and analytical advice, the Bank brought in
global knowledge and expertise, distilled lessons from implementation experience, and applied that
learning into succeeding operations. As the fourth lending operation in Metro Manila, the MWMP


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



incorporated the lessons learned from predecessor projects, while taking into account current
conditions and challenges.

The project design stage should include stakeholders at all government levels that have a
critical role in supporting the implementation of interventions in densely populated areas.
The MWMP involved construction of STPs and conveyance systems in densely populated areas that
require the issuance of construction permits and land acquisition, for which LGUs play a critical role.
The project was delayed when permits were not issued on time. This could have been avoided if the
LGUs had been considered as part of the institutional set-up of the project. Likewise, LGUs could
have facilitated land acquisition and coordinated with utilities and national government agencies in
the implementation of different infrastructure projects at the project sites. The MWMP also
experienced challenges in obtaining the right of way as the conveyance systems passed through
land owned by different entities, LGUs, and individuals. In addition, the project was affected by other
infrastructure developers and utilities operating in the project sites and would have benefitted from
close coordination with these entities. The construction impacts on the public in terms of increased
traffic congestion, socio-economic disruptions, and inconveniences were substantial. These
concerns could have been anticipated and addressed through the LGUs.

Flexibility is important and needs to be applied during implementation to allow implementing
agencies to respond to unanticipated factors. The project allowed financing of other wastewater
investment subprojects as long as these were agreed among the Bank, Guarantor, Borrower, and
the concessionaires and had passed the eligibility criteria set forth at appraisal. This flexibility
allowed the inclusion of the University of the Philippines and Marikina conveyance systems without
the need for a formal restructuring process. This flexible approach should be considered in future
operations, to allow for the scope of work to change without need for major restructuring.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  In light of COVID-19's negative impacts throughout 2020 and still continuing in 2021, the technical, economic
  and financial sustainability of MWMP's investments need to be updated and reviewed, as the outcomes may
  have been seriously eroded by the pandemic's economy-wide effects. This assessment of the project's
  relevance, efficacy and efficiency (which could have changed significantly) could be conducted within the
  larger context of the WSS sector in the Philippines, and could yield valuable lessons on infrastructure
  resilience during global pandemics.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Manila Wastewater Management Project (P113844)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well prepared; it is well written and easy to read. The ICR is results-oriented and presented relevant
evidence in a manner that is consistent with the project's theory of change, delineates the causal chain from
activities to PDO achievement, and supports attribution of project outcomes to the project's own interventions.
The ICR is sufficiently quantitative and efficient in its presentation of data. The lessons about Bank long-term
engagement, stakeholder participation and flexibility during implementation are well selected and have broad
relevance and applicability to other Bank projects. The ICR complies with the Bank guidelines for ICR
preparation.

Some minor shortcomings include the length, which is almost double the expected 15 pages, and the absence
of any discussion of potential gender impacts (e.g., during land acquisition, which may affect livelihoods of
small merchants run by women).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
