     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022460

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P153753                                   Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO

 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Malawi                                    Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-60030                                 31-Mar-2018                                           84,267,052.33

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 04-May-2017                               31-Mar-2018

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        84,267,052.33                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Igor Pejovic                Judyth L. Twigg             Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Letter of Development Policy (LDP, Program Document, p. 40), the program development
objective (PDO) was to improve incentives for private sector participation in agricultural markets and to
strengthen fiscal management through more effective expenditure controls and greater transparency.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)




The DPO was initially designed as a two-operation series. Concerns stemming from governance issues and
uncertainty linked to approaching elections prompted a decision not to proceed with DPO2.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDO for this operation is unpacked into the following objectives:

Objective 1: Improving public expenditure management and transparency

Objective 2: Promoting private sector participation and productivity improvement in agriculture.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The pillars of the operation aligned with the objectives above.

Pillar 1: Public expenditure management and transparency

Pillar 2: Private sector participation and agricultural productivity

The prior actions associated with each pillar were as follows:

Table 1: Prior Actions associated with the Malawi Agricultural Support and Fiscal Management DPO

Pillar 1: Public expenditure management and transparency
PA1: The Recipient has, through its Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MoAIWD)
and the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development (MoFEPD), made parametric changes to
the Farm Input Subsidy Program (FISP) in fiscal year 2016/17, namely: (i) increased the share of fertilizer
retailed by private suppliers; (ii) reduced the level of subsidy to beneficiaries by introducing a fixed value
coupon with beneficiaries paying the difference between the coupon value and market price; and (iii)
piloted improved targeting of beneficiaries. (This PA is expected to contribute to the second objective as
well but has been included under the first pillar.)
PA 5: The Recipient has, through its MoFEPD, MoGCDSW, and LDF, agreed on institutional coordination
arrangements for the expansion of the Social Cash Transfer Program, all in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph 20 of the LDP.[JC1]
PA6: The Recipient has, through its MoFEPD, National Audit Office (NAO), and the Department of Human
Resources Management and Development (DHRMD), completed an audit of the civil service payroll
system, reconciled the differences between establishment and payroll for both salaries and allowances,
and deleted erroneous entries, all in accordance with the provision of paragraph 28 of the LDP.
PA7: The Recipient has, through its NAO, published the audited financial statements for the fiscal years
2011/12, 2012/13, 2013/14, 2014/15.
PA8: The Recipient has, through its MoFEPD, submitted to Parliament the Public Audit (Amendment) Bill
2016 with a view to strengthening the operational independence of the NAO in conformity with International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) standards.
PA9: The Recipient has: (i) through its Office of the President, appointed Controlling Officers (COs) for all
ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) in conformity with the Public Service Management Act (Cap.
1:03 of the laws of the recipient) to perform their functions in conformity with the provisions of the Public
Finance Management Act (Cap. 37:02 of the laws of the recipient); and (ii) through said COs, submitted

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



required monthly returns for their respective Votes for calendar year 2016 in conformity with the provisions
of Section 10 of the Public Finance Management Act.
Pillar 2: Private sector participation and agricultural productivity
PA2: The Recipient has, through its MoAIWD, adopted revised guidelines that put in place transparent and
objective criteria, as well as technical and financial reporting and accountability mechanisms, for maize
draw down for price stabilization from the Strategic Grain Reserve (SGR), all in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph 22 of the LDP.
PA3: The Recipient has, through Agriculture Development and Marketing Corporation (ADMARC Limited):
(i) published ADMARC Limited’s audited financial statements for fiscal years 2013/14 and 2014/15,
respectively; and (ii) published monthly reports outlining maize market distribution and purchasing plans
throughout the fiscal year 2016/17 lean season, all in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 23 of the
LDP.[JC2] [jlt3]
PA4: The Recipient has enacted the: (i) Physical Planning Act, 2016; (ii) Customary Land Act, 2016, (iii)
Land Survey Act, 2016; and (iv) Land Act, 2016 improving administration and security of tenure, all in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 24 of the LDP.




c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The DPO was approved by the Board on May 4, 2017, and the IDA-60030 grant in the amount of US$84.3
million was fully disbursed in a single tranche on September 8, 2017. The DPO closed on March 31, 2018.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The objectives of the operation were critical to Malawi's development agenda. In 2013, the country had
 experienced a financial crisis, instigated by the discovery of a misappropriation of public funds through
 fraudulent transactions carried out through the Government’s Integrated Financial Management Information
 System (IFMIS). The discovery resulted in many donors withdrawing budget support and shaken trust in public
 financial management. Strengthening public finance accountability was thus recognized as a high priority
 within the Country Partnership Strategy FY 13-16 adopted in December 2012.

 Malawi's Country National Agricultural Policy from 2016 emphasized the importance of improved agricultural
 productivity as the country had to confront and overcome several challenges in the sector, including low
 productivity, susceptibility to weather shocks, and poor management of land, water, and soils. All of these
 posed a threat to food security and nutrition in the face of a growing population, increased land pressure, and
 climate change (objective 2).

 The DPO complemented or built upon efforts under other Bank projects and activities. The reforms to
 strengthen public financial management were supported by two complementary projects, including the
 Financial Reporting and Oversight Improvement Project from 2018 (P130878), whose goal was to improve the
 internal controls, accounting, reports, and oversight of government finances at centralized and decentralized
 levels in MDAs in Malawi. The agricultural reforms supported by the DPO built upon an Agriculture Sector

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



Wide Support Program from 2017 (P105256), which aimed to establish an overall sustainable land
management system and sustainable productivity. The DPO extended the goals from that project and
introduced more specific goals such as the participation of the private sector in agriculture.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Some of the prior actions were relevant and had clear results chains towards the achievement of the
operation’s objectives. However, PA 5 was not directly related to either objective, and other PAs addressed only
surface issues and did not tackle the underlying causes of inefficiency and mismanagement.


Pillar 1: Public expenditure management and transparency

PA 1: The first PA aimed to increase the efficiency of public expenditure by adjusting the Farm Input Subsidy
Program (FISP), which accounted for 11.5% of budget funds and 75% of the MoAIWD’s budget in 2014/2015
(Report No. 79865 - MW). The FISP’s costs to the government were high and growing, and the subsidy had led
to an overspecialization in maize. Through this PA, the FISP was to shift from targeting the extremely poor to
targeting more productive farmers who were better positioned to make use of seed and fertilizer subsidies,
resulting in higher productivity especially in maize. The changes in how the FISP targeted beneficiaries also
meant that the system would move away from a fixed farmer contribution (where farmers had been paying as
little as 3% of the market price of fertilizer) to a fixed government contribution (where the government would
issue a fixed value coupon, and beneficiaries would pay the different between the coupon value and the market
price), making the system more stable and reliable, and thus contributing to improved public expenditure
management. The FISP’s role as a safety net and guarantor of food self-sufficiency for the extreme poor was
shifted to the Social Cash Transfer (SCT) program (see PA 5). Logistical costs were to be reduced by involving
private suppliers in the retail distribution of fertilizer, building on a 2015/2016 pilot that had achieved significant
savings through lower-cost sourcing, distribution, and communications. (Relevance of PA1 = HS)

PA 5: This PA was aimed at supporting the scale-up of the SCT program, which prior to the operation covered
only 18 out of 28 districts, and establishing the institutional coordination arrangements across implementing
sector ministries and agencies that were a precondition to national scale-up. However, the PA had more to do
with preserving and strengthening the social safety net for the ultra-poor than with achieving either of the
operation’s objectives. Although this was an important goal, particularly given the adjustments to the FISP,
there was not a credible results chain linking PA5 to either of this operation’s stated objectives. (Relevance of
PA5 = MU)

PA 6: This PA aimed to strengthen management of the public sector wage bill and increase public expenditure
efficiency through internal audits, reconciliations between different establishments, and removal of erroneous
entries in the public finance system. By FY 2014/15, public debt had grown rapidly, crowding out resources for
other current expenditures and making the government heavily dependent on donor funding for service delivery.
The substantial rise in the number of civil servants (from 111,000 to 186,000) and weaknesses in establishment
and implementation of personnel controls left room for fraud. In addition, the absence of an interface between
the payroll and the IFMIS exposed the system to vulnerabilities. While the reconciliation would identify ghost
workers, representing an important incremental reform, the PA was not sufficient to prevent a recurrence of
ghost workers in the future. The PA might have been better defined to have a more lasting impact on the

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



achievement of this objective by focusing on preventing the future appearance of ghost workers through a
regular check-up mechanism delegated to one of the government institutions. (Relevance of PA6 = MS)

PA 7: This PA sought to improve accountability through the publishing of audited financial statements.
Strengthening the integrity of the public financial management (PFM) cycle was at the core of the reforms
supported by the DPO. As per the PFM act, annual financial statements for the previous year had to be
submitted to the Auditor General, who needed to complete the audit and submit the audited statements to the
Treasury and to the parliament by December 31. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of the parliament
would then review these audited accounts with the Treasury, and the Treasury would issue Treasury Minutes
detailing the actions taken to complete the accounting cycle. In FY 2014/15 these reporting and reviewing
requirements were not implemented. In fact, the audited statements for FY 2011/12 through FY 2014/15 were
not submitted to the parliament. To address this problem, the PA required clearance of the backlog, a crucial
initial step. However, in order for the policy reform to be effective, instructions should be acted upon. The latter
requires behavioral change, addressing corruption and governance problems, overcoming bureaucratic inertia
and weak capacity. This PA did address the issue of accountability but, analogous to PA6, the publishing of
past financial statements does not guarantee future compliance. (Relevance of PA7 = MS)

PA 8: This PA aimed at increasing the accountability of public finances through a Public Audit Bill that granted
the NAO more operational independence. Malawi’s legal framework for the NAO did not comply with the
international standards defined by the INTOSAI. These standards prescribe that the independence of the audit
institution needs to be established in the constitution, providing the institution legal protection against
interference in the legislative framework. However, the PA required only submission of the bill to Parliament
rather than passage of the legislation. (Relevance of PA8 = S).

PA 9: At the time of appraisal, many COs were not formally appointed, statutory reports were filed irregularly,
and many heads of MDAs did not clearly delegate financial and personnel responsibilities to subordinate
officers and hold them accountable for compliance with rules and regulations. This PA was intended to set up a
better system of control of public finances by appointing COs in all public institutions and making it obligatory for
them to submit monthly returns. These officers were in charge of making sure that proper records were
maintained and that public assets were protected. This PA therefore aimed to improve management of public
finances through greater transparency and accountability in the use of public funds. (Relevance of PA9 = S)


Pillar 2: Private sector participation and productivity in agriculture

PA 2: Prior to the operation, there was a lack of clarity with SGR operating modalities and uncertainty with
annual purchasing and distribution plans, contributing to volatility of maize prices. The SGR has a significant
influence on the maize market because it is responsible for the drawdown and distribution of maize from the
grain reserves and maize purchase on the market. Lack of transparent guidelines and mechanisms encouraged
speculation by traders and placed a high premium on insider knowledge. As a result, smallholders who
produced a marketable surplus were not able to benefit from purchases by the National Food Reserve Agency
(that manages the SGR). The PA aimed at establishing transparent and objective criteria for maize drawdown
from the SGR and technical and financial reporting and accountability mechanisms, minimizing speculation in
the maize market and decreasing volatility in maize prices. However, there were no provisions for ensuring that
the guidelines were consistently followed. (Relevance of PA2 = MU)

PA 3: This PA aimed to increase predictability and reduce distortions in agricultural markets by improving
transparency in how ADMARC (a parastatal grain marketing board) set prices, purchased quantities, and

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



 distributed them to market. ADMARC operations were unpredictable to market participants, and participants
 were exposed to the risk of ADMARC selling at a price that was below cost. The prior action entailed ADMARC
 publishing audited financial statements for FY 2013/14 and FY 2014/15 and monthly reports outlining maize
 market purchasing and distribution plans throughout the 2016/17 lean season. The Program Document stated
 that this action would explicitly define ADMARC’s roles and operations, providing farmers and traders with an
 improved investment framework less vulnerable to opportunistic state behavior, and improving productivity by
 allowing market participants to better plan their involvement in the market. This action was an important
 incremental institutional strengthening measure, though it did not extend to or guarantee future ADMARC
 behavior. (Relevance of PA3 = MS)

 PA 4: This PA aimed to address the lack of clarity when it came to land boundaries and leases, which created
 uncertainty for private investment in the sector. By 2014/15 most leases had expired, and some of the
 boundaries displayed in official records were erroneous. Additionally, large parts of traditional land management
 areas remained un-demarcated, resulting in tenure insecurity. This PA updated the legal framework. These
 reforms would strengthen land management through improved security of tenure, critical for promoting private
 participation. (Relevance of PA4 = HS)



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The relevance of the results indicators for capturing the likely impact of the PAs toward the achievement
of the objectives was mixed. Some were adequate, but others did not capture what they intended to
measure or were subject to influence by factors beyond the scope or control of this operation.

Table 2: Results indicators of the Malawi Agricultural Support and Fiscal Management DPO

 RI (number and
                             Associated PA        Baseline/target                   Status
 description)
 Pillar 1: Public expenditure management and transparency
                                                  Baseline in FY14/15: 0            Actual: 76%
 RI1: Share of FISP
                                                  Target: FY16/17: >50%
 fertilizer tonnage retailed PA1
                                                  FY17/18: >70%
 by private suppliers (%)

                                                        Baseline in FY14/15: 97%    Actual:
                                                        Target:                     64% in 2016/17
 RI2: FISP subsidy (as % of
                                                        FY16/17: <70%               77% in 2017/18
 retail price of fertilizer)
                                                        FY17/18: <60%
 RI3: Coverage of the SCT                               Baseline in FY14/15:        Actual (2017/18):
                          PA5
 program (districts)

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



                                                     18 districts                  27 districts

                                                     Target: FY17/18:

                                                     28 districts
RI4: Civil servants on
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15: 8004
payroll six months after                                                           Actual (2017/18): 166
                           PA6
exiting employment
                                                     Target FY17/18: < 500
(number)
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15:
                                                     Five years backlog            Actual (2017/18):
RI5: Backlog of audited                              (2011/12-2014/15)
financial statements                                                               Five statements
                           PA7
presented to the                                     Target FY17/18:               presented, clearing
Parliament                                                                         backlog
                                                     Five statements presented
                                                     to Parliament
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15:
                                                     Independence of NAO not
                                                     consistent with
RI6: Strengthened                                    international standards   Actual (2017/18):
independence and           PA8                                                  New Public Audit Act
capacity of the NAO                                  Target FY17/18:           implemented
                                                     Independence guaranteed
                                                     through implementing a
                                                     new legal framework
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15: No Actual (2017/18):
                                                     COs meet monthly
                                                     reporting requirements    Target met
RI7: COs meeting monthly
                           PA9
reporting requirements (%)
                                                     Target FY17/18: >90% of        (specific data not
                                                     COs meet monthly              provided)
                                                     reporting requirements
Pillar 2: Private sector participation and productivity in agriculture
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15: 0.51
RI8: Coefficient of variation                                                      Actual (2017/18): 0.27
                              PA2 and PA3
of maize prices
                                                     Target FY17/18: 0.38
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15: 0        Actual (2017/18):
RI9: Number of expired
                                                                                   34,433
estates notified
                                                     Target FY17/18: >30,000
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15: 0        Actual (2017/18):
RI10: Number of leases
renewed or cancelled          PA4
                                                     Target FY17/18: >10,000       10,000
RI11: Number of districts
                                                     Baseline in FY14/15: 0        Actual (2017/18):
starting systematic low-
cost adjudication of
                                                     Target FY17/18: 3 districts   6 districts
customary estates


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)




Pillar 1: Public expenditure management and transparency

RI1: The share of FISP fertilizer directly retailed by the private sector was intended to capture the
extent to which fertilizer delivery mechanisms were made more efficient under PA1, decreasing logistical
costs and facilitating on-time delivery, and ultimately producing cost savings for the government. The
indicator could have measured intended outcomes more precisely by focusing directly on delivery times
and/or cost savings, both of which had been measured in the 2015/16 pilot (Program Document, pp. 12-
13). (Relevance of RI1= MS)

RI2: The RI measured changes in the level of government subsidy for fertilizer as a percentage of
the market price. However, the point of the reform supported by PA1 was to fix the government subsidy
at a set level (controlling government expenditures), with the beneficiaries paying the difference between
the subsidy (coupon) and market price. The RI as constructed varied with the market price of fertilizer (the
denominator), which was not under the operation’s control. The RI therefore did not capture what it
intended to measure, which was the extent to which government subsidies were kept under control.
(Relevance of RI2=U)

There was no RI to measure outcomes resulting from the other element of PA1, the shift to targeting more
productive farmers who were thought to be better able to take advantage of seed and fertilizer subsidies.

RI3: Expanding the coverage of the Social Cash Transfer Program measured the impact of PA 5's
scale-up of the SCT program adequately, but (as mentioned above) PA 5 could not be logically linked with
either of the operation's objectives. In this way, the RI cannot be considered relevant for measuring
progress toward the objective, because the PA itself was unrelated. (Relevance of RI3=HU)

RI4: The number of civil servants on payroll six months after exiting employment meant to capture
the impact of PA6 towards improved public expenditure management, with a decrease in the number of
ghost employees receiving salaries resulting in greater public expenditure efficiency and better public
expenditure management. The six-month time frame was a relatively lengthy period for those who had
exited public employment to continue receiving salaries. (Relevance of RI4=S).

RI5: The clearance of a five-year long backlog of audited financial statements was intended to
measure the impact of PA7 toward greater transparency and accountability. The RI adequately captured
the impact of implementing the existing reporting and reviewing requirements to clear the backlog, but
there was no provision for continued implementation of requirements and therefore no measure of the
impact of policy or institutional changes that would encourage or guarantee future
compliance. (Relevance of RI5=MS)

RI6: Strengthened independence of the NAO meant to capture the impact of the passage of the public
audit bill under PA8 toward strengthened transparency and accountability. However, the results indicator
contained no specific measure of progress, but instead contained vague language about “strengthened
independence” with a target of “guaranteed” independence through implementation of a new legal
framework. A better RI might have tracked the number of performed audits by the NAO in comparison
with the past number of audits, or the publication of a yearly report on budget execution. (Relevance of
RI6=U)


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)




RI7: The compliance of COs with monthly reporting requirements meant to capture the impact of
appointing Controlling Officers in all public institutions and making it obligatory for them to submit monthly
returns (PA9). The indicator adequately captured compliance, contributing to improved transparency and
expenditure management. (Relevance of RI7=S)

The relevance of results indicators under pillar 1 is rated moderately unsatisfactory.

Pillar 2: Private sector participation and productivity in agriculture

RI8: The coefficient of variation in maize prices meant to capture the impact of PA 2 (improved
management of the SGR) and PA3 (improved operations within ADMARC) on progress towards improved
private sector participation in agricultural markets and agricultural productivity. However, as noted in the
ICR (p. 19), the link between price volatility and the functioning of maize markets depends on many
factors outside the operation’s control, including climate and informal cross-border trade; the contribution
of policy reform and other factors affecting price volatility can only be measured in the medium term after
a longer period of consistent and transparent market interventions. Furthermore, neither PA 2 nor PA3
contained measures that guaranteed adherence to established guidelines. (Relevance of RI8 =U)

RI9: The number of expired estate leases notified adequately measured the impact of PA4 on
progress toward improved private sector participation, with better management and overview of expired
leases leading to improved land administration, investment incentives, and access to land. (Relevance of
RI9=HS)

RI10: The number of expired estate leases renewed or cancelled similarly captured the impact of PA4
on improved land administration, incentivizing private sector participation. (Relevance of RI10=HS)

RI11: The number of districts starting systematic low-cost adjudication of customary estates
captured improved land tenure security and availability of robust and accessible land dispute resolution
mechanisms under PA4, again facilitating private sector participation. (Relevance of RI11=HS)


The relevance of results indicators under pillar 2 is rated satisfactory.

With the relevance of results indicators under pillar 1 moderately unsatisfactory and under pillar 2
satisfactory, the overall relevance of results indicators is judged to be moderately satisfactory.

Table 3: Relevance of Results Indicators and Efficacy Ratings for Malawi Agricultural Support and
Fiscal Management DPO

                                    Efficacy rating
                                    (from RI or
                                    complementary                               Overall Efficacy
Results Indicator Relevance rating                       Pillar Efficacy Rating
                                    evidence)                                   Rating
Pillar 1: Public expenditure management and accountability in public finance
RI1                 MS                    Substantial
RI2                 U                     Negligible


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



               RI3              HU                   Negligible           Moderately
               RI4              S                    Substantial          Unsatisfactory
               RI5              MS                   Modest                                       Moderately
               RI6              U                    Substantial                                  Unsatisfactory
               RI7              S                    Modest
               Objective 2: promoting private sector participation and productivity
               improvement in agriculture
               RI8              U                    Negligible
               RI9              HS                   Substantial
                                                                          Moderately Satisfactory
               RI10             HS                   Substantial
               RI11             HS                   Substantial

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improving public expenditure management and transparency

                Rationale
                RI1: The share of FISP fertilizer tonnage retailed by private suppliers was achieved. Furthermore, the
                FISP reform was continued beyond 2017/18, and the share of fertilizer retailed by the private sector increased
                to 88% by 2018/19. Progress toward the objective is rated Substantial.

                RI2: The FISP subsidy as a share of the retail price of fertilizer was achieved in 2016/17, but the trendline
                reversed and the target was not achieved in 2017/18. In any event, this RI was not an acceptable measure of
                progress toward the objective. In July 2020, the new government replaced the FISP with an Affordable Inputs
                Program that retains many elements of the FISP but extends the benefit to all smallholder farmers; the ICR
                (pp. 17-18) indicates that the new program may not be affordable. Progress toward the objective is rated
                Negligible.

                RI3: The Social Cash Transfer program was expanded as planned, but there is no results chain
                connecting this RA with either objective. Progress toward the objective is rated Negligible.

                RI4: The number of civil servants on payroll six months after exiting employment was achieved, and
                the government is actively addressing anomalies such as the use of the same employee number for multiple
                pensioners and discrepancies between payment records and the human resources management information
                system. Progress toward the objective is rated Substantial.

                RI5: The clearance of a five-year long backlog of audited financial statements presented to the
                Parliament was achieved. However, no evidence is presented that longer-term issues with governance,




                                                                                                               Page 10 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



bureaucratic inertia, and weak capacity—which produced the backlog that had to be cleared—have been
addressed by this measure. Progress toward the objective is therefore rated Modest.

RI6: Strengthening the independence of the NAO was a vague and unmeasurable indicator. However,
according to the ICR (p. 23), a new Public Audit Act enacted in 2018 is “substantially compliant” with
international best practice, and an attempt to appoint an Auditor General in 2018 in a way that was not
compliant with the spirit of the Act was overturned. Furthermore, the new Auditor General (appointed in line
with the new Act) submitted FY 2017/18 financial statements to Parliament concurrently with its submission to
MoFEPD in December 2018. Progress toward the objective is therefore rated Substantial.

RI7: Compliance of controlling officers with monthly reports is reported to have been achieved in
2017/18, though exact data are not available. The ICR (p. 23) reports only on a May 2018 letter from the
Minister of Finance to the Bank stating that the compliance rate was “more than 90 percent.” The ICR further
states, however, that there was “some slippage” in the rate of compliance in 2019, and that some monthly
submissions were delayed, indicating backsliding. Progress toward the objective is rated Modest.



Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Promoting private sector participation and productivity improvement in agriculture

Rationale
RI8: Coefficient of variation in maize prices was achieved in 2017/18. However, the policy actions were
not clearly linked to achievement of the RI, as many factors outside the control of the operation influence
price volatility. Price stability is likely to have a positive impact on private sector participation (and therefore
achievement of the objective), but this cannot be attributed to the operation. Furthermore, according to the
ICR (p. 24), price variation increased in 2018/29 (no exact data are provided). Progress towards the
objective is rated Negligible.

RI9: The number of expired estate land leases notified was achieved under newly enacted land laws.
Progress toward the objective is rated Substantial.

RI10: The number of leases renewed or cancelled was also achieved under the new land laws. Progress
toward the objective is rated Substantial.

RI11: Expansion of low-cost adjudication of customary estates was achieved, with a manual for
systematic demarcation and low-cost surveying approved and double the targeted number of districts
engaged in implementation. Progress toward the objective is rated Substantial.



Rating


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)




                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

While there was demonstrable progress toward enhanced land tenure rights and improved management of the
FISP through participation of private retailers in fertilizer distribution, the other elements of the operation
experienced significant shortcomings. Many of the Prior Actions did not support policies that would carry results
beyond the narrow time frame of the operation, and many of the results indicators were inadequate measures of
progress toward achievement of the objectives. One Prior Action was not related to achievement of either
objective. Overall, there was limited progress on improved public sector management and transparency, including
some backsliding immediately following the operation’s closure, and only initial steps were taken toward improved
private sector participation through the new land laws.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      With relevance of Prior Actions assessed to be moderately satisfactory and efficacy moderately unsatisfactory,
      the outcome of the operation is rated moderately unsatisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Moderately Unsatisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Political, governance, and institutional capacity issues place achieved outcomes at risk. For example, while
      institutions and regulations were put in place to enhance the transparency of maize market operations, there
      have been repeated attempts at political interference. In 2018, in response to a sharp fall in maize
      production, the government overrode established rules to withdraw maize from the SGR. Enacted legislation
      and regulation cannot achieve its intended purpose if the political will for adherence and enforcement is not
      present. Similarly, while audit findings are now published, this is done with delay, and Treasury minutes are
      not regularly issued, making it difficult to judge whether actions have been taken. The same is true for
      monthly reports submitted by COs; there is no evidence on action taken on these reports.


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



The ICR (p. 27) notes that the pace and intensity of the government’s reform effort has fallen off since the
follow-on operation to this one was dropped, and that progress along many reform pathways (unless those
reforms are supported by parallel technical assistance or investment lending) has not been closely tracked
by the Bank or the government. Progress was further stalled by a year-long political impasse following
contested elections in May 2019. New elections were held in June 2020, and the decisive victory of an
alliance of the two main opposition parties restored political stability. Malawi’s COVID-19 case and mortality
numbers have been relatively low to date, but the country’s extremely low vaccination rate (2% as of early
September 2021) and high levels of vaccine hesitancy raise concerns that the pandemic will create
additional risk to development outcomes.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The operation’s objectives addressed the key pressures facing Malawi at the time of appraisal – low
productivity subsistence farming that was vulnerable to climate shocks, and weak fiscal management – as
part of a multi-pronged World Bank Group response. Its policy actions were intended to catalyze parallel
investment project financing to support drought recovery and social safety nets, and to promote an
emerging government reform agenda that would reduce opportunities for corruption following the 2013
“cashgate” scandal. Design drew from extensive prior analytical work, including technical assistance on
agriculture, financial reporting and oversight, and public services modernization.

Risk assessment was thorough, acknowledging the operation’s high level of risk across multiple
categories, but also weighing the risks of not engaging and therefore leaving emerging reforms isolated
and vulnerable to reversals. Some of the PAs increased transparency and accountability of public sector
institutions, which in turn was expected to reinforce public demand for reforms and help offset the power of
entrenched interests. The project team later stressed that this was a highly scrutinized, high-profile
operation both in the country and in the Bank, with preparation involving significant public discussion and
debate, and that the Bank played a public role in supporting reform champions.

Key lessons were cited in the Program Document as having been applied to the preparation of this DPO:
the need to undertake not just superficial reforms, but also to address the underlying informal
arrangements that allowed for collusive behavior to take place; the need for strong focus on timeliness of
fiscal information and integrity of systems; and the importance of identifying the most macro-critical areas
for structural reform, where progress would be harder to unwind after the completion of the operation. The
operation’s design incorporated some of these lessons. Several of the PAs did not contain provisions that
would incentivize or guarantee future behavior beyond the operation’s closure; these PAs were instead ex
post measures that cleared past backlogs or filled information gaps. Although these PAs represented
important incremental steps, they did not create reliable guard rails against future misappropriation or
noncompliance.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



The quality of the results indicators was mixed. Some were satisfactory, but several did not capture the
changes they were intended to measure or were influenced by factors outside the scope and control of the
operation.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring of results indicators was adequate. It took place as part of regular policy dialogue with the
authorities. Implementation of major policy reforms was also tracked through the progress of associated
investment and technical assistance projects (FISP reforms through an agricultural TA and an agricultural
commercialization project, and public finance reforms through a financial sector TA). The ICR (p. 26)
acknowledges that the operation “focused too much on creating institutions and policies and not enough on
results and outcomes, and that reforms may not stay on track.” Though belatedly, the supervision team
recognized these shortcomings and, as a result, the planned second operation was dropped.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

---

Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR (pp. 24-25) states that the DPO series was designed to support poverty reduction in four ways. First,
the FISP reforms supported by the DPO series were to reduce subsidy levels and increase the efficiency of the
program to increase agricultural productivity by targeting more productive farmers instead of the poor who often
did not make effective use of the subsidy. Moreover, the expansion of the SCT program was to focus on poor


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



and vulnerable women. Second, the policies for improved management of the SGR and ADMARC were to
reduce agricultural market distortions and maize price volatility thereby enhance the welfare of net food buyers
who are mainly poor farmers. Third, land reforms, which improve tenure security, were to benefit small farmers,
especially female farmers, as well as improve incentives for commercialization. Fourth, PFM reforms that aimed
to help strengthen expenditure management and budget execution, public accountability, and transparency were
expected to contribute to improved service delivery and were in principle pro-poor.

However, the ICR does not provide information to demonstrate that these intended social and poverty impacts
took place.



b. Environmental

According to the ICR (p. 25), the reforms supported by the DPO series were expected to contribute to improved
climate resilience in Malawi. First, in agriculture, reforms to the FISP, which has long crowded out public
expenditure in the agriculture sector, would free up fiscal space to enable a more balanced set of agricultural
investment activities, including in climate-smart agriculture as set out in the new National Agricultural Policy.
Similarly, improved functioning of agricultural markets should lead to the reversal of incentives that have tended to
encourage maize mono-cropping and growing on marginal and drought-prone land, resulting in soil erosion and a
general lack of agricultural diversification. Second, improved security of land tenure could lead to higher levels of
investment in land stewardship, and thus reduce land degradation. The ICR does not provide information to
demonstrate that these intended environmental impacts took place.



c. Gender

The ICR (p. 24) states that the expansion of the SCT program was focused on poor and vulnerable women and
that land reforms, which lead to improved tenure security, would benefit small land owners, especially female
farmers, but the link between these actions and the actual impact on gender is not discussed in detail, and no
evidence of impact specifically on women is provided.



d. Other

None identified.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is clearly written and concise. It is candid and critical. It provides sufficient and convincing evidence
related to prior actions, results indicators, and achievement of objectives. The evidence is well sourced and

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



presented in a parsimonious fashion. The ICR also provides a balanced narrative of the positive and negative
sides of preparation as well as implementation, intervening factors, and context. Its lessons cover both general
good-practice observations as well as operation-specific lessons, though they are framed as recommendations
rather than lessons. More detail could have been included on the operation’s gender dimensions and impact, as
well as its overall social, poverty, and environmental impacts. The ICR also does not fully address shortcomings
with some of the prior actions and results indicators, and in general, the issues that led to the dropping of the
second operation are not fully acknowledged in the analysis of this operation’s design and efficacy.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                   One of the PAs was not directly
                                                                                   related to either objective. Some
                                                                                   RIs did not capture the changes
                                 Moderately            Moderately                  they were intended to measure,
Outcome
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              and others were strongly
                                                                                   impacted by factors beyond the
                                                                                   scope or control of the
                                                                                   operation.
                                                                                   There were moderate
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory     shortcomings in design and
                                                                                   implementation.
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG concurs with the general lessons of the ICR (p. 28):

Lesson 1: Careful matching of prior actions and results indicators to the political and institutional context is a
prerequisite to successful outcome of a DPO. In this operation, several of the prior actions were designed to
create legislative frameworks (SGR law, COGA, WRA, ADMARC) and institutional reforms. However, in Malawi,
these kinds of actions are undermined by weak capacity and governance problems. Future operations could
consider more strongly linking prior actions and triggers to implementation of reforms. Similarly, when possible,
results indicators should be easier to track and more closely linked to outcomes (see the discussion in Section
4).

Lesson 2: Strengthening linkages with Bank TA and investment lending operations can support implementation
and supervision of DPOs. One of the strengths of this DPO was that it was linked closely to a set of Bank TA

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Agri Supp and Fiscal Mgmt DPO (P153753)



and investment lending operations. However, an even closer link between the actions tracked in the TA
operations and the prior actions and RIs of the DPO would have further supported implementation and
supervision of the DPO.

Lesson 3: DPO series need to adequately account for lengthy processes of legislative change. The analysis in
the ICR indicates that in Malawi it takes a long time to implement legislative change. Developing and
implementing laws is time consuming, unpredictable, and not fully under the control of the executive. In this
DPO, there were delays in putting in place laws for ADMARC, the COGA, the WRA and the Audit Reform act,
which should be taken into account for future operations.

To these lessons, IEG adds the following:

Lesson 4: It is important for projects with potential impact specifically on women to track carefully and report
those impacts. In this case, the ICR states that some prior actions targeted women, but reporting or analysis of
any benefits that accrued is missing.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
