     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022615

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P125506                                    SN:Casamance Development Pole Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Senegal                                    Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53050                                  30-Jun-2019                                           36,742,286.60

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2013                                30-Sep-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         36,742,286.60                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hannah Mary Bleby           Maria Vanessa                Christopher David Nelson        IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Orford                      Corlazzoli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) for project "Senegal: Casamance Development Pole Project" are
   identical in the Finance Agreement, Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and the Independent Completion
   Report. The objectives were to:

           (i) enhance the agricultural productivity of youth and female farmers for selected crops; and



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



             (ii) improve transport linkages in isolated rural communities in targeted areas of the Casamance
   region.

   The ICR (para 9) considers that a third PDO should have been included at design – strengthened rural
   participatory development, including community participation and institutional-building with the post-conflict
   peacebuilding objective – given the significant resources (component 3) allocated to that purpose (para
   74). The ICR considers this a third project development outcome and assesses it accordingly. This ICRR
   makes its assessments against the original two PDOs (see Sections 3 and 4 below).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Support to agricultural production, post-harvest, and marketing for selected value-
   chains (US$24.0 million, of which IDA financed US$22.0 million. Actual cost US$18.3 million)
   Component 1 sought to improve food security and generate cash revenue for small holders, through
   supporting producer organizations to boost rice, horticulture and oyster production, taking a holistic value
   chain perspective. This included rehabilitation and development; provision of assets to enhance
   productivity; small scale post-harvest infrastructure; and improving market access though development and
   operation of the Integrated Economic Platform of Bignona (IEPB).

   Component 2. Rural Accessibility (US$15.0 million, of which IDA financed US$13.0 million. Actual
   cost US$11.3 million) Component 2 sought to improve accessibility of the most isolated rural communities
   and enhance their access to local markets by improving roads and agricultural production zones. This
   involved: spot improvement of the poorest rural communities (CRs) road access; rehabilitation and
   maintenance of about 200km of selected rural roads; implementation of a rural roads maintenance pilot
   program using labor intensive (HIMO) methods; and capacity strengthening for Regional Development
   Agencies (ARDs), and rural communities in contracting and road maintenance.

   Component 3. Project implementation and capacity building (US$7.0 million, of which IDA financed
   US$5.0 million. Actual cost US$7.5 million) Component 3 had four subcomponents spanning capacity
   strengthening in peace processes and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; strategic studies to
   support the Government’s pole development plan; and support for program management and monitoring
   and evaluation; construction of offices and provision of office equipment for Rural Development Agencies.

   A partial Level 2 restructuring occurred as a result of the midterm review (MTR), which included changes to
   component 3 (ICR para 18) and reducing originally allocated funds of US$9 million to US$7 million. There
   changes focused principally in two areas. Firstly, it was to increase participatory development through
   establishing a pilot Citizen Engagement Committees (CECs) to develop Communal Development Plans,
   manage grievance redress mechanism (GRM) and increase transparency of information regarding
   communal affairs. Activities related to studies on development poles were dropped. Activities, related to
   Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration (DDR) were also cancelled because of improvements on
   the ground in Casamance since appraisal. DDR activities were transferred to a different Bank-funded

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



   intervention (ICR para16). A contribution was also made to component 2 to cover a cost overrun (ICR para
   18) (see discussion at Section 4 below).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Key dates: The project was approved on 25 September 2013 and became effective on 20 May 2014. The
   mid term review was dated 19 September 2016 and resulted in a partial restructuring of components and
   corresponding targets. Original closing date was 30 June 2019 but actual closing was 30 September 2020.

   In September 2017, the project experienced changes to the result framework, component, and costs. Most
   of the changes related to modifications to indicators and indicator targets. The changes were made as a
   result of MTR findings.

   In May 2019, the project was extended by one year to allow achievement of outstanding project activities
   required to achieve the PDOs. In addition, there were changes to the implementing agency, results
   framework, and reallocation between disbursement categories.

   In June 2020, a further three-month extension was granted to allow for restrictions imposed by Covid 19. At
   that point however, the project was on track to meet its initial one-year extension deadline (ICR para 20.)

   Costs: US$40 million IDA funding (IDA-53050) was approved for the project, with US$36,742,287 actually
   disbursed at project closing – 92.7 percent of the total. The ICR notes though, that total final disbursements
   may have been higher, since some were tallied after project closing (ICR footnote 20, p28).

   Borrower Contribution: In addition, US$6 million was to be contributed by the Government and
   beneficiaries ( US$4 million government and $2million by beneficiaries) (ICR, para. 12). However, at MTR, a
   decision was taken to remove the counterpart contribution from the official project funding, as there was
   difficulty in mobilizing these funds – primarily due to other government fiscal constraints (ICR Annex 3, p46,
   footnote 21, p28). This reduced the original component budgets by US$2 million each, which had been
   primarily earmarked for payments to Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff. These gaps were ultimately
   absorbed by IDA funding (ICR para 71.)

   Costs across components remained largely steady. Against the revised costs for each component,
   Component 1 was at 91.5% spending, component to was at 86.9% and component 3 was at 107.1% (ICR
   Annex 3). At MTR, some funds (approximately US$984,000) were reallocated from component 1 to enable
   the PIU to continue operation through the one-year extension. Funds were also reallocated towards
   component 3 to enable Citizen’s Engagement Committees and Grievance Redress Mechanism activities to
   be introduced (ICR para 19 and 74). The ICR does not give further details of these changes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: At time of appraisal, Senegal was enjoying one of the highest economic growths in Africa.
However, this economic growth was uneven and left behind those that had experienced state and societal

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



fragility, such as in the areas of Casamance. These areas experiences conflict between 1982 and 2004
and many of the root causes that fueled the conflict persisted. For example, poverty levels in Casamance
were higher than the national average. The region also experienced food insecurity, with 20% of the
population having reduced or minimally adequate food consumption and 16.5% prevalence of chronic
malnutrition (ICR, para. 3). The conflict led to a lack of trust of government institutions among the local
population and traditional religious and ethnic differences were exacerbated. When it came to agriculture,
the region also suffered from production and marketing constraints, and environmental challenges. The
conflict impacted rice yield productions, poor or non-existing irrigation facilities, and lack of knowledge on
effective agricultural practices. Moreover, Casamance's road infrastructure was in disrepair, with less than
75% of the population having access to basic services and 50% access to roads that were passable year
round. The objective of the project adequately addresses key barriers to economic growth by seeking to
increase agricultural productivity and improve transport linkages. The project also aimed to promote long-
term peace.

The economic analysis also highlights that economically, Casamance had a comparative advantage for rice
production (ICR para 42), adding to the relevance of selecting and investing in this crop up front for
production under the project. Similarly, the horticulture crops selected under the project were traditionally
carried out primarily by women and youth. This allowed the project to focus support on these relatively more
economically vulnerable groups, thereby helping reduce inequalities – a key driver of conflict and instability
in Casamance (PAD para 19 and 79).

Previous Experience: The project benefited from experience of similar projects in particular the Senegal
Agricultural Competitive Project and the Participatory Local Development Project. According to the PAD,
lessons learned from these projects were incorporated into the design of the project (PAD, pg. 20).

Alignment with Government and Bank Strategy: The objective also aligned with the Bank’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF FY13-17) at appraisal as well as with the new CPF FY2024 at project closing.
For example, at appraisal the CPF sought to improve governance and build resilience by accelerating
growth and employment and improving service delivery. At closing, the project objective's aligned with the
CPF's (FY20-24) focus on resilience and sustainability through social equity, climate and transparency
risks. The project's objectives support the World Bank's twin goals of poverty reduction and economic
growth. While the project also aimed to tackle some of the root causes of conflict, Senegal is not
considered a fragile state by the World Bank.

The objectives are aligned with the Government’s Plan Senegal Emergent, focusing on i) more balanced
development though promoting an economic pole approach, ii) improving well-being and reducing social
inequality, and iii) reinforcing security, stability and governance to support peace in the isolated region of
Casamance (ICR para 7 and 26, PAD paras 19, 26). The government’s plan specifically highlighted
challenges of decentralization in the Casamance region. The project’s holistic approach aimed
at strengthening local engagement with the government through improved agricultural development and
transport links. Reducing economic and social inequalities in Casamance would support Government’s and
broader efforts towards stability and peace in the region. In addition, the project objectives also align with
the Government's agricultural priorities as described in the Programme d'Acceleration de la Cadence de
l'Agriculture Senegalaise (PRACAS, 2014-2017).

The ICR also highlights, however, that the PDO did not capture a key third outcome of the project –
strengthened rural participatory development and institution-building, to which the resources and activities
of component 3 were directed (ICR para 9) – increasingly so after the mid term. It argues that this outcome

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



               should have been included in the PDO, as it was highly relevant to achieving the higher order outcomes of
               contributing to post-conflict peacebuilding. In that sense, while the stated objectives were indeed highly
               relevant, the PDO itself fell short of the project’s full scope and designation of resources. The PDO was less
               ambitious than the activities planned against it and as a result the relevance of the objectives is rated as
               Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Enhance the agricultural productivity of youth and female farmers for selected crops.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The ICR’s rendering of the theory of change (para 8) aligns well with the PAD’s description of project
                             objectives (PAD Section II - prepared prior to the theory of change being a requirement for design), including
                             the intended contribution to higher order objectives of helping address core conflict drivers (PAD
                             p.11). Component activities, such as providing equipment and technical support, road rehabilitation and
                             strengthening local institutions, link to project outputs and work together to produce to short term outcomes.
                             Improved yields, infrastructure and investment programs, and strengthened rural institutions and participation,
                             lead to PDO outcomes of improved agriculture productivity and transport links. These contribute to longer
                             term objectives of peacebuilding in the region through addressing economic inequalities.

                             Both the PAD and ICR theory of change diagram position component 3 activities and associated short-term
                             outcomes as contributors to PDOs. The ICR analysis, however, positions component 3 as leading to a PDO
                             level outcome of its own (strengthened rural participatory development), because of its critical contribution to
                             the higher order outcome. While this demonstrates clear the line of sight between these activities, outputs and
                             higher order outcomes, for consistency of analysis, this ICRR remains focused on the original two PDOs.

                             The critical assumptions listed in the overall design appear to have held true. However, a further assumption
                             critical to the project’s targeted beneficiaries, is not listed – that is, that there would be no cultural or other
                             barriers or risks to women and youth being prioritized for support under the project, especially within a
                             conflict-affected context. This assumption also appears to have held but there is little analysis of this in either
                             the ICR or PAD although it could have seriously undermined achievement of the PDO. The ICR lessons (para
                             84) do highlight the importance for future approaches, of considering the full range social, economic and
                             physical infrastructure dimensions that constrain economic empowerment of vulnerable groups, rather than
                             limiting it to production support.


                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



While not explicit in the ICR, the PAD does set out reasoning for targeting women (e.g. para 76-79) and youth
(para 75), based on evidence gathered through specific youth employment and gender studies from 2013.
The PAD describes increased poverty and vulnerability (particularly economic) of these groups as a result of
the ongoing conflict in the region, and women as predominant in many agricultural industries (para 41b) and
transport activities (para 16) – the key focus areas of the PDOs. The project did not aim to change the gender
or youth balance in those agricultural activities, since traditionally, all groups worked together along the
production cycle. Rather, it aimed to reduce economic vulnerability of women and youth, particularly where
industries were female dominated (e.g. oysters) (ICR para 30).

Outputs and Outcomes:

PDO indicator 1.1 Average increase in rainfed rice yield achieved 84% of its target of 1.6 tons of paddy per
hectare, reaching 1.34 tons from a baseline of zero. Intermediate project outcomes that supported this were
mostly strong. 126,620 ha with irrigation and drainage services were provided – four times the target of
30,000 (this is not explained in the ICR). Around half the target of 12,000 hectares – 5,300 hectares – were
provided with new irrigation and drainage services and 23,461 hectares of irrigation and drainage services
were improved, against a target of 18,000 (ICR p37). A client satisfaction survey in 2020 found 98.7% of
clients were satisfied with the technical and advisory support received to improve cropping practices against a
target of 85% (ICR, para 31). The target of providing 50 female and youth groups with equipment and input
packages to was vastly surpassed with 509 groups actually supplied. The ICR does not explain how costs for
this significant increase in groups supplied were covered or why so many more groups were reached. Despite
these strong outputs, crop yields were also affected by differing weather conditions across seasons. The ICR
also notes that the overall target was ambitious. This is because it represented a doubling of yield in a five
year period (para 31) from a challenging base, due to salinity, a lack of irrigation and transport facilities,
exacerbated by effects of conflict (para 4).

PDO indicator 1.2 Average revenue of horticulture, achieved 122% of its revised target, averaging US$1,650
per hectare against a target of US$1,350 (revised up from $675 in 2019), from a baseline of $250. While the
result was very strong, the intermediate level design story line was mixed. Significantly, the intermediate
target of rehabilitating 3,000 hectares of horticultural perimeters was reduced at mid term to 300 ha due to an
overestimation at design of available land and costs (ICR para 17, 32, 76). A total of 197.39 ha was actually
rehabilitated, managed or developed. But as the result of PDO indicator 1.2 shows, the producer revenue rate
of those fewer hectares was substantially exceeded, even above the increased per hectare target, confirming
the horticultural potential of the Casamance region, with the improvement in markets, connectivity and a focus
on youth and women. The ICR does not, however, address the possible relationship between the smaller
scale of rehabilitation activities and this much higher return. Other intermediate outputs were achieved such
as providing youth and female groups with equipment and input packages for horticulture (94 groups supplied
against a target of 75) and oyster farms (21 groups supplied against a target of 2) and rehabilitating 126,620
ha or rice valleys against the target of 30,000 ha.

PDO indicator 1.3 Tons per year of local produce passing through the Bignona platform A total of 339 tons
were achieved at closing and therefore not meeting its target of 25,000 tons from a baseline of zero. The
platform is a wholesale market for storage and processing of produce. The target was revised down to 13,000
at the mid-term to account for a perceived design overestimation, then back to 25,000 in May 2019 to account
for the extra year added to the overall project length (a contributing factor being delays to supplies and people
movement caused by COVID-19. ICR para 20). The platform was indeed eventually constructed and
functional, including construction of 15 mini platforms (a PDO indicator of objective 2 – see this section below
for discussion), but the original target was for this platform to be completed on September 2013. In fact, it was

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



not completed until September 2020. This delay, due largely to inherited land acquisition and safeguards
issues (see Section 10a below and ICR para 34) meant that only 338.98 tons of the target 25,000 tons per
year of produce had passed through the platform by project closure. A total of 9 of the intended 15 small
enterprises were also operational (target not met). However, the ICR reports that at project closure, the
platform was fully operational, staffed with competent, trained people and had operated on a pilot basis for 2
years (ICR para 34 and 40). Based on this and the project’s economic analysis, it is expected the objectives
of the platform would be achieved over time, with 25,000 tons per year projected to pass through the platform
by year 8, and potential for double this if operating year-round (ICR p49 and 51). That said, the target was
not achieved during the life of the project.

The efficacy of PDO1 is rated modest. While it exceeded targets against indicators 1.1 and 1.2, it fell well
short on the important indicator on the marketability of agriculture product. Outcome 1.3 may well be achieved
in the future, given the groundwork put in place by the project and early indications of its function. But there is
still doubt as to whether it will provide the necessary fix to the challenge of marketing agriculture product.
Moreover, the lack of outcome indicators to measure female and youth agricultural productivity hinders the
ability to assess the extent to which the overall objective was achieved.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve transport linkages in isolated rural communities in targeted areas of the Casamance region.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project sought to improve transport linkages in isolated rural communities by
providing technical assistance and support for rehabilitation and improvement of roads. The theory claimed
that if roads were improved, then more of the rural population would have access to key services. Road
linkages would also support the project's higher level of objectives of socio and economic empowerment of
rural population in Casamance.

Outputs and Outcomes:

PDO indicator 2.1 Share of the rural population with access to an all-season road. The target of 60 percent,
representing 705,000 people, was exceeded with 71 percent (809,079 people) reached (ICR para 36). At
intermediate outcome level, 460km of roads rehabilitated was not reached (target of 480km). The target was
revised down from 550km at midterm due to an overestimation of what could be achieved with available
budget (ICR para 76, although this is not reflected as a formal revision in the results framework). Key outputs
around rehabilitation included both periodic maintenance around (200km of roads) and spot maintenance
(around 222km). It also combined mechanized as well as high intensity labor methods. The latter was used to
generate greater local employment and it also significantly reduced costs (ICR para 44, and see section 5
below). The ICR reports that nearly all the infrastructure works were completed on time (para 36). There were
also some very strong results reported by the GoS Implementation Completion survey and local executing
agency AGEROUTE final survey. Transport times were reduced by 44-57% in different regions and 98.7% of


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



                            respondents reported positive effects of these reductions on their businesses, increased access to markets
                            and customers (ICR para 36).

                            PDO indicator 3.1 Overall beneficiary numbers of the project were very strong and exceeded expectations.
                            At completion, 120,842 people were direct beneficiaries, against the original target of 50,000 (240%
                            achievement of target). The ICR does not explain this positive variance. A total of 56% of beneficiaries were
                            women, against an expected target of 40%. This is explained as primarily due to the project targeting
                            activities which were traditionally women’s activities (ICR para 27, 30, 38). The expected proportion of youth
                            beneficiaries was 30% (Target: 50% - not achieved) (ICR p34). There was no specific analysis of why the
                            youth target was proportionally lower than expected, although the ICR’s lessons do indicate that both youth
                            and female participation can be constrained by ‘social structures and cultural norms’ (ICR para 84 and
                            Section 12 below).

                            A further key outcome of the project was strengthened rural participation, although as noted above, this
                            was not originally part of the PDO or results framework. The ICR assesses this through PDO indicator 3.1
                            (Overall beneficiaries – see above), as a proxy for rural participation. It was supported by two new
                            intermediate indicators introduced following the MTR – number of Citizen Engagement Committees (CEC)
                            formed and grievance redress mechanism (GRM) response rate (ICR para 37). These indicators replaced
                            component 3’s DDR activities and studies on the pole development, recognizing improvements in the
                            Casamance region in relation to militia groups and changes to local government responsibilities. DDR
                            activities were transferred to another Bank funded intervention (ICR para 16 and see Section 8
                            below). These activities were also consistent with component 3’s focus on project implementation and
                            capability building and supported sustaining PDOs 1 and 2.

                            Citizen Engagement Committees – of the 9 planned CEC pilots introduced at MTR to strengthen capacity
                            building and project implementation, 3 were operational at the end of the project with a further 6 about to be
                            launched (Target not met, ICR para 39). The ICR describes this as a major achievement in view of their
                            contribution to sustaining other elements of the project through, for example, providing a structured voice for
                            beneficiaries (notably marginalized groups) (ICR para 77), helping address capability building shortcomings
                            identified at the MTR (ICR para 74), collecting data on implementation and laying ground for ongoing
                            participatory development approaches (ICR para 86). The ICR also cites ‘increased ownership and greater
                            impacts of project interventions’ (ICR para 39) resulting from the CECs but does not provide specific details.
                            As noted above however, overall beneficiary numbers and satisfaction were high (see also ICR para 27).

                            Grievance Redress Mechanism – The GRM complemented the CECs, with 94.3 percent of complaints
                            addressed to a satisfactory level for the complainant (ICR para 69, and p40), against a target of 100 percent.

                            The efficacy of PDO2 is rated substantial, due to targets for 2.1 and 3.1 being exceeded but intermediate
                            results such as youth participation and kilometers of road rehabilitated being somewhat lower than expected.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  As noted above, the ICR assesses three PDOs, rather than the original two in the design. This ICRR,
  however analyses the original two, since the adjusted component 3 activities also continued to support
  achievement of PDOs 1 and 2. It also acknowledges there was a clear line of sight between component 3
  activities and the higher order peacebuilding objectives.

  The overall efficacy of the projected is rated Substantial with shortcomings. The project achieved a number of
  its objectives, and where it did not (e.g. PDO indicator 1.3 Bignona Platform), it is plausible that these could
  be achieved in the future, given the groundwork laid by the project. However, while PDO1 on agricultural
  outcomes of increased yield and revenue were strong (and several exceeded), there was a significant
  shortcoming with the Bignona Platform going well beyond the intended timeframe of the project. PDO2
  improved transport related outcomes once an underestimation regarding required budget was addressed at
  the MTR. Importantly, rural participation was also significantly strengthened, supporting not only the
  achievement of the PDOs, but making critical contributions towards the high order objectives of sustaining
  peace and development in the region.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Scope of Analysis: At appraisal, economic and social benefits were created for the two operational
components (agricultural and transport) because the types of benefits are not measured in the same terms
(PAD, para. 55). The project did not plan to carry out a comprehensive Cost Benefit Analysis of the whole
project (PAD, para. 55).

The methodology used was based on a cost-benefit analysis with a 13 percent discount rate and was conducted
on selected value chains: rice, banana, sweet potato, mango, cassava and the Bignona platform. The results
indicated that the project would be economically and financially profitable, with an ERR varying between 30% for
the platform and 90% for the production of rice.

For the road maintenance and rehabilitation work, the results indicated that the economic benefits were
acceptable given the main risks of higher investment costs (20%) and lower future benefits due to lower traffic
(20% decrease) (PAD, para 61). The expected economic investment varied across different districts within the
Ziguinchor and Kolda regions. The EIRR (base scenario) ranged from 39% to 13% at a NPV discount rate of
10%.

Economic Analysis: An efficiency analysis was conducted across the income generating crop activities (rice
and horticulture), the Bignona Platform, and the improvements of roads (components 1 and 2) at project closure.
The ICR notes that component 3’s activities (strengthening rural participation and capacity) were not readily
quantifiable and their benefits would accrue over time (ICR Annex 4 para 2), hence the analysis is partial.
Similar methodology to that used in the appraisal was used at project completion.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



The efficiency analysis rates the project’s overall results as strongly positive, with net present value (NPV) of
$67 million vs against an out-of-pocket cost of $46 million (ICR para 46) and an ERR of 30.8%.

For income generating crop activities, the NPVs (West African CFA Franc (CFAF) ‘000/ha) were positive, with
rice being 236 (with subsidy, 80 without), okra 18,124 (17,586 without subsidy) and chili pepper 25,673 (25,135
without subsidy) (ICR Annex 4, Table 1). The large differences in numbers reflect the fact that rice is a much
less labor-intensive crop than the others, requiring 1 worker per hectare, compared to 8 for other crops. But
also, subsidies for rice made a particularly marked difference, given the significant upfront costs of improving
longer term production, which would otherwise be prohibitive to farmers (ICR p.50). As the ICR points out, these
results indicate that they were financially profitable; and economically, Casamance has a comparative
advantage for producing these crops (ICR para 42).

For the Bignona Platform, the financial NPV (‘000 CFAF) was 808,292 with an IRR of 27.2%. Economic NPV
was 4,394,467 with an IRR of 44.6% (ICR Annex 4, Table 2). The ICR points out that this is positive, yet still
conservative, based on 25,000 tons passing through the platform, whereas if used year-round, its capacity is
54,000 tons, increasing the potential returns (Annex 4, para 9).

For road rehabilitation, the analysis showed both mechanized and high intensity labor methods to be cost
effective relative to ‘other projects’ (no details of other projects provided – ICR Annex 4, Table 3). The high
intensity methods also cost a fraction of the mechanized methods (US$15,900/km vs US$3,500/km) and
provided more local employment (ICR para 44). NPV for all road activities was US$41,368,235 with an IRR of
53.1% (ICR Annex 4, Table 4).

Operational Efficiency: The project experienced some delays in particular related to the implementation of the
Bignona Platform. In addition, there were operational inefficiencies related to funds disbursements and
procurement. The project also spent US$500,000 over the revised allocated amount on Component 3, which
was responsible for project implementation and capacity strengthening.

Overall, there is strong evidence to support the financial and economic efficiency of the crops and roads
activities of the project (components 1 and 2 accounting for US$29.6m of the US$36.7m project cost) in the form
of its positive NPV and ERR results, even across widely differing crop types and yields, and all roads activities.
The project also held up well against the sensitivity analysis of three downside scenarios (10% benefit decrease,
10% cost increase, 20% benefit decrease from roads activities, ICR p20, Table 4). Further, while not quantified
in the ICR, the strong results against the third key outcome (strengthened rural participation) suggest it is
feasible that these benefits would be sustained into the future, increasing the overall efficiency of the project
over time. A lack of data on revenues, and therefore the actual efficiencies of the Bignona Platform, are a
shortcoming.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



                                                                                      15.00
Appraisal                                                  37.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                               30.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall, the project is rated moderately satisfactory. The objectives were relevant to the project context and
aligned with the priorities of the Government and the World Bank. The project objectives were for the most part
achieved in particularly against the agricultural and transport objectives. That said, there were moderate
shortcomings against an important element (Bignona Platform). Some realignment of activities and
corresponding budget was appropriately undertaken at the mid term and its overall efficiency was substantial.
The overall outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Capacity: This risk to the development outcome rests primarily on the institutional capacity
and capability of local authorities to manage the improved processes put in place by the project. Given the
Government’s development plan (see ICR para 16), supporting devolution of such responsibilities was at the
core of the project’s design, including putting in place building blocks for managing this risk. This was evident
particularly in the design of component 2, which included strengthening local road maintenance capacity,
decisions to focus component 3 on increasing local participation, and adjusting project management
structures to meet capacity of the local authorities.

Operational Funds: The Bignona Platform carries both high potential and high risk regarding meeting its
intended development objectives. To be sustained, it would need to operate year round to maximize
revenue, since the costs of opening and closing each season would not be viable. The ICR indicates year
round operation is entirely feasible, were the full range of possible crops in the region to be grown, and the
well staffed systems and facilities that were established, were promoted locally (ICR para 81).

Maintenance is the key risk for the sustainability of benefits from the road projects. In recognition of this,
establishing maintenance systems and capability was also a key element of the project activities. Again, risks
rest on the appropriate authorities taking up responsibility and engaging the community, and balancing of the
two key methods of spot and mechanized maintenance (see section 4 above). Supporting these issues had
also begun under the project (ICR para 82), recognizing that spot maintenance methods were well suited to
the economic and practical needs and capacity of the local communities. Mechanized methods would require
more financial and technical resources, yet be required less often.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared by a multi-disciplinary team, made up of agricultural and road specialists as
  well as the post-conflict and rural community practitioners.



   The ICR reflect that there were some project design flaws. The principal issue identified was the
  inadequacy of the PDO itself to capture the full range of outcomes for which component 3 were actually
  designed, a key objective of the Government’s development strategy, and to which activities and
  resources were dedicated (see Section 3 above, ICR para 74). This was mostly remedied through the
  MTR at component level, contributing substantially to strengthening rural participation in development,
  but not reflected in the PDO or results framework. Consequently, the full contributions and lessons were
  likely not captured.

  Other design shortcomings identified in the ICR were an overreliance on local authorities for
  implementation – even though in keeping with the intention of strengthening decentralized institutions.
  The local authorities were not yet in a position to take on the full responsibilities, as they did not hold
  sufficient technical expertise. Adjustments were made to give the PIU more centralized responsibilities,
  supported by local committees but consequently, decentralized institutional strengthening aims were
  quite limited (ICR para 75).

  There was also an underestimation of activity costs and overestimation of targets against several
  agricultural and transport objectives, as well as an underappreciation of the land tenure difficulties the
  project would face (ICR para 76). The focus on supporting youth and women could have had more
  impact, had it taken a more holistic approach – i.e. closer consideration of social and cultural constraints
  – and been less restricted to supporting types of horticultural activities (ICR para 74 and 84).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports that the Bank was proactive, systematic, and timely in its supervision throughout the
 project, including in responding to requests from national project teams. The project team had regular
 supervision reports and the MTR (para 77). Bank supervision resulted in several key decisions being taken
 which improved overall outcomes, such as changing administrative responsibilities for implementation,
 pausing the Bignona platform excavation due to it having begun before compliance was reached (see
 Section 10a below), and changes to the project components and activities. The ICR also cites some
 ongoing difficulties which inhibited uptake of some Bank recommendations, largely outside the Bank’s



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



 control, such as fiscal constraints of the Government, including counterpart funding availability, the need for
 better data coverage and more systematic documentation of certain project elements (para 78).

 The overall Bank Performance is rated moderately satisfactory as a result of short comings in project
 design, and minor shortcomings in steering the supervision process.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR states that the decentralized M&E strategy was well designed for both the tracking and measuring
 the main outcomes of the project. The M&E system was designed to be led by a Monitoring and Evaluation
 Specialist, supported by a Senior M&E Specialist (PAD, pg. 23). It drew on the appropriate local
 implementing agencies and combined data from the financial and PIU unit, local statistics and technical
 expertise (para 60). The ICR also points out however, that a missed opportunity in the M&E design was a
 baseline study and indicators that could assess benefits to the specifically targeted groups of women and
 youth, vis a vis the rest of the farming population (para 61). The need for a more holistic approach to
 ensuring benefits for these groups was also raised as part of the overall project design (see section 9
 above), and again in the ICR lessons (para 84 and Section 11 below).



b. M&E Implementation
  Implementation of the M&E strategy was successful, despite a one year delay in completing the manual,
  (ICR para 62). The M&E system was able to demonstrate the immediate project development outcomes.
  Data collection involved several local agencies as well as some Specialist Consultants, and appears to
  have been timely and sufficient. Planned studies and surveys were carried out, as was an ex-post
  completion study. Successful adaptations were made towards virtual data collection to compensate for
  COVID-19 restrictions. A comparative assessment of the benefits of the project for women and youth was
  not able to conducted, due to the design issues mentioned above. The ICR notes that a baseline study
  would have also help assess longer term impacts of the project or its contribution to higher order issues
  such as trust in institutions or sustaining peace (para 63). But while desirable for future interventions,
  these elements were not part of the original PDOs and therefore, not expected to be measured as part of
  the project’s M&E.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



  The ICR reports that data was collected by the M&E unit and referenced daily by project managers to
  steer implementation. Collaboration with the multiple implementing and collection agencies went well.
  Data informed establishment of the project website, reports and progress monitoring (ICR para 64). The
  changes made to the project during implementation and at the MTR were instrumental to getting the
  most from the project, indicating strong utilization of the M&E system. In particular, these were
  establishment of CECs and GRM under component 3, shifting of implementation responsibilities towards
  the PIU, and budget reallocation in component 2 to correct for shortfalls.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B (PAD, pg. 32). Five safeguard policies were triggered under the
   project: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitat (OP 4.04); (iii) Pest Management (OP
   4.09); (iv) Cultural Resources (OP 4.11); and (v) Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) (PAD, pg iii). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a
   Pest Management Plan (PMP) were prepared.

   Overall, the project’s compliance with safeguards was satisfactory to the Bank (ICR para 66). The project
   hired a safeguards specialist as a permanent member of the PIU to manage the ESMF. The ICR reports
   that all contractual documents were compliant. At design stage, all activities were screened. During
   implementation, World Bank procedures were generally followed, staff and contractors were trained, liaison
   with other government levels was established for oversight, and communications campaigns regarding
   environmental and social risks of the project were carried out.

   The major exception to satisfactory environmental and social compliance was related to land acquisition for
   the Bignona Platform. In 2018, it was noted by the Bank that excavation had begun before full plans and
   Bank approvals for resettlement and environmental assessment had been obtained (ICR para 67). This was
   not in line with Bank procedures, specifically OP 4.12 (Resettlement) and OP4.01 (Environmental
   Assessment). Contractors complied with the Bank’s request to stop work immediately. It was resumed in
   2019 once full compliance was realized; however, the land acquisition compensation process managed by
   municipality contributed to delays and non-attainment of horticulture development targets in particular (ICR
   para 66 and 76).

   A Grievance Redress Mechanism was established after the MTR to increase community participation in the
   project. A total of 94% of complaints received were addressed to the complainant’s satisfaction (ICR para
   69). Training for the PIU staff was also carried out to increase ongoing capacity to deal with complaints. The
   GRM also supported addressing gender-based violence incidents, which came to the fore in the last year of
   the project. The ICR reports that the project took proactive steps to address this, through training and
   awareness activities, developing a code of conduct, supervision and drawing on the GRM for upstream
   anonymous treatment of issues (para 70).




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management of the project was also satisfactory. External audits were unqualified and
   received on time (ICR para 71). There was an initial delay in hiring the PIU’s internal controller, who then
   resigned in 2019. He was not replaced, despite repeated requests by the Bank, leaving extra
   responsibilities with the finance manager. The ICR reports that although this was suboptimal, it proved
   adequate for compliance (para 71).

   The ICR also reports, however, that an amount of CFAF36 million (approximately US$66,400) was ‘duly
   repaid’, having been paid, presumably from IDA project funds, as compensation to the president of the
   project steering committee (para 71). A further unexpected cost and process was paying civil works
   providers in from IDA credit in local currency. This was due to the lack of counterpart funds being mobilized
   (para 71). The ICR does not detail amounts or how this may have impacted other project fund flows.

   Procurement overall is described in the ICR as moderately satisfactory, citing generally adequate
   handling of procurement operations but with staffing challenges. Required plans, reports, and contracts
   were regularly uploaded to STEP. This was despite the PIU procurement specialist resigning in 2016. The
   assistant who resumed interim responsibilities was eventually confirmed in the position in 2019 (ICR para
   72).

   Disbursements were slow in the initial phase. At the MTR, 81 percent of IDA Credit had been committed
   but only 27 disbursed. Only 16 percent of counterpart funds had been committed and 6 percent disbursed.
   Counterpart funds disbursement proved a challenge throughout, despite the Bank’s repeated requests and
   efforts (ICR para 73). In particular, it delayed payment of PIU staff, which was due from counterpart funds.
   The ICR notes that these challenges were consistent with broader fiscal constraints and competing
   priorities in Senegal and neighboring countries (ICR foot note 21). Disbursement reached 92.7 percent of
   the IDA Credit following the four-month grace period after project closure and may have been higher after
   closure, based on further information from the PIU (ICR para 73, footnote 20).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR highlights that a positive unintended contribution of the project related to COVID 19 was improved
   connectivity through the rehabilitated roads, for information flow, tracing and access to health services.
   Additionally, the mechanisms which enabled stronger community participation, such as the CECs and
   GRM, helped sensitize the local population to the risks and mitigation approaches. Further, it suggests (but
   does not provide specific evidence) that as a result of improved food security and increased social
   infrastructure from the project, communities were better equipped overall for meeting challenges of the
   pandemic (para 88).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                                 The most significant
                                                                                 shortcomings of the M&E cited
Quality of M&E                 Modest                 Substantial                in the ICR were principally
                                                                                 related to elements that were not
                                                                                 part of the original PDOs.
Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provides well-articulated lessons, which highlight the benefits of community led, holistic and
collaborative approaches to development interventions in fragile or post-conflict affected settings.

Lessons summarized from the ICR:

    1. Addressing the challenges of inclusion, fragility and sustainability characteristic of
       post-conflict situations require multi-faceted investments tailored to local
       circumstances. This project supports experiences elsewhere which demonstrate that
       addressing complex challenges in conflict affected settings requires holistic (i.e. economic,
       social, political, environmental), flexible approaches. Addressing inequalities through multi-
       faceted productive investments, around clusters with a territorial lens, is key, particularly to
       support agriculture production, improve transport infrastructure, and strengthen connectivity
       with markets to create more job opportunities. This usually calls on multiple actors to
       collaborate and use their comparative advantages while being well anchored with local
       actors and tightly aligned with local objectives.
    2. Economic empowerment of marginalized groups like women and youth are best
       supported by a focus on key value chains with a holistic approach. Women’s and youth
       participation in development processes are constrained by social structures and cultural
       norms which can negatively impact their ability to develop income generating activities and
       access markets for their products. Future interventions should shift emphasis from
       supporting production only to addressing support downstream to access the market. This
       means considering in a holistic way the social, economic, and physical infrastructure needs
       of women and youth, in alignment with local traditional norms. Interventions must include
       corresponding indicators that can track impacts and are sufficiently disaggregated.
    3. Community based, holistic approaches strengthen social cohesion and resilience to
       shocks. The citizen engagement pilots provided the basis for ongoing strengthening of
       partnerships between communities, healthcare systems, local governments and the private
       sector. Over the longer-term, development efforts can build on the network of trusted
       community leaders and facilitators as developed under PPDC to support community
       outreach and awareness, cooperate in vocational and skills training, and prepare for and
       respond to emergencies such as those arising from climate change and pandemics. This

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)



        approach would be further strengthened if combined with information and communication
        technologies such as the Geo-Enabling for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) would fit well
        within a fragility context.
     4. Participatory planning, programming, budgeting and M&E processes improve and
        guide implementation. It is important to have a results framework that adequately captures
        the voices of beneficiaries directly and throughout the project cycle, so that the
        understanding of barriers and impacts of PDO is informed by their perspective and feeds into
        project design and implementation. The Citizen Engagement Committees provided a voice to
        beneficiaries and enabled the PPDC to cross check and ground truth project results
        throughout the project cycle.
     5. Integrating the twin concepts of pole development and decentralization holds strong
        potential for long term development. Combining the macro level comparative advantages
        of a region, such as the agricultural potential of the Casamance Region, with the micro level
        understanding of social, economic, physical infrastructure constraints is key to advancing
        sustainable development at both levels. Both approaches reinforce each other. They also
        include specific institutions that should interconnect, such as the creation of regional
        development committees with local participatory mechanisms (e.g., the citizen engagement
        committees created under PPDC), and grassroots institutions such as POs, cooperatives
        and women/ youth groups.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of the project's preparation and implementation. The ICR is generally
well written, forthcoming on successes and difficulties, with consistent data, logical rationale and useful insights.
There were some gaps in explanation of some generally positively divergent outcomes (e.g., 10-fold number of
female and youth groups supported and over doubling of expected beneficiaries). While the ICR
provided traditional economic analysis, it did not provided an analysis of operational efficiency. Overall, the
quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SN:Casamance Development Pole Project (P125506)




                                                                               Page 18 of 18
