     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022683

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P122629                                   VN-NORRED

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Vietnam                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52590                                 31-Dec-2019                                        109,228,611.61

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2013                               31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           119,395,733.12                                              0.00

 Actual                                       109,228,611.61                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb            Eduardo Fernandez              IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                         Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 7), the
   project objectives were as follows:

           To increase the efficiency and equity in the use of hospital services in selected provinces of
            the Northeast (NE) and Red River Delta (RRD) regions.



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   (Note: The amounts below reflect IDA costs only)



   1. Strengthening Capacity of Lower-level Hospitals to Deliver Quality Services (Appraisal: US$ 116.0
   million; Actual: US$ 96.7 million): This component aimed to increase the capacity of the health system to
   provide more and better quality health services in the thirteen project provinces. Activities would draw
   from subproject proposals prepared by participating provinces, which identified areas in need of support at
   the provincial hospital and at least three district hospitals. Subproject proposals would be based on a needs
   analysis for developing hospital capacity, with a defined list of priority health services that the hospitals
   would be able to perform with project support and with "sponsorship" (training and technical
   supervision) from central hospital. Proposals would also include specific measurements of quality and
   management improvement. Activities also included support to the central Ministry of Health to provide
   quality technical support to the provinces, including the process of transferring knowledge and skills for
   health services from central to local levels.

   2. Reducing the Financial Barriers to Access by the Economically Vulnerable (Appraisal: US$ 29.0 million;
   Actual: US$ 9.9 million): This component aimed to support the government's plan to achieve universal
   health coverage, particularly for the poor and near poor. Activities included: providing direct subsidies to
   support purchase of health insurance by the near poor (an additional 20% subsidy on top of the current
   70% subsidy by the government) though conditional on whole family enrollment (rather than individuals);
   reimbursing hospitals for health expenditures above the insurance cap for catastrophic health expenditures;
   and conducting information and education campaigns to increase understanding of and enrollment in the
   voluntary health insurance program.

   3. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraisal: US$ 5.0 million; Actual: US$ 2.7 million):
   This component supported operations of the project management units at central and provincial levels,
   including monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 154.0 million. This was later revised to US$ 119.4 million, of
          which US$ 113.4 million was actual.
         The differences mainly derived from the savings from procurement of medical equipment, and
          funding being provided by the GOV for financial support to catastrophic health expenses. Other

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)



          savings came from the use of hospitals’ own financial sources for continuous quality improvement
          activities as well as training costs that were lower that initially estimated.
         The project subcomponent on funding catastrophic health expenditures was dropped following the
          Mid-Term Review.

   Financing

         The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 150.0 million, of which US$ 109.2 million
          disbursed.
         US$24.0 million was cancelled from the Credit. The Public Debt Management Law that was passed
          in 2017 (a revision of the 2009 Law by the same name) affected all overseas development
          aid, including World Bank projects - any undisbursed funds (in the case of this project, those
          remaining after the subcomponent on catastrophic health expenditures was halted) were required to
          be returned to the Ministry of Finance,

   Borrower contribution

         The appraised Borrower contribution was estimated at US$ 4.0 million. According to the PAD (page
           14), the counterpart funding requirement was low because all participating provinces receive
           national government support for annual budgets. Counterpart funds were expected to be used for
           salary allowances for seconded government staff, pre-investment expenditures such as incremental
           operating costs, per diems for training, and initial consulting services.

   Dates

         June 2018: The project was restructured to revise the results framework, replacing three of the four
           project outcome indicators with two revised indicators to ensure measurability.
         May 2019: The project closing date was extended from December 2019 to December 2020, due to
          additional time needed for acquisition, installment, and operationalization of new techniques.
         November 2020: US$24.0 million was cancelled from the Credit, due to procurement savings and
          unused funds from health insurance activities (some provinces utilized their own budgets to provide
          health insurance coverage for the near poor: US$7 million disbursed, compared to US$23.0 million
          planned)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Vietnam has experienced significant economic growth and poverty reduction in the last couple decades,
transforming itself into a lower middle income country. However, despite declines in the national poverty
rate, there remains a significant population that hovers just above the official poverty line. There are also
growing disparities in health outcomes and demographic changes due to an aging population and the
increased prevalence of non-communicable diseases. To increase access to health services for vulnerable

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      VN-NORRED (P122629)



               populations, the government adopted a national social health insurance program, which includes providing
               partial premium subsidies to encourage voluntary enrollment. While the officially classified "poor" are
               receiving complete subsidies, the "near poor," who comprise 10-30% of the population, are also in need of
               a near complete subsidy, as opposed to the current 70% subsidy from the government. According to
               the PAD (page 82), at the time of project appraisal, only about 25% of the near poor population had health
               insurance. Scaling up demand for health insurance also requires improving the availability and quality of
               health services. Hospital overcrowding is a significant challenge, particularly at the central and provincial
               level hospitals, due to several factors: inappropriate use of hospitals for basic health services, revenue
               enhancing incentives, low quality (actual and perceived) of health services at lower levels, draining of
               scarce human resources from lower levels, and inefficient referral systems.

               To address these challenges, the Government prepared a Masterplan on Reducing Hospital Overcrowding
               (issued in January 2013) which aims to increase capacity of the health system to provide better quality
               services at the provincial level. The Bank's Country Partnership Strategy (FY12-16), under the pillar of
               improved opportunity, identified improved public service delivery as a key outcome, with health insurance
               coverage of the poor and near poor as an outcome indicator. Hence, the project objectives are highly
               relevant to both the government priorities and Bank strategy.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the efficiency in the use of hospital services in selected provinces of the Northeast (NE) and Red
                             River Delta (RRD) regions.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was clear. Activities to increase the availability and quality of health
                             services at lower-level facilities (district and provincial hospitals) were likely to lead to the intended outcome of
                             reduced referrals and thus reduced use of expensive central hospital services. These activities would
                             also likely reduce overcrowding, which is another indication of inefficiency in the hospital system. Project
                             support to increase the supply of health services at lower levels included funding for medical equipment and
                             training for hospital staff to provide services in five specialty areas (obstetrics/gynecology, pediatrics,
                             cardiology, oncology, and trauma) and implementation of quality management approaches. Project activities
                             were to be implemented in thirteen provinces in two regions, benefiting approximately 15.1 million
                             people. These two regions were selected due to the fact that the other regions were already receiving Bank
                             or Asian Development Bank support. As noted in the PAD (page 8), women and children were highly likely to
                             benefit from the project, as the priority health services included those required by women and children



                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-NORRED (P122629)



(obstetrics/ gynecology, pediatrics) and the health insurance enrollment was conditional upon family
enrollment, rather than individual.



Outputs

      Financing of sub-project proposals in the thirteen project provinces. 74 hospitals received seed
       money (approximately US$ 1.86 million) for quality improvement activities, with the provincial
       committees and hospitals providing additional own budget to implement the activities.
      Construction and/or rehabilitation to improve infrastructure quality at 81 provincial and district
       hospitals, as well as the training centers in the seven central hospitals (target: 57).
      Training of 4,805 health personnel (target: 4,050), of which 80% participated in technical training and
       20% participated in quality management training. The ICR (page 18) noted that 48% of participants in
       capacity building activities organized by the central project management unit (training courses,
       workshops, and seminars on management and quality improvement) were females, with the
       proportion "consistently higher" at the provincial project management unit level.
      Implementation of quality improvement and management approaches at participating health
       facilities. The ICR (page 18) reported that the project also contributed to the development of MOH
       national hospital quality criteria in the form of regulations, guidelines and training.



Outcomes

      The number of technical services transferred from central hospitals to provincial or district hospitals
         was 2,288. This achieved the target of 2,200. The ICR (page 42) noted that there were a few cases
         were planned transfer of services did not take place due to changes in personnel, shifts of health
         service needs in particular provinces, or mismatch of equipment types used during training vs. actual
         facilities - 89.9% of trained staff were able to apply the techniques in which they were trained.
        The number of patients benefiting from new clinical techniques in five specialty areas
         (obstetrics/gynecology, pediatrics, cardiology, oncology, and trauma), which were services transferred
         from central to provincial hospitals, reached 12,824 patients at project closing. This achieved the
         target of 12,500 patients. The number of patients benefitting varied widely among the provinces, from
         85 in Nam Dinh to 9,912 in Phu Tho.
        The number of patients benefiting from new clinical techniques in three specialty areas
         (obstetrics/gynecology, pediatrics, and trauma), which were services transferred from provincial to
         district hospitals, reached 29,107 patients at project closing. This achieved the target of 29,000
         patients.
        The percentage of hospitals implementing Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) or
         equivalent processes increased from 25.0% to 100% at project closing. This surpassed the target of
         75%.
        The average quality assessment score among the 14 provincial hospitals increased from 2.76 (out of
         5) in 2014 to 3.38 (out of 5) in 2019. All 14 hospitals increased their scores, although to varying
         extents.
        The percentage of patients satisfied with overall medical quality increased at both provincial hospitals
         (76.2% to 81.3%) and district hospitals (82.1% to 88.5%). Satisfaction with specific elements (waiting

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   VN-NORRED (P122629)



       time, availability of treatment services, and availability of diagnostic facilities) all increased at both
       provincial and district hospitals. Improvements with regards to targets could not be evaluated as the
       targets were set lower than the baseline figures.

The original key outcome indicators measuring "reduction in inpatients referred from the participating
provincial hospitals to the central hospitals," "reduction in patients referred from participating subnational
hospitals for three health conditions (deliveries, child pneumonia, appendicitis)," and "reduction in self-referral
rate of insured patients from the participating provincial hospitals to the central hospitals" were dropped. The
reasons provided by the Project Restructuring Paper, Section I, Rationale for restructuring, para, 2) were
related to issues in data availability, data quality, and attribution.

The data reported above demonstrate increases in access and utilization of hospital services (i.e., number of
patients receiving services), strengthened lower level capacity and service availability (i.e. number of services
now being delivered at provincial/district hospitals), and also improved quality (i.e. patient satisfaction). While
the results do not include direct measures of utilization efficiency, the latter is expected to be achieved, or to
have been achieved, because the increased availability and quality of health services that were satisfactorily
realized at lower-level district and provincial hospitals would contribute to reducing the use of expensive
central hospital services, including through self-referrals or unnecessary hospital referrals, as the needs for
treatment are met at these lower-level hospitals, and as appropriately stipulated by the theory of change.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase equity in the use of hospital services in selected provinces of the Northeast (NE) and Red River
Delta (RRD) regions.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective was clear. Activities to increase affordability of health services for the
poor and near poor, along with activities to increase demand for those services, were likely to lead to the
intended outcome of increased access/utilization, contributing to increased equity in the use of
services. Project support included expanding coverage of health insurance through direct subsidies and
conducting of information campaigns to increase knowledge among the poor and near poor about health
insurance.

Outputs

      Financing of health insurance premiums for over 1.3 million near poor.
      Behavior change communication strategy for health insurance, including information materials and
       support from trained communication team.
      The activity to reimburse hospitals for catastrophic health expenditures for the poor and near poor was
       dropped. This activity was deemed less effective, due to the government adding inclusion criteria for



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               VN-NORRED (P122629)



                                     vulnerable groups that increased coverage of regular health insurance among the near poor and the
                                     complex administrative procedures for reimbursing different hospitals.



                            Outcomes

                                  Utilization of inpatient hospital services by the poor and near poor increased from 0.05
                                     hospitalizations/person/year in 2015 to 0.15 in 2019, exceeding the target of 0.06 hospitalizations per
                                     person per year (ICR, p. 30).
                                    Utilization of outpatient hospital services by the poor and near poor increased from 0.21
                                     visits/person/year in 2015 to 1.22 in 2019, exceeding the target of 0.25 visits per person per year
                                     (ICR, p. 30).
                                    Coverage of health insurance for the near poor reached 100% at project closing.
                                    The number of people with access to a basic package of health, nutrition, and reproductive health
                                     services (number of people with a health insurance card) increased from 11,942,834 in 2015 to
                                     14,703,163 in 2019. Achievement relative to the target could not be assessed as the original target
                                     was 10,882,272 (below actual baseline).
                                    There was an increase in knowledge about health insurance among the near poor:
                                           o 58% of near poor knew at least three services covered by health insurance (increase from
                                              16.4% in 2015, exceeded the target of 50%).
                                           o 52.6% of near poor knew the basic responsibilities for using the health insurance
                                              card (increase from 6.3% in 2015, exceeding the target of 50%).
                                           o 79.3% of near poor knew the basic procedures for using the health insurance card (increase
                                              from 3.2% in 2015 exceeding the target of 50%).
                                           o 51.3% of near poor knew their basic rights with the health insurance card (increase from 3.2%
                                              in 2015, exceeded the target of 50%).
                                           o Additional data in the ICR (page 43) demonstrated that increases in knowledge were greater
                                              among the near poor, compared to the general respondents (whose knowledge also
                                              increased, but to a lesser degree).

                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence among the near poor population of increased coverage of
                            health insurance, increased utilization of services, and increased knowledge about health
                            insurance. However, as noted in the ICR (page 19), important context to note is that during the project
                            period, the poverty rate decreased significantly (45% in 2008 to 7% in 2018), which may confound to some
                            extent the contribution of the project.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-NORRED (P122629)



  The two development objectives to increase the efficiency in the use of hospital services in selected
  provinces of the Northeast and Red River Delta regions; and to increase equity in the use of hospital services
  were almost fully achieved. Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased access and
  utilization of hospital services, strengthened lower- level capacity to deliver services, improved quality of
  services, and increased coverage and knowledge about health insurance among the near poor. However,
  there were evidence gaps in measuring increased efficiency in the use of hospital services.




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal (PAD, Annex 5), there was no cost-benefit analysis or other quantitative estimate conducted due to
"difficulties in assigning a monetary value to expected improvements in health outcomes." Instead, the PAD
aimed to establish an economic case for the project investment by presenting the mechanisms through which
cost savings would be achieved, including increased efficiencies in the production and consumption of health
services and addressing of market failures in the health insurance market.

At completion (ICR, Annex 4), the economic analysis discussed allocative efficiencies realized in the health
sector, due to the project approach to shift basic service provision to the lower levels and to expand health
insurance coverage for the near poor. Allocative efficiency was likely realized by investing in the proper
technical services. Efficiency was also likely gained through increased capacity to manage and deliver services,
implementation of continuous quality improvement processes, and reduction in unnecessary referrals (although
data on all of the above were not quantified). The ICR (page 16) noted that there were possibly higher unit
costs (data were not available) for health service delivery at the lagging provincial and district hospitals due to
lower demand in these areas (i.e. number of patients), but that the overall impact on that community and the
overall health system were still justifications for investment.

Some inefficiency arose due to the lack of full optimization of medical services in some facilities, owing to few
patients, lack of medical staff due to high turnover, lack of supporting medical equipment, and services not yet
being included in health insurance benefit package. Nevertheless, most of the 2,288 new techniques that were
transferred to lower- level facilities were highly used and only 341 techniques had not achieved optimal function
by the end of 2019 (ICR, p. 53). (In the larger context, the ICR (page 54) noted that there was a significant
annual increase in hospital costs, due to an increasingly sophisticated style of care, without corresponding
improvements in health outcomes yet).



There were also some implementation delays due to procurement delays for equipment particularly for radiation
therapy and cardiological intervention, which contributed to a one- year project extension. However, all project
activities were eventually completed, with savings realized from hospitals’ decision to use their own budgets for
continuous quality improvement activities and also from lower unit costs of training than appraised (no data


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      VN-NORRED (P122629)



provided).The project resulted in procurement savings of US$6 million. There were also changes in local
government policies to use their own local budgets to provide financial protection to their constituents resulting
in undisbursed funds of US$14 million in subcomponent 2b for Supporting Catastrophic Health Care. The above
savings and local financing changes led to the cancellation of US$24 million at project closing (ICR, page 17).

Although there were some weaknesses in the PAD and ICR’s assessments of project efficiency, as many of the
economic arguments provided in the PAD and ICR were more relevant to efficiency in the hospital sector rather
than project efficiency, allocative and technical efficiencies under the project were substantially realized (ICR,
pp. 16-17). Also, there were no indications from reported project findings that resources and inputs were not
converted to results cost-effectively overall through the project’s accomplishment in transferring/developing
capacities and new medical techniques to lower-level hospitals as planned and implemented, and with
substantial savings.




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall outcome is rated Satisfactory due to High Relevance, based on strong alignment with country conditions
and Bank/government priorities, Substantial Efficacy as project objectives were almost fully achieved, and
Substantial Efficiency, as the project was efficiently implemented overall, with substantial allocative and
technical efficiencies realized, and with substantial procurement savings.




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government policies and practices - both at the central and local levels - remain aligned with the project
objectives. As reported in the ICR (page 15), by project closing, "most of the project provinces had
committed to continue to support the near poor to purchase health insurance" thus supporting the
sustainability of the objective to increase financial access for the poor and near poor and to increase
equity. While there will continue to be recurrent costs for maintenance of the medical equipment at the
provincial and district hospitals, these may be offset by the increased capacity of each facility to generate
more direct revenue from delivering a wider range of medical services. The improved quality of hospital
services is also likely to be continued due to the increased capacity of hospitals (through acquired equipment
and staff training) to deliver services and implement quality management practices (including some
resources allocated from their own budgets).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives and design were clearly aligned with government priorities and existing policies.
  The design drew upon extensive Bank experience in the health sector in Vietnam, including through
  regionally focused operations, particularly for expanding health insurance coverage and corresponding
  implementation mechanisms. The flexibility of the sub-project proposal approach allowed for the varying
  conditions and priorities among the thirteen project provinces, while also relying on local health systems
  needs assessments to ensure relevance and feasibility. Project preparation (and implementation)
  included building leadership commitment towards the project goals, at both the provincial government
  level and the hospital management level. Overall risk was assessed as Substantial due to low
  implementing agency capacity at the decentralized levels, therefore significant implementation support
  from the task team was expected.

  However, there were some moderate shortcomings in the project design; for example, the project
  planned to reimburse hospitals for catastrophic health care expenditures, but the reimbursement
  mechanism required complicated contractual procedures with hospitals. This, in addition to the fact that
  hospitals had to pay the treatment costs in advance, led to reluctance from hospitals to continue
  participating in the scheme. This activity was subsequently dropped. There were some shortcomings in
  M&E/results framework (feasibility in key outcome indicator data, accuracy of baseline and target
  figures) and data collection arrangements ( =data reliability).




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)



 Supervision was proactive and intensive, relying on regular supervision missions (14 in total) and close
 monitoring of activities to assess progress and identify issues. The Bank team's proactive engagement with
 the local governments and hospital leaders helped to sustain commitment to project objectives and
 likelihood of activities continuing beyond the project period. The Bank team also provided strong fiduciary
 support, including for procurement of specialized medical equipment, to help overcome initial
 implementation delays. Project results framework was revised to account for changing circumstances and
 government directives, although the new indicators did not adequately measure all aspects of the stated
 project objectives (see Section 9 below).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original M&E framework was clearly linked to project design and objectives and drew upon existing
 monitoring systems (i.e. Social Services system). Evaluative activities were planned, including the
 beneficiary satisfaction surveys and hospital quality assessments. However, there were some
 shortcomings. There were inaccuracies in some baseline and target figures (number of people with access
 to basic services, patient satisfaction) and lack of feasibility/ reliability for collecting data for key outcome
 indicators (reduction in referral rates). The ICR did not report on why some target figures were set lower
 than the baseline figures.




b. M&E Implementation
  The Vietnam Social Services department was identified at appraisal as the main source of data collection
  on referrals; however, there were significant challenges in obtaining accurate data, in part due to
  inconsistent and inaccurate coding practices. Although M&E staff were required to be hired/assigned at
  the central and provincial level, lack of experience and high turnover led to challenges in M&E
  implementation in the initial project period. There were significant revisions to the results framework:
  three of the original key outcome indicators (reduction in inpatients referred from the provincial hospitals
  to central level hospitals; reduction in patients referred from sub-national hospitals for three health
  conditions (deliveries, child pneumonia and appendicitis); and reduction in the self-referral rate of insured
  patients from the province hospitals to the central hospitals were replaced by two new indicators (number
  of patients benefiting new clinical techniques in five intervention areas, number of patients benefiting new
  clinical techniques in three intervention areas at district hospitals). The ICR (page 10) reported that these

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)



  revisions were undertaken in part due to the introduction of hospital payment caps by the government
  that led to increased referrals from lower level hospitals and thus raised concerns about attributability of
  project activities, as well as issues of data availability and quality. Also, while the PAD (page 8) noted
  that improved efficiency would be achieved when the strengthened lower level capacity enabled the
  provincial and district hospitals to provide services and not refer patients to central hospitals, as well as
  increase willingness of patients to seek treatment at the local level, the revised key indicators did not
  directly measure increased efficiency.

  However, M&E implementation performance improved significantly after the Mid-term Review in 2017
  (ICR, page 22). Also, according to the ICR, Provincial Project Management Units recruited full-time staff,
  and the Central Project Management Unit increased the intensity of supervision, support and efforts to
  increase the capacity of provincial units (ICR, page 22).



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data, including findings on beneficiary knowledge and satisfaction and on hospital quality, were
  used to inform project decisions during the project period, including reallocations of project financing
  within components and across hospitals. The M&E framework, as originally designed and subsequently
  revised, was generally adequate to assess project achievements.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to medical waste issues and
   potential civil works, triggering the safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework was prepared to ensure compliance with Bank
   guidelines and national regulations. The safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) was also
   triggered due to the presence of ethnic minority groups in the project areas. A Social Assessment was
   conducted, which included identifying potential barriers for ethnic minority communities, and an Ethnic
   Minority Development Plan was prepared to ensure culturally appropriate interventions.

   Proper medical waste disposal equipment was provided by the project, along with training on medical waste
   management. According to the ICR (page 23), the results of M&E have shown that "the waste
   management and environmental protection at the health facilities under the Project improved over the
   years." The ICR did not report any problems with safeguard compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     VN-NORRED (P122629)



   Financial management: The ICR (page 23) reported that financial management performance was
   Satisfactory, with no major problems. Delays in large procurements led to some slowdowns in
   disbursement, and the yearly budget allocation process also led to a one-off issue of several project
   provinces not receiving the donor funding amounts in their budget allocations. External audits were
   submitted regularly, although the ICR did not report on whether there were any qualified audits.

   Procurement: The ICR (page 23) reported that procurement performance was also Satisfactory with no
   major problems except some delays due to lack of experience and the complexity of medical equipment
   procurement. Given the significant role of new medical procedures in the project design, coordinating the
   procurement schedule for medical equipment and the training/ introduction of the relevant medical
   techniques was critical. Therefore, procurement risk ratings were initially High but adjusted to
   Moderate/Low during the project period as procurement capacity increased. As reported in the ICR (page
   21), the Bank team provided intensive procurement training for CPMU/PPMUs and hands-on guidance and
   suggestions for the procurement of large value and technically complex medical equipment contracts




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 There were moderate
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings in the Quality at
                                                                                 Entry, including in M&E design.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 27-28) and additional lessons from IEG:

      Certain elements of the project design can help to build ownership and thus contribute to
         achieving outcomes and ensuring sustainability. In the case of this project, the bottom-up
         planning mechanisms helped to ensure strong alignment of selected activities with local
         needs and priorities, and the requirement to use own budget to partially finance the quality


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       VN-NORRED (P122629)



         improvement plans ensured continued funding and proactivity in promptly resolving
         implementation problems.
        While a project's theory of change may be sound, an inadequate results framework can
         inhibit proper assessment of outcomes. In the case of this project, the original project
         indicators (reduced referral rates) were appropriate but were not feasible for collection by the
         participating hospitals, and the revised project indicators (number of patients benefitting from
         new hospital techniques) were not directly linked to the project objective to increase
         efficiency in the use of hospital services.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was concise and provided an informative narrative on project implementation experience. However,
while the quality of the evidence is strong, there were some shortcomings in its presentation, as the actual data
on achievements and analysis of the results chain is provided in the Annex (Annex 1A) rather than in the main
body of the ICR (Efficacy, pages 14-15, primarily focused on Table 3 which listed the indicators that were
achieved/ surpassed). Also, the analysis of Efficacy should have treated the project objectives separately - to
increase efficiency and to increase equity. Although indicators may overlap in measuring aspects of both
objectives (and can be reported as such), each objective is distinct and separate. Despite these shortcomings,
the evidence was present to enable a proper assessment of the project and therefore the quality of the ICR is
rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 14
