     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022703

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152210                                    Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55760                                  30-Jun-2020                                         48,522,347.59

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Dec-2014                                30-Jun-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            75,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             48,522,347.59                                              0.00

 Actual                                         48,522,347.59                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Samjhana Thapa              J. W. van Holst              Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financial Agreement (FA, 2015) and the Project Appraisal Development (PAD, 2014), the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) of the Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project was “to enable
   selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes and increase access to human
   development services and social entitlements”.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



   For the purpose of this Review the PDO will be divided into three parts, and will be referred to in Section 4 of
   this Review as Objectives 1, 2 and 3 as follows:

   Objective 1: Enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes

   Objective 2: Enable selected poor households to increase access to human development services

   Objective 3: Enable selected poor households to increase access to social entitlements

   The PAD stated that the “selected poor households” would include households that are geographically and
   socially excluded and have low-income levels. As per the ICR (Table 3, footnote), ‘Income’ was defined in
   terms of profit from the project’s crop/livestock interventions net of all expenses (representing change from
   baseline year to end-line year in nominal terms), and ‘income increase’ was defined as the increase in profits
   from selected value chain services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   To achieve the PDOs, the project was structured under five components.

   Component 1: Value Chain Development (Appraisal cost: US$44 million, Actual cost: US$30.31 million).
   This component aimed to increase the income of 250,000 small-scale and marginal farmers through
   productivity enhancement activities and improved market access. The component had two sub-
   components:

         i. Rural Value Chains (RVC): Small-scale and marginal producers would be organized into value-chain
             focused farmer producer groups (FPGs) and farmer producer organizations (FPOs). They would
             receive extension and advisory services, access to improved inputs, infrastructure, finance etc.
             Activities would be implemented in alignment with existing Government schemes of various line
             departments.
         ii. Rural Retail Chains (RRC): Rural producers and enterprises would be connected to rural consumers
             by aggregating demand, supporting supply linkages, and promoting quality of consumption.
             Traditional kirana stores (village marts) would be established as a network or association of rural
             retail outlets offering quality and nutritious goods and linked to locally processed home based
             agricultural and non-agricultural enterprises.

   Component 2: Human Development (Appraisal cost: US$19 million; Actual cost: US$20.03 million). This
   component would promote alignment with human development services provided by the line departments. It


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



  focused on stimulating demand at the community level for human development services while also
  promoting improved service delivery through existing public systems. The three sub-components were:

       i. Stimulating demand for quality nutrition, health, sanitation, and pre-school education services:
          Activities would include community mobilization at the village level on nutrition, sanitation, health and
          pre-school education through financing of village Human Development (HD) and Water, Sanitation
          and Hygiene (WASH) plans; usage of communication materials for behavioral and social change;
          and development of community level monitoring tools.
      ii. Strengthening service delivery: Activities would include strengthening the training capacity of
          Departments of Women and Child Development (DWCD) and Health and Family Welfare
          (DHM&FW) on community mobilization, early childhood education and growth monitoring, and by
          supporting the establishment of an IT-supported community monitoring systems; and
     iii. Linkages with value chains: The activities will be linked to Component One on Value Chain
          Development. To improve nutritional outcomes in the community, nutrient rich snacks would be
          made available through nutri-shops and efforts will be made to create awareness on the benefits of
          these products.

  Component 3: Access to Social Protection Services and Entitlements (Appraisal cost: US$13 million;
  Actual cost: US$1.98 million). This component aimed to improve the coverage and service delivery of social
  protection services to the poorest households. The two key sub-components to be supported were:

       i. Improved service delivery at the Gram Panchayat (GP) level: By closely coordinating with services
          and entitlements to be offered by line departments and to address the “last mile” service delivery, it
          will establish One Stop Shops (OSS) referred to as ‘Mana Sewa Centers’ managed by village level
          entrepreneurs (VLEs) with digital connectivity to improve the outreach and quality of access for
          select services (NREGA, social pensions, and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe (SC/ST)
          scholarships)).
      ii. Pilots on Improved access to Specialized Services on Gender and Persons with Disabilities: It would
          pilot a program for improved access to specialized services for Persons with Disabilities and gender
          related services.

  Component 4: Mission Support, ICT and Partnerships (Appraisal cost: US$20 million; Actual cost:
  US$7.68 million). This component would support establishment of mission support units (MSU) created by
  the government of Andhra Pradesh in promoting agricultural income, quality education, healthcare, and
  nutrition, areas covered by the project. These entities will promote inter-departmental synergies and support
  effective planning and delivery of programs led by the line departments through real time feedback,
  analytics, and expertise. Investments would be made on IT platforms for project Management Information
  System (MIS), Decision Support Systems (DSS), Financial Management System (FMS), etc.

  Component 5: Project Implementation Support (Appraisal cost: US$11 million; Actual cost: US$9.31
  million). This component aimed to finance staffing for project activities, consultancies, training, office
  equipment and related operational cost of implementing the project. It will establish a Monitoring, Evaluation
  and Learning (MEL) system, and would provide support related to financial management, procurement, and
  safeguards of the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



Project costs: The project cost at approval was US$107 million (ICR, annex 3). The second restructuring
(June 22 and 26, 2020), a few days short of the project's closing date (June 30,2020), US$23.5 million of
the IDA credit was cancelled (ICR, paragraph 12). The ICR stated that the cancellation was due to unspent
budget resources which resulted from the following factors: (i) changes in Government priorities led to
partial/non implementation of key activities; (ii) less investments required in some project areas where there
were other Government schemes/programs; (iii) project’s revised policy to work with existing technical
partners (e.g. NGOs, ICRISAT, Universities) instead of technical support agencies; and (iv) gains from
exchange rate between US dollar and INR (13.2 percent). The actual project cost at completion was
US$69.3 million (65 percent of appraised estimate).

Financing: Per the Financing Agreement (Nov. 16, 2015), IDA credit (Credit No. 55760) for US$75 million
financed the project. As mentioned above, due to loan cancellation, the actual IDA financing from the Bank
decreased to US$48.5 million.

Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution during appraisal was estimated to be US$32 million. At
project closing, it amounted to US$20.8 million.

Dates: The project was approved on December 19, 2014 and became effective on February 02, 2016. The
Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on July 09, 2018. According to the ICR (paragraph 72), ‘the
delayed MTR review was because the client requested that it take place at least two years after the project
started on-ground operations. The project effectively started implementation in June 2016.” The project
closed on June 30, 2020, without any change to the original closing date.

Restructurings: The project was restructured twice (March 2019 and June 2020). By the project’s first
restructuring, the project had disbursed US$34.22 million (70 percent of Bank financing). The first
restructuring lowered the ambition of the project’s objectives by adjusting the indicators to lower
achievement levels. Therefore, this review will undertake a split rating. The details of the restructurings are
as follows:

First Restructuring, March 2019

The decision for the first restructuring was based on the MTR mission of July 09, 2018 which noted that,
though the project had made adequate physical progress across project components, it fell short in
achieving impacts and as a result, outcome-level indicators could not be measured. The ICR stated that the
project had ‘evolved’ from its original design with changes in project activities, and was confronted by limited
implementation capacity (ICR, paragraph 11). The ICR did not provide additional details on the changes
found at MTR on project activities.

Changes in Indicators and Expected Outcomes:

At the first restructuring, the PDO was not revised, however, there were significant changes made to PDO
indicators, sub-indicators, and targets. Project funds were also reallocated across components (ICR, Annex
6a-c, Restructuring paper 2019). Key changes were as follows (ICR, Annex 6a; MTR Aide Memoire, Annex
1):

      The target of the original PDO 1 sub-indicator 1 (incremental income increases of the target HHs)
       was reduced from 50 percent to 30 percent.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 27
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



     The definition of the original PDO 1 sub-indicator 2 (percentage of producers benefiting are from the
        poorest and SC/ST households) was revised by eliminating the reference to the ‘poorest’. The new
        indicator was “Percentage of the producers benefitting are SC/ST or small/marginal farmer
        households)
       The original PDO 2 indicator (250,000 poor HHs obtain improved human development status) was
        revised to “250,000 targeted HHs have received services related to health, nutrition and sanitation”.
       The original PDO 2 sub-indicator 1 (Percentage increase in pregnant and lactating women who
        practice core child nutrition and health care behaviors) was eliminated.
       The original PDO 2 sub-indicator 2 (Percentage increase in use of HD services - Integrated Child
        Development Services (ICDS), health and sanitation services by households) was revised to
        “Number of targeted HHs that have received Human Development Investment Funds (HDIF) for
        WASH and H&H activities”
       The original PDO 3 indicator ("Where One Stop Shop has been established, percentage of eligible
        households with access to at least three entitlements programs or key services") was revised to
        “Where One Stop Shop has been established, number of beneficiaries accessing One Stop Shop
        (OSS) services”. The definition of "services" was revised to “beneficiaries accessing at least one of
        the following OSSs: Mee-Seva, Banking, Streenidhi".
       The original target of PDO 3 indicator was reduced from 500,000 to 100,000 beneficiaries.
       Three of the four Intermediate Indicators for Component 1 were either revised or dropped. The
        original indicator ("percentage increase in productivity from improved practices among target
        farmers") was revised to “percentage of targeted farmers that have received at least 5 value chain
        services”.
       Three of the four Intermediate Indicators for Component 2 were dropped. An example of a dropped
        indicator was “percentage of villages in the target Mandals that have prepared and are implementing
        Village HD/WASH plans”. Three new indicators were ("number of HHs that received HDIF funds for
        WASH, H&N activities", "number of Village Organizations (Vos) trained", and "number of targeted
        HHs that received backyard poultry interventions") were added.
       Component 3 intermediate indicator 1 ("percentage of enrolled beneficiaries in targeted gram
        panchayats who receive payments on time for key entitlements (NREGA, Social pensions,
        Insurance") was eliminated.
       The target for Component 3’s intermediate indicator ("number of targeted Panchayats that have
        operationalized one OSS services for safety nets and entitlements") was reduced from 1,000 to 700
        OSSs established.

Changes in Components/Sub-components:

     Component 1 – At project entry, the Sub-component 1.2’s (Rural Retail Chains) emphasis was on
      improving the quality of consumption and nutrition by supporting traditional village marts (Kirana
      stores). At restructuring, the project focused on building their capacity as aggregators. For this the
      Department of Commerce and Industry became the implementing agency.
     Component 2 – This component was substantially revised with an addition of two new sub-
      components: (i) Augmenting Human Development Services: Support maternal, infant and child
      nutrition, hygiene and sanitation practices, and pre-school children; and (ii) Strengthening
      Implementation and Monitoring Systems for Improved Maternal Health: Procure essential health
      monitoring equipment for improving the quality of antenatal check-ups by Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
      (ANM) workers, and strengthen nutrition, health awareness and delivery of basic health services by


                                                                                                Page 5 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



          organizing village health and nutrition days. These additional sub-components would be
          implemented by DWCD and DHM&FW respectively (Restructuring Paper, March 2019, Section 1-C).
         Components 3 – A new part was added to Sub-component 3.1 on improved service delivery at the
          Gram Panchayat (GP) level to design and establish Integrated Digital Service Delivery Centers, to
          be implemented by Department of Tribal Welfare (DTW).
         Component 4 – Under Sub-component 4.2 on Information and Communication Technologies (ICT),
          a new activity was added to provide technical assistance for establishing an integrated ICT platform
          for the development of digitally enhanced smart villages on a pilot basis. This activity (g) will be
          implemented by Department of Panchayat Raj and Rural Development (DPR&RD).

   Second Restructuring, June 2020

   The second restructuring cancelled an unused balance of US$23.5 million of the IDA credit in late June
   2020 preceding the closing date of June 30, 2020 by only a few days.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. India’s achievement towards poverty reduction and economic growth has
been commendable. Between 2005 and 2010, India’s share of global GDP increased from 1.8 to 2.7
percent, and 53 million people were lifted out of poverty (CPF 2013). Despite this success, at project
appraisal, about 400 million people (mostly rural) were still living on less than $1.25/day in PPP terms and
the country had high inequality (Gini coefficient of 0.34 in 2012). In line with the country’s success at the
national level, Andhra Pradesh (AP) achieved significant economic growth (GDP rate of 11.6 percent vis-a-
vis national average of 6.7 percent) and poverty reduction. However, inequalities existed amongst its
population with high poverty ratio within the scheduled tribes (ST), schedules castes (SC), and Muslim
communities (23 percent) in comparison to the rest of the population (12 percent). In AP, the SC and ST
households who were primarily engaged in agriculture had limited access to extension services, good
quality inputs like improved seeds, marketing services and institutional credit. Similarly, on human
development, most health and nutrition indicators were worse for SCs and STs than in other states.

Government strategy. At the time of appraisal, the Government of AP had adopted a mission-based
approach focusing on inclusive growth and poverty alleviation (PAD, paragraph 10). The government had
launched seven missions: Primary Sector, Social Empowerment, Industry Sector, Infrastructure, Urban
Development, Service Sector, and Knowledge and Skill Development, and each mission had a Governing
Body chaired by the Chief Minister and led by one of the Secretaries of the departments. These missions
were intended to enhance inter-departmental synergy, enable an effective planning and delivery
mechanism, and improve departmental capacity. This project was closely aligned with two of the
missions: The Social Empowerment Mission focused on quality education, healthcare and nutrition for all,
and the Primary Sector Mission aimed to improve agricultural incomes. Additionally, the Government had
enacted an enabling legislation titled “The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan and Tribal Sub-
Plan (Planning, Allocation and Utilization of Financial Resources) Act”. The primary aim of this legislation
was to promote equity among SCs and STs, by allocating financial resources for improvements in SC’s and
ST’s economic, educational, and human development outcomes.


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



               At project closing, the priorities of the Government of India (GoI) and the Government of AP remained
               relevant to the project. According to the ICR (paragraph 19), the priorities applicable to the project were on:
               (a) promotion of agricultural transformation and the doubling of farmers’ income by 2022 (Component 1); (b)
               the expansion of nutrition, health, skills, and education service delivery (Component 2); and (c) the
               promotion of balanced and inclusive growth nationwide (Components 1, 2 and 3). Furthermore, the GoI
               had launched a new Central Sector Scheme named "Formation and Promotion of 10,000 Farmer Producer
               Organizations (FPOs)" with committed resources of INR. 6865 crores (US$931.6 million) to form and
               promote 10,000 new FPOs in the country (ICR, paragraph 19) – equivalent to US$93,160 per FPO.

               Bank strategy. The project is well-aligned with the Bank strategy. Its objectives would contribute to the
               achievement of two focus areas of Transformation and Inclusion included in the World Bank’s FY13–17
               Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India (PAD, paragraph 13). On Transformation, the project
               supported small-scale and marginal farmers through productivity enhancement services and linking them to
               markets. On inclusion, activities to increase access to services such as health, nutrition, water and
               sanitation, and social safety net were implemented with a focus in marginal and poorer areas of the State.
               At the project’s closing, the objectives were also well aligned with the current Country Partnership
               Framework (FY18-22) for India on areas of ‘Resource Efficient Growth’ and ‘Investing in Human Capital’.
               Under ‘Resource Efficient Growth’, the ICR (paragraph 20) stated that the project contributed towards the
               CPF’s objective to ‘Promote more resource-efficient, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural sector by
               enhancing agricultural productivity and ensuring inclusiveness by targeting women, poor, and tribal
               communities. Under ‘Investing in Human Capital’, the project contributed to CPF’s objective to ‘improve
               access to rural water supply and sanitation services’ and ‘improve the quality of health care delivery,
               financing, and access to quality health care’ by enhancing access to health, nutrition, and sanitation
               services.

               During project implementation, the ICR (paragraph 12) stated that due to changed priorities of the national
               Government, several project activities across components to be executed by line departments (i.e., Health
               and Family Welfare Department, Tribal Welfare Department) were not implemented. In addition, the AP
               government revised its mission-based approach (Borrower Completion Report, Section 8.1), which led to a
               significant budget reduction in Component 4 though there were no details provided in the ICR about the
               impact of this revised approach on program delivery. 

               In summary, the project’s objectives were highly relevant to both Government and World Bank strategies.
               However, there were difficulties in measuring some of the original PDO indicators. In addition, as stated
               above, changes in Government priorities reduced the scope of this project because some planned project
               activities were to be implemented instead by line departments. Thus, the Relevance of this project’s
               objective to Government and World Bank strategies in India is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                         Page 7 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Figure 1 in the ICR provided a retrospective Theory of Change (ToC) for the project. To
achieve Objective 1 the project would work with small-scale and marginal producers who already had some
productive assets by organizing them into FPGs and FPOs, and by supporting them to engage in key value
chains (i.e., red gram, milk, poultry, fisheries, turmeric, cashew, and coffee). Their productivity would be
enhanced through services like technology, credit, extension, and marketing. Another key project intervention
was to support in establishing kirana stores (village marts) and help them form associations to link rural
producers to rural consumers.

Outputs

The ICR did not provide details on specific activities undertaken by the project until the first restructuring
occurred. However, the Aide Memoire of the Mid-Term Review (MTR) mission (Annex 4) did list results at the
MTR, which showed progress mainly related to physical targets of the project.

To meet the original objective to enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes, at project
end, the ICR (Annex 6f) stated that the project mobilized households (HHs) into FPGs and provided them with
training on institutional development, financial management and technical (production, processing practices).
By project closing, 303,178 FPGs and 168 FPOs were established. Exposure visits (29 locations) and
demonstration sites (592) on production, pests, nutrient management etc. were organized. FPOs (149,232)
were provided with inputs (seed, farm kit, fertilizers, pesticides, and farm implements). Income generation
activities (poultry, small ruminants) for producers (130,911) were supported and nearly 4,000 FPGs were
linked to Banks. Further, the project facilitated market linkages between producers (105,336) and
national/international buyers.

Outcomes

At the MTR, progress on outcome indicators was not reported. As per the ICR (paragraph 11), “Outcome-
level indicators could not be adequately assessed and analyzed due to a gap in outcome-level data, hence
limiting the MTR mission to fully assess the status of the project toward the achievement of the PDO”. The
project achieved several outputs, but the inability for the MTR to measure outcomes attributable to these
outputs reflected a weakness in the project’s M&E.

At project closing, the original outcome indicators for this objective and the extent to which were achieved,
were:

      Percentage incremental agricultural income increase of the target households [Target:50; Actual: 36.7
       (End-line Survey)]
      Percentage of producers benefitting from the project that were from the poorest and SC/ST
       households [Target: 70; Actual: no data]




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



In summary, despite the achievements of outputs, one of the original outcome indicators for Objective 1
(percentage incremental agricultural income increase of the target households) was not achieved. For the
second original outcome indicator (percentage of producers benefitting from the project that were from the
poorest and SC/ST households), the indicator was revised (see Section on Objective 1, Revision 1) and there
was no evidence provided on whether this was achieved at project closing. Thus, the efficacy with which
Objective 1 was achieved is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes.

The original objective did not change, but there were substantial changes to the PDO indicators and targets
following the restructuring which reduced the level of ambition of the original objective. The key indicator
changes (see ICR, Annex 6a) were:

•     The target of the original PDO 1 Sub-indicator 1 (incremental income increases of the target HHs) was
reduced from 50 percent to 30 percent.
•     The definition of the original PDO 1 Sub-indicator 2 (percentage of the producers benefiting are from the
poorest and SC/ST households) was revised by eliminating the reference to the ‘poorest’. The new indicator
was “percentage of the producers benefitting are SC/ST or small/marginal farmer households.
•     PDO 1 Sub-indicator 3 (percentage of the producers benefiting are women) was added.
•     Two intermediate indicators were eliminated, one retained, one revised to “percentage of targeted
farmers that have received at least 5 value chain services”, and two added (i.e. number of targeted farmers
that that have access to productive assets and services through convergence, number of village level marts
strengthened as rural retail enterprises).


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: Based on the recommendation of the MTR, the Results Framework (RF) was revised
during the project’s first restructuring in March 2019. The Restructuring Paper (Section 1) stated that project
implementation had evolved from the original design and there were variations in implementation approaches
and structures followed by the project. Despite the change in the RF, the project’s ToC did not change.

Outputs

At project closing, the outputs achieved under the revised indicators were as follows: (i) convergence of
services (on seed, fertilizer, micro-irrigation, livestock, marketing, post-harvest management infrastructure)
provided by line departments benefited 283,309 producers (target: 125,000); (ii) against the target of 40
percent, 51 percent (75 percent per the end-line survey) of target producers received at least five value chain
services related to purchase of inputs, livestock asset/services, financial assistance, marketing etc. and (iii)
4,644 marts were registered and strengthened through capacity building activities (target: 5000).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



Outcomes

To assess outcomes of Objective 1 Revision 1, the ICR stated that multiple sources of information were used:
project’s M&E system, mission documents, studies undertaken by external agencies, third party reports and
an end-line survey (ICR, paragraph 23).

On the revised PDO indicators, the results were as follows:

      Percent incremental income increases of the target households [Target: 30; Actual: 36.7 (End line
       survey)]
      Percent of producers benefiting from the project that are SC/ST or small/marginal farmers [Target: 70;
       Actual; 88 (MIS), 87.1 (End-line Survey)]
      Percent of the producers benefiting from the project are women [Target: 25; Actual: 19 (MIS), 15.1
       (End-line Survey)]

Increase in incremental agriculture income: At closing, the project achieved the revised target (30 percent) for
this indicator (36.7 percent). In measuring this indicator, a baseline survey had been administered before the
project activities were implemented. An end-line survey was planned to target the same producers but due to
the lockdown resulting from COVID-19, the methodology was revised with a ‘treatment control approach’.
Simultaneously, a sample of non-project producers were selected as a comparison group. The methodology
of the end-line survey was found by the ICR to be robust though the statement in the ICR (Annex 6d)
indicating that significant pretreatment differences were observed between control and treatment farmers’
incomes was not explained. As evidence, the ICR (paragraph 24) stated that “the use of the treatment and
control group ensured that the achievement of indicator 1 of outcome 1 is attributable to the project”. The
document (paragraph 28) further mentioned that “the incremental income increase achieved by the project
resulted from the project-induced increased adoption of the productivity enhancement interventions and cost
reduction technologies (150,778 farmers project beneficiaries adopted productivity enhancement,
interventions in 2019/20, and 93,895 adopted cost reduction technologies on around 270 thousand acres of
land)”. These details were useful but not sufficient in attributing project activities to outcomes. However,
attribution was clarified by the End-line survey document (Section 3.1) which stated that “In Table 3.2 we
present the difference in the percent increase in profits between farmers in the treatment group and their
counterparts in the control group. We find (Table 3.2) that the net percent increase in the total profits between
the treatment and control groups was approximately 7 percentage points, 10.6 percentage points for all crops,
and 8.2 percentage points for focus crop profits”. This statement confirms and provides the evidence that
project activities were attributable to achieving the outcome on increased income.

Inclusion: As per the data from the MIS and end-line survey, the project surpassed the target of 70% (Actual:
88%) for the second PDO indicator “Percentage of producers benefiting from the project that are SC/ST or
small farmers”. This indicator was revised from the original indicator “Percentage of producers benefitting
from the project that were from poorest and SC/ST households” by eliminating the reference to the ‘poorest’.
The Restructuring Paper (Annex 1) noted that the rationale for the revision was “to simplify the ‘inclusion’
criteria as per project activities” which was not elaborated. The ICR defined project beneficiaries to be those
that were “small and marginal farmers, SC/ST HHs, tenant farmers, shepherd communities, indigenous
people etc. (Annex 6e). On the gender related indicator, the project did not meet its target of “25 percent of
producers benefiting from the project are women” (Actual: 19% MIS; 15.1% end-line survey) though there
were several gender related outputs (85 percent of village mart owners were women, 289 female Board of
Directors and 7,615 women FPG leaders) that the project achieved (ICR, paragraph 43, Annex 6l).


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



In summary, the project achieved its revised PDO indicators 1 and 2. It did not meet its target for PDO
Indicator 3 on gender. There was evidence that the project implemented activities focusing on women
farmers, but it would have been helpful if key project output data had been disaggregated based on gender.
The efficacy with which Objective 1, Revision 1 was achieved is rated Substantial.




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enable selected poor households to increase access to human development services.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The project design focused on bringing behavioral changes at the household and
community levels on health, nutrition & sanitation. The Results Chain in the PAD (Annex 2) emphasized the
need for strong community mobilization at village levels in support of achieving alignment with other ongoing
mother and child (health, nutrition, and sanitation) activities. Village human development (HD) and water
supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) plans would be developed and financed. Use of communication
materials for behavioral and social changes would be promoted, along with development of community level
monitoring tools for generating demand for services. On the supply side, training capacity of Departments of
Women and Child Development (DWCD) and Department of Health and Family Welfare (DHM&FW) on
community mobilization, early childhood education and growth monitoring would be pursued.

Outputs

The ICR did not provide details on outputs achieved until the first restructuring of the project when the
indicators and targets were revised. The outputs achieved until the MTR were included in the Aide Memoire
of the MTR mission (Annex 4) and were close to targets. On the project’s original intermediate outcomes,
several were dropped due to lack of progress and therefore no achievement was reported. A few other
indicators were revised, and their progress is reported under the next section Objective 2, Revision 1.

To improve nutritional outcomes, the project supported and established model kitchen gardens and
households (HHs) were provided inputs for kitchen gardening and backyard poultry. On WASH, self-help
group members were trained on hygiene products. Village Organizations (VOs) were mobilized, and Health
Sub Committees were trained. At project closing, the ICR (Annex 6k) stated that 659,878 HH members
received maternal, infant, and young child nutrition, hygiene, and sanitation messages during VO meetings.
Pregnant women undergoing ante natal care (ANC) services during Nutrition and Healthy Day or at the
healthy facility reached 31,273 project beneficiaries. Additional outputs related to loans for various health and
nutrition activities were also achieved.

Outcomes



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



The original outcome indicators for this objective and the extent achieved at project closing were:

      Percentage increase in pregnant and lactating women who practice core child nutrition and health
       care behaviors [Target: 20; Actual: 35.5 (End-line Survey]
      Percentage increase in use of HD services (ICDS, health and sanitation services) by households
       [Target: 30; Actual: 54.75 (End-line Survey]

Per the end-line survey, targets for both the indicators were achieved. However, for both these outcomes,
according to the ICR (paragraph 31 and 32), the survey documented only “one nutrition or health care
behavior” and one “HD service” attributable to the project. In light of the large scale of the program, the
minimal level of practice or behavioral change captured by the survey was found to be weak. This finding is
also validated by the ICR (Annex 6d). Thus, this Review agrees with the ICR that the efficacy with which the
original PDO Objective 2 was achieved was modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enable poor rural households to increase access to human development services.

The original objective did not change but there were substantial changes with the PDO indicators and targets
following the first restructuring. This resulted into a reduced ambition of the objective. The key indicator
changes were:

•     The original PDO 2 Indicator (250,000 poor HHs obtain improved human development status) was
revised to “250,000 targeted HHs have received services related to health, nutrition and sanitation”. The
original indicator’s definition of ‘improved human development status’ was not clear.
•     The original PDO 2 Sub-indicator 1 (percentage increase in pregnant and lactating women who practice
core child nutrition and health care behaviors) was eliminated.
•     The original PDO 2 Sub-indicator 2 (percentage increase in use of HD services-ICDS, health and
sanitation services by households) was eliminated.
•     Three out of the four intermediate indicators for Objective 2 were eliminated. An example of a dropped
indicator was “percentage of villages in the target Mandals that have prepared and are implementing Village
HD/WASH plans”. Three new indicators were (number of HHs that received HDIF funds for WASH, H&N
activities, number of Village Organizations (VOs) trained, number of targeted HHs that received backyard
poultry interventions) were added.


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Following the MTR, project activities were strengthened with a targeted focus on
maternal, infant and child nutrition, and hygiene and sanitation practices, as well as those that targeted
activities for pregnant and lactating mothers, pre-school children etc. On the rationale for revisions, the ICR
(paragraph 30) noted the following reasons: (i) a new HD strategy had been in place which warranted the
need to revise the indicators; and (ii) client did not have the required technical capacity to work in the targeted

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



segments. This led to inclusion of line departments (e.g., Department of Women Development and Child
Welfare (DWD&CW) and Department of Health, Medical and Family Welfare (DHM&FW)) as implementing
agencies.

Outputs

To meet the objective to increase access to HD services, and in line with the revised indicators, the project
achieved the following outputs (ICR, paragraph 33, annex 6k). Against the target of 150,000 HHs, 1.5 million
HHs (1.1 million – End line Survey) received Human Development Investment Fund (HDIF) grants for WASH,
Health and Nutrition which was a significant achievement. The project provided HDIF grants to VOs and other
community institutions, that then loaned those funds to 1.5 million HHs for: (i) constructing Individual Sanitary
Latrines (ISLs); (ii) preparing and selling nutritious food to village retail stores; (iii) setting up small enterprises
to produce and sell hygiene products such as cleaning liquids; and (iv) village-level seed/nursery banks. The
project’s Backyard Poultry related interventions reached 134,108 HHs (target:166,000) and 20,324 VO Health
Committee members were trained (target: 10,000).

Considering that the project’s three intermediate outcome indicators were added at MTR, this high
achievement within the remaining project period (15 months) post restructuring is noteworthy. The ICR did not
provide details on factors that contributed to this success.

Outcomes

Compared to the original PDO indicator for Objective 2 (250,000 poor HHs obtain improved human
development status), the revised indicator below made this objective measurable.

      Number of targeted HHs that have received access to services related to health, nutrition, and
        sanitation [Target: 250,000; Actual: 246,975]

On the evidence about the project’s achievement in reaching its target, the ICR (Annex 6d) stated that there
were no baseline data on human development indicators. Thus, the End-line Survey documented the
respondents' pre-project and post-project practices. The ICR further noted that some of the pre-treatment
practice adoption values were found to be higher than those measured in the National Family Health Survey-
4 in 2015 which could be due to respondents’ overestimation of practices. Nonetheless, at project closing, the
PDO indicator was almost achieved, captured both by the project’s MIS and the End-line Survey. The efficacy
with which Objective 2, Revision 1 was achieved is therefore rated as Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enable selected poor households to access social entitlements.

Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



Theory of Change: The project aimed to improve the coverage and service delivery of social protection
services to the poorest HHs, protecting them from risks and vulnerabilities (PAD, Annex 2). Building on
existing initiatives of the Government of Andhra Pradesh, it would provide training and capacity building,
including technical and equipment (laptop, printer, basic office furniture, biometric reader etc.) support to
Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) to establish and manage One Stop Shops (OSSs) which provided access
to social protection services and entitlements. One such service is the “Mana Sewa Centers” run by women
entrepreneurs in villages (ICR, para10). By using innovative technology, these OSSs would enhance
outreach and quality of select social protection and banking services in rural areas with a focus on ST and SC
communities. Pilot activities would be planned on improved access to specialized services for persons with
disabilities and gender related services.

Outputs

As per the Aide Memoire of the MTR, there were limited achievements in establishing OSSs offering social
protection related services. Up until the MTR, 133 OSSs were established against the target of 1,000.There
were 112 OSSs that offered ‘Mee Seva’ services. Mee Seva means 'At your service' which was an initiative to
provide a single entry portal for a range of Government services (i.e., Pension, Birth/Death Certificate,
Insurance etc. services). Some of the OSSs (33) provided banking services. Neither the ICR nor the MTR
Aide Memoire provided explanation for this limited achievement.

At project closing, the original intermediate outcome (Number of targeted Panchayats that have
operationalized one stop shop services for safety nets and entitlements) was not achieved (Original
Target:1,000; Actual: 649). The other indicator (percentage of enrolled beneficiaries in targeted gram
panchayats who receive payments on time for key entitlements-NREGA, Social pensions, Insurance) was
dropped and progress on this indicator was not reported.

Outcomes

The original outcome indicators for this objective and the extent achieved at project closing were:

      500,000 poor households have enhanced access to systems that deliver improved information,
       enrollment and payment for social protection and entitlement programs [Actual: 216,492 (MIS);
       204,217 (End-line Survey)]
      Where one stop shops have been established, percentage of eligible households with access to at
       least three entitlement programs or key services [Target:80%; Actual:46%]

At project closing, the two original indicators and their targets were only partially met. Therefore the efficacy
with which the original PDO Objective 3 was achieved is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enable selected poor households to access social entitlements.

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)




The original objective did not change but there were revisions of the PDO indicator and targets following the
first restructuring. As a result, the ambition of the objective was also reduced. The key indicator changes
were:

•     The original PDO 3 indicator (500,000 poor HHs have enhanced access to systems that deliver
improved information, enrollment and payment for social protection and entitlement programs) was revised to
“Where a One-Stop Shop has been established, 100,000 beneficiaries accessing OSS services”. The
definition of ‘services’ was also revised to “beneficiaries accessing at least one of the following services: Mee-
Seva, Banking, Streenidhi".
•     The original PDO 3 Sub-indicator (Where One Stop Shop has been established, percentage of eligible
households with access to at least three entitlements programs or key services) was eliminated.
•     The target for the original intermediate outcome indicator (number of targeted panchayats that have
operationalized one stop shop services for safety nets and entitlements) was reduced from 1,000 to 700.
•     The original intermediate outcome indicator (% of enrolled beneficiaries in targeted gram panchayats
who receive payments on time for key entitlements (NREGA, Social pensions, Insurance) was eliminated.


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Following the MTR, the indicators and targets were revised and made less ambitious. The
project renewed its focus to expand OSSs in tribal areas, through planned collaboration with the Department
of Tribal Affairs (Restructuring Paper, section I.B). The OSSs were expected to facilitate improved access of
services to the poor, particularly women and the disabled in marginal areas. According to the ICR (Annex,
table 1.1), three types of services were given an emphasis by the project for the OSSs to be established: (i)
Mee Sewa Services; (ii) Banking Services; and (iii) Customer Service Center Services. The services ranged
from those that were related to pensions, insurance, applications for birth/death certificates, Aadhar (resident)
cards, information on land titles, and opening Bank accounts.

Outputs

 At closing, the project established 649 OSS centers in 13 districts across 150 Mandals. The project fell
slightly short of achieving its revised target.

      Number of targeted Panchayats that have operationalized one stop shop services for safety and
       entitlements [Target: 700; Actual: 649]

Outcomes:

The following outcome was measured at project closing:

      Where OSSs have been established, the number of beneficiaries accessing OSS services [Target:
       100,000; Actual: 216,492 (MIS); 204,217 (End-line Survey)]

The End-line Survey found that 204,217 beneficiaries were able to access various OSS services. The project
surpassed the revised target of 100,000 beneficiaries. It is, however, important to clarify that the definition of
“access to OSS services” changed to include awareness of government entitlements and schemes which
OSSs informed beneficiaries about. According to the ICR (paragraph 35), “In the End-line Survey, most
beneficiaries reported that OSS centers provided easier and more convenient access to services and had

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 27
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



                              increased their awareness of government entitlements and schemes”. Following the MTR, the project put
                              emphasis on establishing OSSs in tribal areas. According to the Borrower Completion Report (paragraph
                              6.5), 293 Centers (45 percent of the total OSSs) were set up in tribal areas. In summary, the achievement
                              towards meeting Objective 3 Revision 1 has been rated Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            On Objective 1, the project did not achieve its first outcome (Percentage incremental agricultural income
                            increase of the target households), while there was no evidence provided for the second outcome
                            (Percentage of producers benefitting from the project that were from poorest and SC/ST households) which
                            was not measured at project closing. Likewise, for Objective 2 (Number of poor HHs obtain improved HD
                            status) no evidence was provided on its achievement. For the other two outcome indicators under Objective
                            2, targets were surpassed but the end-line survey’s scope was limited and deviated from the original
                            objective. Finally, for Objective 3, targets were only partially met. Considering these outcomes, the efficacy of
                            the degree to which the original objectives were achieved is rated "modest".



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The efficacy of the objectives after the revisions of PDO indicators was Substantial. The basis for this rating
                            was as follows. For Objective 1, the project achieved its revised PDO indicator 1 and 2. Though it did not
                            meet its target for PDO Indicator 3 on gender, there was evidence that the project implemented numerous
                            activities focusing on women farmers. For Objective 2, the revised PDO indicator was almost achieved,
                            captured both by the project’s MIS and the end-line survey. Further, there was substantial achievement
                            related to HHs access to resources (e.g., the Human Development Investment Fund) for WASH, health, and
                            nutrition activities within a short period (15 months) of project implementation post restructuring. For Objective
                            3, the revised target on number of beneficiaries accessing OSS services were met.

                            Overall, the efficacy with which the project’s objectives were achieved as measured by the revised PDO
                            indicators was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating


                                                                                                                               Page 16 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Ex Ante

At appraisal, the project did not estimate an Economic Rate of Return (ERR). For each of the three main
components of Value Chain Development, Human Development and Access to entitlement, the project analyzed
benefits separately. For Value Chain Development, the project identified input cost reduction, production gains,
marketing, and value-added processing benefits along the value chain for key commodities to be selected by the
farmers but an economic analysis was not done due to the demand-based nature of the project. This meant that
any estimates of benefits would have been speculative. However, a financial analysis was carried out for major
commodities using standard agriculture economic analysis at field level based on the income gains and
component investment costs along the chain (PAD, Paragraph 49; ICR, Annex 4). For Human Development and
Social Entitlement, the project did not estimate benefits in economic terms but qualitatively described the various
benefits by referencing available literature and analysis from similar projects in India.

Ex Post

At closing, an economic analysis was conducted on the Value Chain Development Component. Economic
benefits from the other two components focusing on improved adoption of health, sanitation and hygiene
practices, and improved access to OSS services were not measured. The EFA (ICR, Annex 4) for Component 1
was based on: (i) changes in income level of project beneficiaries from value chain activities that were captured
by the end-line survey; (ii) MIS data on project coverage and outreach, and (iii) total economic project costs. The
EIRR and NPV were calculated based on benefits primarily from the real income increases (measured by the
end-line survey) of project beneficiaries projected over a 20-year period. Due to the limited sample of the end-
line survey, a base-case scenario was defined which assumed that only 70 percent (210,977) of HHs supported
through the project’s investments in FPOs realized an increase in their income, amounting to an average
increase of 90 percent of what had been measured by the impact evaluation (100 percent = INR 45,091 per year
per HH). The calculation of the incremental income used as baseline income of beneficiaries was INR 34,342)
per annum.

Economic and Financial Analysis: At baseline with 70 percent of beneficiaries experiencing income increases,
the project’s EIRR was 27.2 percent with an NPV of US$38.9 million at a 12 percent discount rate. Alternatively,
if 100 percent beneficiaries experienced an incremental income, the project’s EIRR amounted to 43 percent with
an NPV of US$84.0 million. The various scenarios of a sensitivity analysis were also presented in Table 4.1
(ICR, Annex 4). For the Financial Analysis of Rural Value Chains (RVCs), data generated out of the farmer-
support activities of the project that established FPOs was provided. The ICR stated that FPOs generated an
aggregate turnover of INR 2,300 million (US$31.2 million) during the project (ICR, Annex 4). Further, District-
level information on FPO loan amounts from financial institutions and their surplus reserve were provided (ICR,
Appendix Table 3) and the project teams’ view in exchange with IEG was that the surplus reserve was a good
indicator for financial sustainability. For Rural Retail Chains (Mandal Nodal Stores), the project team provided
year-wise sales data of the 4,624 stores established in 13 districts, which showed growth in turnover at an
aggregate level. These data were interesting, but this review did not find them as useful indicators of financial
sustainability or commercial viability.



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



On investments for Human Development, the ICR stated that financial analysis was undertaken on the utilization
of the Human Development Investment Fund (HDIF) (Table 4, Appendix to Annex 4). On Social Protection and
Entitlement, the ICR analyzed the financial sustainability of the OSSs to continue operating after project closure
(Table 5, Appendix to Annex 5). This information’s utility was limited as it was not quantified for deriving net
benefits for the project. Finally, the ICR calculated the cost per beneficiary based on each of the components
with comparison to the estimated cost at project appraisal, which was not a very useful measure as well.

Administrative Efficiency: The ICR (Annex 4, Section E) stated that “the project faced several challenging
situations during implementation” which resulted into implementation delays. However, the project’s closing date
was not changed. In addition to the delays, the project’s administrative cost of 13 percent (ICR, Annex 3) was
quite high. This amount excluded the cost of Component 4 (Mission Support, ICT and Partnerships), which
included a sub-component on ICT that supported project’s M&E and if added, would have raised the overhead
cost to 25 percent of total project costs. This raises questions about the project’s operational efficiency. In IEG’s
exchange, the project team stated that the high administrative costs were due to “(a) the project also aimed
‘institutional strengthening of SERP’ and included many aspects to strengthen the human resources and
operational systems (please refer PAD); (b) outreach in the most backward and remote areas targeted in the
project could have increased project management costs (human resources, logistics, mobilization, knowledge
management etc.)”.

In conclusion, despite the project team’s explanation, these costs in comparison to similar projects were
extremely high. Nevertheless, the rate of return (EIRR at 27.2 percent) for the project was high. Therefore, the
efficiency was rated as Substantial, but only marginally so. In future projects, efforts would have to be made to
reduce these high costs.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                27.20
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Outcome Rating is based on a split evaluation of the performance of the project's objective.




                                                                                                       Page 18 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



This review rated the project’s relevance to be substantial, ratings for efficacy of the original objective as
modest, but substantial following the revision of various indicators and targets at the project’s restructuring, and
substantial for efficiency.

    1. Substantial rating for Relevance of the PDO: The project’s objectives were relevant and highly aligned
       with both Government and World Bank strategies for India. However, they were very ambitious with
       complex multi-sectoral sub-objectives which required multiple institutions for delivery of project activities
       that resulted in considerable implementation challenges. Therefore, this review rates relevance of
       objectives as substantial.
    2. Modest and Substantial ratings for Efficacy: With respect to the project’s original objectives, the project
       did not achieve its targets. Following restructuring and revisions of PDO indicators and targets, the
       project achieved most targets (three out of five).
    3. Substantial Rating for Efficiency: The project had a high rate of return (EIRR at 27.2 percent). This
       review was concerned about the high administrative cost; therefore the efficiency was rated substantial,
       but only marginally so.

Based on the ratings for Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy, and Efficiency without and with restructuring, this
review concludes that the project’s overall outcome is rated “Moderately Satisfactory”. Details on the derivation
of this rating are provided in the table below.

                                               Original Objectives          Original Objectives
Rating Dimensions
                                               without Restructuring       with Restructuring
1. Relevance of Objectives                                               Substantial
Efficacy (with same objectives, but
revised indicators/targets)
Objective 1: Enable selected poor
                                                  Modest                   Substantial
households to enhance agricultural incomes
Objective 2: Enable selected poor
households to increase access to human            Modest                  Substantial
development services
Objective 3: Enable selected poor
                                                 Modest                   Substantial
households to access social entitlements.
2. Overall Efficacy                              Modest                   Substantial
3. Efficiency                                                       Substantial
Outcome Rating                             Moderately Unsatisfactory Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                    3                        5
Amount Disbursed                                   $34,223,173            $14,299,174
Disbursement (%)                                      70.5                      29.5
Weight Value                                          2.12                      1.48
Total Weights                                                         3.6 (Rounded to 4.00)
Overall Outcome Rating                                    Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project faces a number of risks to development outcomes. Some of the significant ones are:

      One of the risks to development outcomes identified by the ICR (Paragraph 75) was on ‘sustainability
       of project activities. The ICR has rated this risk as moderate based on: (i) high participation of farmers
       in value chain activities; and (ii) high adoption rates on HD interventions (drinking water, ANC
       services, nutrition etc.) by project beneficiaries.
      The other risk that the ICR pointed out was on ‘sustainability of institutions/FPOs’. According to the
       ICR, “the FPOs and FPGs are deemed sustainable at project completion because: (i) 62 percent of
       them were graded A or B; (ii) the GoI is pushing for the setting up of 10,000 FPOs; and (iii) the FPOs
       and FPGs are anchored in the wider ecosystems of community institutions supported by APSERP;
       thus benefiting from the over a decade-long existence of highly inclusive, financially strong women’s
       SHG federation platforms”.
      One additional risk identified by this review is on the institutional capacity of APSERP. In the absence
       of Bank’s technical support, the capacity of the implementing agency (APSERP) to continue to
       manage and implement a multi-sectoral project in close coordination with multiple organizations (line
       agencies, technical service providers, private sector, NGOs etc.) will continue to be a substantial risk
       to development outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared in light of experiences from prior Bank-financed rural development projects in
  India. The ICR (paragraph 51) stated that the project was based on the Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty
  Reduction Project (APRPRP) that developed the capacity of women’s organizations. The project also
  drew lessons from other projects in India, Brazil and Mexico. As per the ICR (Paragraph 52) project
  preparation benefited from analytics, pilot projects and consultation with key stakeholders at the national
  and global level. The implementing agency (APSERP) had prior experience working with APRPRP and
  with SC and ST communities, which were important in the design phase of the project in selecting project
  Mandals for implementing activities. Considering the complexity of implementing a multi-sectoral project
  with linkages to local Government institutions and line departments for alignment on service delivery, at
  project appraisal, the overall risk for achieving PDO was rated as substantial. The other key risk identified
  at appraisal was the reduced capacity of APSERP due to the bifurcation of the State which occurred
  during the last stages of project preparation.

  Despite a comprehensive analysis of risks (PAD, section V), and a preparation phase of nearly two years
  (Concept Note Review: February 2013; Board Approval: December 2014), there were several quality-at-
  entry weaknesses for the project. The project was ambitious and complex with multiple activities that
  were dependent on a strong capacity of the implementing agency (APSERP), including buy-in and
  commitment on the delivery of the programs from several line departments. To address this complexity, a
  careful assessment of the capacity of APSERP and its readiness to implement a multi-sectoral project
  would have been critical. This review's assessment was that APSERP was not ready. The scope of the
  new project was broader and more multi- sectoral than APSERP’s experience requiring it to strengthen

                                                                                                     Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



  its own internal capacity by hiring subject matter specialists and key staff which took time during early
  implementation phase. Further, the Results Framework that was developed for the project had
  shortcomings (see discussion in the next section of this review) with ambitious targets and
  complex indicator definitions which were difficult to measure, resulting in the revision, amendment, or
  elimination of several indicators during restructuring (Annex 1, Restructuring Paper 2019). The inability of
  the MTR mission to adequately assess progress and outcomes of the project (MTR Aide Memoire,
  paragraph 3) and the variations it found In the project’s implementation approaches and structures (MTR
  Aide Memoire, paragraph 6) demonstrated weaknesses of the project’s M&E system and hence
  shortcomings in project preparation.

  This review concluded that the project's Quality-at-Entry was Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During project implementation, the ICR (paragraph 70) stated that the Bank provided TA, organized
 technical consultations, and workshops (e.g., FPO Business Planning, FPO/FPG grading) for the project.
 Examples of TAs included: (i) Development of a Tribal Area Strategy for the State with a focus on WASH,
 health and nutrition, livelihoods, and institution building; (ii) Workshop on e-commerce solutions,
 particularly focusing on RRC’s infrastructure; and (iii) Development of protocols for a launch of a dedicated
 Enterprise Promotion Fund (EPF) to facilitate enterprise development. In addition, the Bank had provided
 a resident consultant for the project since April 2018. Over the course of the project’s life, the Bank
 undertook five implementation missions and as per the ICR (paragraph 71), the Bank team provided
 comprehensive reports with guidance and recommendations which were used for follow-up actions.

 A key intervention and support provided for the project was at the MTR mission (July 2018) when major
 changes were made to the Results Framework and cost re-allocation amongst sub-components. The ICR
 noted (paragraph 73) that the delay in the MTR (which was held later in project implementation period than
 planned) was primarily because of a request from the client who preferred that it take place at least two
 years after the implementation of project activities in the field. There was subsequent delay of 8-9 months
 for the project restructuring to be approved (March 2019) due to delays on the client side, which left only 15
 months before project closing to complete the activities.

 Considering that the project was complex with multi-sectoral focus, the frequency of Bank implementation
 missions (total of 5) was far less than expected but there were apparently regular contacts between the
 Bank’s New Delhi office and the project. Further, the effort from the Bank team at MTR to restructure the
 project and the periodic technical assistance provided in key areas referred to earlier were noteworthy.

 Based on the above-mentioned assessment, this review rates the Quality of Supervision as Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Results Framework: A Theory of Change (ToC) was not included in the PAD as it was not required at the
 time of project appraisal. However, for Component 1 (Rural Value Chains) and Component 2 (Human
 Development), the PAD (Annex 2) included separate Results Chains to show causal pathways. The RF
 developed at project appraisal included five PDO indicators and 15 intermediate outcome indicators (PAD.
 Annex 1). The PAD did not provide definitions of the selected indicators. The RF was ambitious and at the
 first project restructuring, several indicators were either revised, amended, or eliminated. The Restructuring
 Paper (Annex 1) provides the following reasons for the changes: (i) indicator definitions were either not
 clear, or they were complex and difficult to measure; (ii) client was unable to implement certain activities in
 some focus areas (i.e., maternal health, child nutrition) due to limited technical capacity; (iii) there was lack
 of sufficient community uptake and prioritization amongst several ongoing component activities. Original
 targets were also revised and made less ambitious.

 M&E System: According to the PAD (paragraph 37, Annex 3), during implementation, the project would
 strengthen the overall monitoring and evaluation capacity of APSERP by investing in technological
 infrastructure and evaluation systems. APSERP already had an operational Management Information
 System (MIS) with data that were publicly available. The project would build on this system and improve it
 under Component 4. For evaluation, the project would prepare quick and rigorous studies, along with
 formal impact evaluations based on baseline, mid-term, and end-term surveys, which would help assess
 the overall impact of the project. Qualitative studies would be planned to supplement quantitative studies.
 To support this effort, an external agency would be hired to manage the Concurrent Evaluation Cell (CEC)
 for key monitoring and evaluation activities of the project.

 The need for significant changes to the RF, with the revisions of the indicators and targets are a result of
 shortcomings in M&E design. To support APSERP in its M&E function, the hiring of an external agency was
 sound. However, the project’s expectation for APSERP to undertake innovative and multiple M&E activities
 based on a State-of-the-Art IT platform (PAD, Annex 2) through technical support alone was premature.



b. M&E Implementation
  In measuring its PDO, the project used data from its M&E system, studies undertaken by independent
  agencies and other third-party reports (ICR, paragraph 23). Quarterly reports were prepared which
  helped the project monitor its activities. These reports showed slow progress in the implementation of the
  project which improved following the MTR. The project’s ICT-based MIS and digital data collection were
  also implemented after the MTR. In addition, a baseline study, and an end-line survey were undertaken.




                                                                                                      Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



  To implement the M&E system, a Technical Support Agency (TSA) was hired in August 2015 to staff the
  CEC, which was fully operational in June 2016 (ICR, paragraph 64). The ICR does not elaborate further
  on the performance of this Cell. On studies commissioned during project implementation, the ICR (Annex
  6i, paragraph 65) included key findings of the FPO Assessment of Organizational Maturity and
  Sustainability and referred to FPO Business Centers and Business scoping studies of selected
  commodity value chains. Other than these studies, the ICR did not provide any other references.



c. M&E Utilization
  At the time of the MTR (Aide Memoire, paragraph 3), the project had completed a base line study and
  the MIS system was in place. However, the MTR was unable to measure the outcome level indicators
  for assessing achievements of PDO due to gaps in outcome level data. Since then, the ICR (paragraph
  65) stated that the MIS system provided periodic reports (e.g., Quarterly Progress Report), including
  input-output assessment, process monitoring, thematic studies, and rapid appraisals (details of these
  studies were not referenced in the ICR). The project undertook implementation audits to support and
  guide teams based on challenges found in the field which were used to revise the project operational
  manual. The end-line survey that was administered at project closing provided critical evidence in
  assessing project outcomes and impact.

  In summary, M&E is rated as Substantial. Despite the weakness in M&E design, the project’s MIS was
  operational and various studies/reports were prepared for the project after the MTR. The project’s effort,
  with strong support of an independent consulting institution to complete the End-line Survey during the
  challenging period of COVID-19 lockdown which provided the evidence on project outcomes was
  creditworthy.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B (partial assessment) under the World Bank safeguard policies.
   Five safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09): and Indigenous Peoples
   (OP/BP 4.10). No new safeguard policies were triggered following the restructuring of the project.

   Environmental Safeguards. The PAD (paragraph 61) noted that the project had a low-medium
   environmental risk, nonetheless, an Environment Assessment (EA) was conducted to ensure that the
   activities of the project were environmentally sustainable. In addition, the project developed an
   Environmental Management Framework (EMF) which identified possible environmental impacts of
   interventions proposed under each of the components and proposed for mitigation measures. The ICR
   (Annex 6m) stated that APSERP had a dedicated officer supported by a young professional for
   implementation of the EMF guidelines. On safeguards compliance, a screening checklist was prepared, and
   no activities were found to have taken place within forests or natural habitats. Workshops for project staff at

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



  all levels on safeguard issues were held. IEC materials were prepared for increasing awareness on
  environment-friendly practices for all crops covered by the project. Regular training programs were
  organized for farmers on Integrated Pest Management, Integrated Nutrient Management, organic
  cultivation, non-pesticide management, safe handling and storage of chemicals etc.

  Social Safeguards. The PAD (paragraph 60) stated that in light of the project’s explicit focus in covering
  poorer and excluded Mandals with significant presence of STs and SCs, the Operational Policy (OP 4.10)
  on Indigenous Peoples was triggered. At project appraisal, a Social Management and Tribal Development
  plan (SM & TDP) was prepared based on the ASERP’s wide experience of working with SCs and STs. The
  ICR (Annex 6m) noted that during project implementation, a beneficiary targeting strategy was developed
  that focused on women from SC and ST households and other vulnerable households. Poorest of the poor
  Mandals were selected based on composite deprivation criteria, including incidence of rural
  poverty, illiteracy, lack of irrigation, and other social infrastructure, as well as higher presence of SC and ST
  populations. Project interventions ensured outreach, coverage, and inclusion of tribal and scheduled caste
  households. The project set up 293 OSS centers in tribal communities and worked towards aligning with
  ST/SC programs of the Department of Social Welfare and Integrated Tribal Development Agency. A
  Grievance Redressal Mechanism was in place with an associated indicator “Percentage grievances related
  to project delivery are resolved within 3 months (baseline 0 end-line survey 70%)” that was added following
  the MTR. The ICR stated that no grievances were registered in the formal grievance system as they were
  addressed through the project’s participatory processes.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: According to the ICR (paragraph 6m), implementing a community demand-driven
  project that worked with district and cluster-level based teams in remote areas with poor connectivity and
  limited administrative capacity posed challenges for the project in financial management and procurement
  processes. To address the challenges, the project implemented the Tally Financial Accounting Software at
  APSERP Head Office and at field-level offices. An additional software titled ‘e-FMS’ was used for recording
  demand, approval, and transfer of funds. Furthermore, on fund disbursed and used by FPGs and their
  members, the project developed a software called ‘FPO Accounting System’.

  Procurement: The project had prepared a Procurement Manual to ensure consistency and compliance with
  procurement procedures. Procurement Plans were prepared and updated on a timely basis. The ICR
  (Annex 6m) noted that procurement contracts were awarded as per World Bank procurement guidelines,
  and trainings were provided to enhance procurement related capacity of the implementing agency. At
  project closing, there were no pending contracts or procurement activities. As per the ISR (March 2020),
  procurement plans were aligned with the budget, however timeliness were generally not adhered to. The
  document further indicated that frequent changes in staffing had hampered progress on procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None



                                                                                                     Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 Quality at Entry suffered from
                                                                                 shortcomings such as
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 complexity of design and
                                                                                 implementation readiness.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presented several lessons learned. Most lessons listed were focused on issues specific to
this project. However, the most significant lesson which had broader application is summarized
below:

Multi-sectoral project with numerous project interventions dependent on several
implementing agencies can be challenging to implement. One single project that promotes
livelihood support to increasing farmers' income, along with improvements in human development
outcomes and access to social protection was challenging to prepare and successfully implement.
As was the case with this project, at MTR, the project had to be restructured and four additional line
departments with the relevant technical capacity had to be brought in as implementing agencies,
which put enormous responsibility for APSERP to manage the project and monitor progress. The
ICR stated that “future projects aiming at promoting inclusive rural growth should avoid integrated
approaches that have too numerous interventions from very different sectors to avoid the
implementation challenges encountered in this project”.

IEG suggests that the following additional lessons :

Project restructuring should not be done too late in the project cycle, which leaves limited
time for course corrections to be implemented. The project was approved on December 19,
2014. However, due to client request, the Mid-term Review (MTR) which proposed for the project’s
first restructuring was conducted only in July 2018 (project restructuring approved in March 2019).
The project had remaining 15 months until the closing date (June 30, 2020) to complete all the
activities and achieve the revised set of indicators and targets which was challenging.

It is important for the project to develop a Results Framework with simple and measurable
set of outcome indicators for monitoring and evaluation. In the case of this project, several
indicators had to be eliminated after the MTR either because the definitions were not clear, or they


                                                                                                   Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



were complex and hard to measure. As a result, it was difficult to measure progress at the MTR. At
project closing, the simplified set of indicators helped the project to realistically measure its progress.

A careful assessment of the absorptive capacity of the implementing agency is required prior
to scaling up interventions of a multi-sectoral project. In this project, the implementing agency
(APSERP) had experience working with the Bank under an earlier project in financing women SHGs.
This project was much broader with multiple objectives which required high capacity to implement
the program, in close coordination with numerous line departments. During project preparation, a
careful assessment of the absorptive capacity of the implementing agency should have been done.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The project was complex with multi-sectoral focus requiring strong alignment with various line departments of
the Government to implement the various components and sub-components. Post MTR, the objectives
remained the same but there were substantial changes to the project’s expected outcomes and targets.
Preparing the ICR was therefore a difficult task. Nevertheless, it provided useful information about the various
structural changes in the project .

The ICR provided evidence based on the findings of the important End-line Survey as well as details of the
Cross-Sectional Analysis of APRIGP FPOs (Annex 6i) though the analysis of attribution of outcomes to project
activities was not always clear. The ICR did not, however, provide any references or analysis based on many
thematic and sector studies that were done during project implementation. The ICR’s M&E section could have
been strengthened by providing details on the results of these additional studies (referenced in paragraph 65),
and the functioning of its ICT-based MIS system. Furthermore, the ICR (paragraphs 53, 61) was generous to
state that the original Results Framework (RF) at project entry was sound and practical, with most of the
indicators well designed, which was not consistent with the actions the project took at its first restructuring
which revised several indicators and targets.

In presenting results, the ICR reported and included a discussion on the achievement of the three PDOs. Some
further balanced discussion on the achievement of outcomes and their relation to project activities would have
been useful. For example, on one HD-related indicator (No. of HHs that received HDIF grant for water,
sanitation and hygiene, Health and Nutrition), the project achieved 1,000 percent of its target. The ICR could
have provided further explanation on factors that contributed to this high achievement within a short period post
restructuring and its relation to HD outcomes, which may have been a useful lesson learned.

Apart from the justification for operational efficiency, the analysis of the project's economic efficiency was
convincing after an exchange with the Bank project team to clarify some of the data used for the analysis..




                                                                                                       Page 26 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Pr (P152210)



Finally, the ICR could also have candidly reported on the shortcomings in the project design and
implementation, such as design issues related to implementation delays during the early stages of the project.
Further, Annex 2 of the document provided an arguably incomplete list of the project’s preparation team.

In summary, this ICR provided useful information about the activities and achievements of a complex project. It
followed the OPCS guideline and had a number of strengths including useful lessons. However, there were also
several shortcomings in the document. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated by this review as Substantial but
only marginally so.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 27 of 27
