     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022646

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P116170                                   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-78550                                30-Jun-2014                                        650,400,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Apr-2010                               30-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           650,400,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            650,400,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        650,400,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur              Elisabeth Goller             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original objective. The project development objective (PDO) was to improve mobility for public transport
   users in the Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin corridor in a cost-efficient and environmentally
   friendly way (Loan Agreement page 6 and PAD para 19).

   Revised objective. The revised PDOs were: (a) to improve the mobility of public transport users in the
   Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin (Line 5) and Vila Sonia-Luz (Line 4) Corridors in a cost-efficient


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



   and environmentally-friendly manner; and (b) to facilitate the integration between metro and bus at the metro
   stations (First Amendment to the Loan Agreement, page 2 and Restructuring Paper RES27607).

   In this review, the achievement of the PDO is assessed separately for the three sub-objectives to "improve
   mobility for public transport users in the Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin (Line 5) corridor in a
   cost-efficient and environmentally friendly manner", “improve the mobility of public transport users in the Vila
   Sonia-Luz (Line 4) corridors in a cost-efficient and environmentally friendly manner” and " facilitate the
   integration between metro and bus at the metro stations". The objectives are denotated as objectives 1, 2,
   and 3, respectively. This is in line with the assessment in the ICR.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project comprised of two components:

   Component A. Infrastructure and Equipment (appraisal estimate US$2,260.55 million
   (excludes contingencies, expropriation costs and detailed project design); actual cost US$3,248.5 million).
   This component included three sub-components:

         1. Provision of financing for acquisition and/or installation of: (i) at least twenty-six new train
            sets, Electric Multiple Units of six cars each, and related accessories, to operate on the Extended
            Line 5; (ii) Communication Based Train Control signaling systems for the Extended Metro Line 5 ;
            and (iii) platform screen doors for all stations of the Extended Line 5.
         2. Carrying out of works and provision of financing for: (i) the rehabilitation and modernization of eight
            trains which were already operating on the existing part of Line 5; and (ii) the installation of the
            energy supply, telecommunications and control and auxiliary systems required for the Extended Line
            5.
         3. Carrying out of civil works for the construction of approximately 12 km of tunnel and eleven new
            stations, the railway track and the Guido-Caloi train yard.

   Revised Component A (June 2017 restructuring). The activities under the revised components are in
   addition to the ones in the original component. The changes refer to the inclusion of civil works for Line 4.
   This includes:




                                                                                                           Page 2 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



        Acquisition and/or installation of information and communication (ICT) equipment to interconnect the
         operational control centers of the Metro lines into a unified network.
        Provision of financing for the: (i) completion of infrastructure and equipment investments initiated
         during the Line 4 Phase 2 project, including: (i) the civil works of the four stations of Line 4 initiated
         during the Line 4 Phase 2 project; (ii) the civil works for one new station (Vila Sonia), its access
         tunnel of about 1.5 km extension, and a bus terminal at the Vila Sonia yard; and (iii) acquisition and
         installation of escalators, platform doors, and signaling and telecommunication systems necessary
         to operate the stations referred in (i) and (ii).

  Component B. Technical Assistance and Institutional Development (appraisal estimate US$83.3 million;
  actual cost US$202.9 million). This component included:

      1. Provision of financing and technical assistance for: (i) supervision of the manufacturing and delivery
         of the new trains acquired under Component A; (ii) supervision of the supply and installation of the
         CBTC signaling systems; and (iii) carrying out of specific studies to support the development of São
         Paulo Metro’s climate change strategy and to assess the impact of the Extended Line 5 on
         greenhouse gas emissions.
      2. Carrying out a study assessing the impact of the Extended Line 5 on the low-income population in
         the Capão Redondo - Chácara Klabin Corridor.
      3. Provision of financing for Project management and civil works supervision consultants.

  Revised Component B (June 2017 restructuring). The activities under the revised components are in
  addition to the ones in the original component. They include technical assistance for: (i) supervision and
  project management of civil works under the revised Part A of the project, (ii) supervision of the supply and
  installation of the systems included in the revised Part A of the project, and (iii) data collection and users'
  perception surveys and studies to support strategic planning.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$4,112.5 million, significantly higher than the estimate at the
  moment of the 2017 restructuring of US$3,108.6 million (ICR Annex3), and the originally estimated cost at
  project appraisal of US$2,813.9 million (PAD, Annex 5). The figures in the ICR, Annex 3 are not in line with
  the ICR datasheet, page 2, because as per clarifications of the Bank task team, the datasheet does not
  reflect the appraisal estimate for Line 4, added to the project through the 2017 restructuring, and for
  expropriations and detailed project design.

  Financing. The actual and planned IBRD loan amounts were US$650.4 million. It was expected to be used
  in full for the original activities of Line 5. At the 2017 restructuring, the US$210 million loan savings from the
  Line 5 project - derived from (a) favorable prices from the international competitive bidding of the trains and
  systems, (b) an appreciation of the United States Dollar relative to the Brazilian Real after project appraisal,
  and (c) a reduction in the expected goods and services taxes to be paid by Metro - were reallocated to
  finance the remaining Bank-appraised civil works for Line 4 Phase 2.

  The disbursement for the activities related to Line 5 was US$398.99 million, and for the ones related to Line
  4, Phase 2 was US$252.36 million (ICR Annex 3, see column Actual Since 2018), which is equal
  to US$651.3 million (the project team explained that the small difference between the amount in the ICR


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 29
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



datasheet page 2 and in Annex 3 is because the costs in Annex 3, are in constant dollars of 2008, while the
loan is the sum in current dollars in different years).

Borrower Contribution.

The actual Borrower contribution was US$3,086.4 million, substantially higher than the appraisal estimate at
the moment of the 2017 restructuring of US$1,921.9 million. The originally estimated Borrower contribution
at project appraisal was US$1,647.6 million (IEG calculation, based on ICR, Annex 3). The actual Borrower
contribution includes a contribution from National Economic and Social Development Bank (BNDES) of
US$1,878.0 million, which was not planned at appraisal (ICR Annex 3). These figures are not fully in line
with the ICR datasheet, page 2, for reasons similar to the ones pointed out for the total project cost.

Co-financing. The project was co-financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and the Japan
Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC). The actual IADB co-financing was US$367.1 million, lower than
the appraisal commitment of US$515.9 million (ICR Annex 3). The actual JBIC co-financing was US$7.6
million, slightly lower than the appraisal estimate of US$9.2 million. The IADB figure in Annex 3 is not fully
consistent with the ICR datasheet and the PAD as the IADB financed project designs (US$35 million), were
not considered as part of the reported project financing in the ICR datasheet and the PAD.

Dates. The project was approved on April 20, 2010, became effective on November 12, 2010, and closed
on December 30, 2020 after a 6.5-year delay (78 months).

The closing date was extended four times under the following six project restructurings:

     i. In June 2014, the closing date was extended by 30 months, from June 2014 to December 2016
        because of delays in the start of Line 5 civil works due to legal injunctions for awarding contracts,
        delays in obtaining environmental licenses, and completing the resettlement process;
    ii. The next two extensions added a new project component related to the civil works of Line 4 Phase
        2. The restructuring was split into two: first in December 2016, the closing date was extended for 6
        months, from December 2016 to June 2017, to provide the State of São Paulo (SSP) additional time
        to make the case for the restructuring and for the Federal Government to accept it; second in June
        2017, it was extended by 18 months, from June 2017 to December 2018, together with changes in
        the PDO, results framework, components and costs, and implementation schedule; and
   iii. In October 2018, the closing date was extended by 24 months, from December 2018 to December
        2020 to enable the installation of the tracks, which was delayed.

The project was restructured in September 2019 to change the results framework. In December 2020, the
project was restructured to reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

Split Rating. In line with the ICR, this review will apply the split rating methodology. It will assess objective
1 based on the original targets, the targets revised through the 2017 restructuring, which lowered the level
of ambition of three PDO indicator targets, and the targets revised with the 2019 restructuring, which
dropped two PDO indicators and increased the level of ambition of a third PDO indicator target. The reason
for dropping one of the PDO indicators is that the project had another indicator to more accurately measure
the achievement. The other PDO indicator was dropped because it would have been difficult to measure
and had been replaced with two similar indicators in the 2017 restructuring. The review will assess the new
objective 2, introduced with the 2017 restructuring, based on the original targets and the targets revised
with the 2019 restructuring, which lowered the level of ambition of one of them. It will assess the new

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



   objective 3, also introduced with the 2017 restructuring, based on the original targets and the targets
   revised with the 2019 restructuring, which lowered the level of ambition for two of them.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At appraisal, Line 5 was completed from Capão Redondo to Largo
Treze and was fully operational. However, for Line 5 to have a significant impact on mobility in the São
Paulo Metropolitan Region (SPMR), it needed to be extended from Largo Treze to Chácara Klabin, thereby
linking the very busy Santo Amaro area to the expanded city center (PAD para 3). With this extension, Line
5 was to enhance accessibility to important employment areas as well as health and education
facilities, thus enhance the mobility for people that previously had only access to poor road-based
transportation services, with long travel times caused by road congestion for buses and by frequent
breakdowns for trains. The average duration of a trip by public transport for low- income group was 1.5
hours, and in some more peripheral areas it exceeded two hours.

Alignment with São Paulo's Strategy. The project objectives were fully aligned with Sao Paulo's Urban
Transport Master Plan (PITU), which aimed at improving mobility in the SPMR by prioritizing the
construction of key missing links of the metro network to enable better integration between the existing
commuter rail and the bus network with the metro (PAD page 1). In addition, the SPMR aimed at improving
rail-based urban transport in low-income areas to increase accessibility to employment centers, health,
education and leisure facilities (PAD page 5).

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. At appraisal, the PDO was consistent with the World Bank
Group's Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2008-2011 which emphasized increased efficiency in the
public sector and the appropriate targeting and delivery of support systems to the poor. The revised PDO,
which included the completion of Line 4 under the existing objective “to improve mobility for public transport
users” and added another objective “to facilitate the integration between metro and bus at the metro
stations” was consistent with sub objective 3.3 “Improving transport infrastructure and management” of the
CPS for the period 2012-15, which supports improved mobility and intercity transport; and objective 2
“Improve quality and expand provision of public services for low income households". The project objectives
remained aligned with the Focus Area 3 "inclusive and sustainable development" of the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Brazil for Fiscal Year 2018 to 2023. The CPF emphasizes greening of transport,
reducing the heavy reliance on road-based transport, decreasing motorization, and providing high quality
public transport. The integration objective is fully aligned with the “inclusive” part Focus Area 3 as the
population living in low-income areas require a higher number of transfers to complete their trips (ICR para
23).

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank financed several urban transport projects in Sao Paulo.
These included (i) the São Paulo Metropolitan Transport Decentralization Project (P006379), approved
in 1992, which succeeded in the decentralization and modernization of the federally-owned Brazilian Urban
Transport Company (CBTU) and laid the foundations for metropolitan coordination; (ii) the São Paulo
Integrated Urban Transport Project (P006559) (the Barra Funda-Roosevelt link), approved in 1998,
resulted in connecting the two suburban railway networks and improving the Luz and Brás train stations; (iii)
the Metro Line 4 Phase 1 Project (P051696), approved in 2002, which increased connectivity between the

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 29
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



               existing metro and suburban rail lines and created an integrated fare for municipal buses (Bilhete Unico
               Integrado); and (iv) the Sao Paulo Trains and Signaling Project (P106038) which was approved in May
               2008 to finance trains and signaling systems for both rail-based systems - suburban train and metro - of
               SPMR (PAD page 22).

               The project was important to enhance mobility in the SPMR and there was full alignment between the
               project’s development objectives and the country and World Bank strategies. The implementation capacity
               of the Sao Paulo State Secretariat for Metropolitan Transport and the Metro was adequate to implement the
               technically complex project activities. The project’s PDO, however, did not evolve over time since it was
               similar to the ones of previous projects. Therefore, on balance, the relevance of objectives is
               rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the mobility of public transport users in the Capão Redondo and Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin
                             (Line 5) corridor in a cost-efficient and environmentally friendly manner.

                             Rationale
                             The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs would be used to finance (a) civil works,
                             such as construction of tunnels and new metro stations; (b) the acquisition of trains and provision of
                             equipment; (c) the acquisition and installation of the energy supply, telecommunications and control and
                             auxiliary systems; (d) the carrying out of studies, for instance, to estimate greenhouse gas emission, develop
                             São Paulo Metro's climate change strategy, and to assess the impact of Line 5. This was to result in outputs
                             such as fully operational stations on Line 5 extension, new trains, and completed studies. These outputs were
                             expected to result in the outcome of improved mobility for public transport users in the Capão Redondo-Largo
                             Treze-Chácara Klabin corridor in a cost efficient (because of more people using the metro system and hence
                             improving the operator’s working ratio) and environmentally friendly manner (because of a shift of car users to
                             public transport). In the long run, these results were expected to improve and integrate the public transport
                             system in the SPMR, promote social equity through enhanced accessibility to transport services, jobs, and
                             public services for low-income areas, improve the financial sustainability and stability of public transport
                             services in the SPMR, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

                             The key assumptions for achieving this objective were: (a) there are no restrictions on mobility or exogenous
                             changes in the behavior of users; (b) there is adequate funding to maintain the infrastructure and equipment;
                             and (c) the government continues to provide affordable integrated fares.



                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



Outputs

      At project closing, all eleven stations that were part of the Line 5 extension were fully operational.
       These included: Adolfo Pinheiro, Alto da Boa Vista, Borba Gato, Brooklin, Campo Belo, Eucaliptos,
       Moema, AACD-Servidor, Hospital Sao Paulo, Santa Cruz, and Chacara Klabin.

      As targeted, 26 new trains were delivered for the operation of Line 5.

      Communications-Based Train Control signaling systems were implemented and platform screen doors
       installed in all Line 5 stations.

      The following studies were completed: (a) two environmental studies (i) to support Metro’s climate
       change strategy, providing an initial inventory of the primary GHG emissions by Metro, and (ii)
       assessing the impact of the Extended Line 5 on low-carbon construction processes and materials,
       which were applied in the construction of Line 4 Phase 2 and Line 5 (ICR para 34); (b) study (still
       ongoing) to understand the impact of improved mobility of low-income populations in the influence
       area of Line 5 (the baseline was collected in 2017 and the endline will be collected post COVID -19
       once mobility patterns recover since survey fieldwork was temporarily suspended due to COVID -
       19); and (c) studies and technical assistance to support strategic planning and fare policy.

Outcomes

This section looks at the outcomes of mobility improvements for public transport users, cost-efficiency of
mobility, and the environmental friendliness of mobility separately based on the original outcome targets.

The project substantially improved the mobility of public transport users in the Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-
Chácara Klabin corridor of Line 5. Travel time (defined as travel plus average waiting time for all indicators)
from Largo Treze (the last station on Line 5 before the extension) to Chacara Klabin (the last station on Line 5
after the extension) dropped to 25 minutes in December 2019 (pre-COVID) and 26 minutes in
2020, compared to the original target of 21 minutes. Although the target was not achieved, this was
significantly lower than a 72-minute travel time before the project. The slight increase in the travel times in
2020 was due to an adjustment of the metro timetables because of COVID-19. According to the project team,
the Metro was running with 17-29 percent lower frequencies during the months most affected by the
pandemic.

Travel time between Capão Redondo (the first station on Line 5) to Se, a central station downtown, passing
through all new Line 5 stations and connecting to Line 1, was halved, dropping from 99 minutes to 50 minutes
in 2020, but it is short of the original target of 44 minutes. Before COVID-19 in 2019 the travel time was 49
minutes.

The mobility in the corridor was also improved because of the bus-train integration mentioned under
objective 3 and the integration between Metro stations, enabling the passenger to move more easily from one
train or mode to the other.

The ease to move was enhanced through increased service quality, which was improved through low noise
levels of trains, air conditioning, universal accessibility for people with disabilities, CCTV cameras in all trains



                                                                                                       Page 7 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



and stations, platform doors that open when the train arrives to enhance safety, speed, and regularity in
boarding times.

However, the mobility benefits did not accrue to as many people and low-income users
as originally expected because of COVID-19. The incremental ridership on Line 5 in 2020 was 187,000 daily
passengers, significantly short of the original target of 334,000 daily passengers. Before COVID-19 in 2019,
the daily incremental ridership was 413,000 passengers, exceeding the original target. In 2020, the number of
users per day on Line 5 of households with less than 4 minimum salaries was 193,000, substantially lower
than the original target of 276,000. The pre-COVID figure in 2019 was 329,000 users, exceeding the original
target. 

The ICR points out that the total ridership on Line 5 grew rapidly after the opening of the eleven stations
between 2017 and 2019, but the growth was curtailed by the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions. The average
daily ridership increased by 45 percent, from 255,000 in 2017 to 370,000 in 2018. It further increased by 54
percent, from 370,000 in 2018 to 568,000 in 2019. In 2020, due to pandemic restrictions, the annual ridership
declined by 42 percent, from 568,000 in 2019 to 332,000 in 2020.

According to the Bank project team, in 2021 the ridership on Line 5 has slightly picked up: in August 2021 the
number of passengers on Line 5 was 34 percent lower compared to August 2019 (there were still high
number of COVID-19 cases and lingering restrictions to mobility).

Accessibility to jobs and public services also increased because of the expansion of Line 5 for households in
the area of influence of new stations.  According to a job accessibility analysis, the region around the Se
station in downtown of the SPMR, which has a high concentration of jobs, became much better connected
with the area served by Line 5.

The cost-efficiency of mobility in the Line 5 corridor was also negatively affected by COVID-19. With the
extension of Line 5, the working ratio (operating cost to operating revenue) of the operator, which is a proxy
for financial sustainability and the indicator available to measure cost-efficiency, decreased from 1.88 at
appraisal to 0.73 in 2017, meeting the original target of a ratio under 0.75. The operator of Line 5 maintained
a working ratio of under 0.75 in both 2018 and 2019. Although the ICR does not include the 2020 working
ratio, according to the Bank project team, it is unlikely that this ratio went up substantially due to COVID-
19 because (i) although the ridership went down, the metro operator adjusted the service frequency and so
reduced costs, and (ii) the metro operator’s contract contains a minimum ridership guarantee, which requires
the government to provide compensation if the ridership falls below a certain threshold. However, as seen
above, while the original incremental ridership target on Line 5 was exceeded in
2019, the achievement was significantly lower in 2020 because of COVID-19. This lower demand is one of
the factors that contributed to a significantly lower ex-post Economic Rate of Return (ERR) for Line
5 compared to that at appraisal (see section 5).

The ICR does not report on the achievements for the indicators “working ratio of Metro as a whole” and
“Number of bus kilometers/peak hour in the corridor after project” because they were dropped with the 2019
restructuring for valid reasons pointed out at the end of section 2.

The project improved mobility in an environmentally friendly way, but the environmental
benefits were also negatively impacted by COVID at least in the short run. Without considering the impact of
COVID, gross GHG emissions savings resulting from Line 5 over the economic lifetime of the assets were
estimated at 2,960,000 tCO2eq, with the savings resulting from the modal shift from more GHG-intensive

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



travel modes, such as cars and buses to the metro. The economic benefits related to GHG emissions savings
were expected to amount to US$75.6 million over 50 years (ICR para 55). Although no data is available, the
actual reductions in GHG emissions from Line 5 are lower than they could have been without the COVID-19
pandemic, which caused people to use more individual than public transport at least as long as the pandemic
is not fully under control (some people might have shifted definitively to individual motorized transport). The
project had, however, no GHG emission target.

In sum, the project improved mobility for public transport users in the influence area of Line 5 with minor
shortcoming, and the impact of COVID-19 on ridership reduced the benefits of the improved mobility for
users, the environmental benefits, and the cost-efficiency of the new mobility solution. Overall, the
achievement of this objective is rated substantial, with moderate shortcomings




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the mobility of public transport users in the Capão Redondo and Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin
(Line 5) corridor in a cost-efficient and environmentally friendly manner.

Revised Rationale
The theory of change and key assumptions remained unchanged. Three outcome targets were revised at
2017 restructuring.

Outputs

Same as those reported under original objective 1.

Outcomes

This section assesses the outcomes of mobility improvements for public transport users, cost-efficiency of
mobility, and the environmental friendliness of mobility separately based on the revised outcome target set
at the 2017 restructuring.

The project improved the mobility of public transport users in the Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-
Chácara Klabin corridor of Line 5. The travel time from Largo Treze to Chacara Klabin dropped to 25 minutes
in December 2019 (pre-COVID) and 26 minutes in 2020, nearly reaching the revised target of
25 minutes. The travel time between Capão Redondo to Se dropped to 49 minutes in 2019 and 50 minutes in
2020, nearly reaching the revised target of 49 minutes.

The mobility in the corridor was also enhanced through other improvements, such as better integration,
mentioned under the objective 1 (original targets) above.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



The incremental ridership on Line 5 in 2020 was 187,000 daily passengers, short of the revised target
of 280,000 daily passengers. Before COVID-19 in 2019, the daily incremental ridership was 413,000
passengers, significantly exceeding the revised target. In 2020, the number of users per day on Line 5 of
households with less than 4 minimum salaries was 193,000, substantially lower than the revised target
of 331,000. The pre-COVID figure in 2019 was 329,000 users, nearly meeting the revised target. 

The targets related to cost-efficiency of mobility in the Line 5 corridor were not revised, and as mentioned
under objective 1 (original targets) above, the degree to which this outcome was achieved, was negatively
affected by COVID-19. 

The project had no indicator to measure its impact on the environmental-friendliness of the new mobility
solution, so nothing changed with the 2017 restructuring. As mentioned under objective 1 (original targets)
above, the project provided improved mobility in an environmental-
friendly way, but the expected environmental benefits were negatively impacted by the reduced ridership
because of COVID-19.

In sum, the project improved mobility for public transport users in the influence area of Line 5. However, the
impact of COVID-19 on ridership reduced the benefits of the improved mobility for users, the environmental
benefits, and the cost-efficiency of the new mobility solution. Overall, the achievement of this objective is
rated substantial, with minor shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve the mobility of public transport users in the Capão Redondo and Largo Treze-Chácara Klabin
(Line 5) corridor in a cost-efficient and environmentally friendly manner.

Revised Rationale
The theory of change and key assumptions remained unchanged. One outcome target was revised and two
indicators dropped during 2019 restructuring.

Outputs

Same as those reported under original objective 1.

Outcomes

This section assesses the outcomes of mobility improvements for public transport users, cost-efficiency of
mobility, and the environmental friendliness of mobility separately based on the revised outcome target set
at the 2019 restructuring.

The project improved the mobility of public transport users in the Capão Redondo-Largo Treze-
Chácara Klabin corridor of Line 5. The travel time from Largo Treze to Chacara Klabin dropped to 25 minutes

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



in December 2019 (pre-COVID) and 26 minutes in 2020, nearly reaching the revised target of 25 minutes.
The travel time between Capão Redondo to Se dropped to 49 minutes in 2019 and 50 minutes in 2020,
nearly reaching the revised target of 49.

The mobility in the corridor was also improved through other improvements, such as better integration,
mentioned under the objective 1 (original targets) above.

The incremental ridership on Line 5 in 2020 was 187,000 daily passengers, significantly short of the revised
target of 559,000 daily passengers. Before COVID-19 in 2019, the daily incremental ridership was 413,000
passengers, also significantly lower than the revised target. In 2020, the number of users per day on Line 5 of
households with less than 4 minimum salaries was 193,000, substantially lower than the revised target of
331,000. The pre-COVID figure in 2019 was 329,000 users, nearly meeting the revised target. 

The targets related to cost-efficiency of mobility in the Line 5 corridor were not revised, and as mentioned
under objective 1 (original targets) above, the degree to which this outcome was achieved, was negatively
affected by COVID-19. 

The project had no indicator to measure its impact on the environmental-friendliness of the new mobility
solution, so nothing changed with the 2017 restructuring. As mentioned under objective 1 (original targets)
above, the project provided improved mobility in an environmental-friendly way, but
the expected environmental benefits were negatively impacted by the reduced ridership because of COVID-
19.

In sum, the project improved mobility for public transport users in the influence area of Line 5. However, the
impact of COVID-19 on ridership significantly reduced the benefits of the improved mobility for users. COVID-
19 also negatively affected the environmental benefits and the cost-efficiency of the new mobility solution.
Overall, the achievement of this objective is rated substantial, moderate shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Not Applicable

Rationale
Not Applicable.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)




Revised Objective
To improve the mobility of public transport users in the Vila Sônia-Luz (Line 4) corridor in a cost-efficient and
environmentally-friendly manner.

Revised Rationale
The theory of change and key assumptions are the same as for objective 1. Objective 2, introduced with
the 2017 restructuring, is identical to objective 1, except that it covers a different corridor.

Outputs

At project closing, four out of the five stations from Phase 2 of Line 4 were fully
operational: Fradique Coutinho (opened in November 2014), Higienopolis-Mackenzie (opened in January
2018), Oscar Freire (opened in April 2018), and São Paulo-Morumbi (opened in October 2018). 99 percent of
Vila Sonia (the last station on Line 4) was completed. According to the Bank task team, it is currently
expected to be opened on December 16, 2021. The ICR notes (para 35) that the remaining works for the
station are being financed with resources from SSP

The studies listed under objective 1 are relevant for this objective too.

Outcomes

This section assesses the outcomes of mobility improvements for public transport users, cost-efficiency of
mobility, and the environmental friendliness of mobility separately based on the original outcome
targets introduced with the 2017 restructuring.

The project partially improved the mobility of public transport users in the Vila Sonia – Luz Corridor and is
expected to substantially improve it once the Vila Sonia station is in operation. “Travel time between pairs of
stations of Line 4: Vila Sonia - Luz (minutes, at peak hour)” dropped significantly from 55 minutes to 32
minutes in 2019 and 2020. It is, however, short of the original target of 20 minutes because passengers had
to get off at the previous Sao Paulo Morumbi station and take a bus to Vila Sonia. According to the ICR, the
target is expected to be fully achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia station.

The mobility in the corridor was improved because of the bus-train integration mentioned under objective 3
(original targets), the integration between metro stations, and the service quality improvements mentioned
under objective 1 (original targets).

By project end, passenger could not board or alight at the Vila Sonia station and the original target of 47
million “total annual passenger boarding in Vila Sonia (both directions, in millions)” was not achieved. For
the Sao Paulo Morumbi station, in 2019 the total annual passenger boardings was 16.8 million for one
direction. Assuming that the number of boardings and alightings are the same, this corresponds
to 33.6 million boardings in both directions. In 2020, it dropped to 19.2 million. Between May and September
2021, the passenger boardings in this station have constantly increased but in September 2021 they were still
only 67 percent of the 2019 average (data on boardings for the Sao Paulo Morumbi station provided by the
Bank task team). According to the Bank task team, the Vila Sonia station ridership is expected to be
higher than the one of Sao Paulo Morumbi because Vila Sonia is the final station and a significant share of
the ridership would come from travelers transferring from buses, traveling from the peripheries of
the metropolitan area. The ICR points out that the project is likely to achieve the revised target of 26.5 million
annual passenger boardings in Vila Sônia once the station is inaugurated and the impact of the COVID-19

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



pandemic subsidies, however, the original 47 million is not expected to be achieved given the updated
demand model estimations (ICR para 36).

The mobility in the corridor improved in a largely cost-efficient way. The private operator of Line 4 maintained
a healthy working ratio below 0.75 in 2018 and 2019 (ICR para 37). The 2020 ratio is not available, but for the
same reasons as pointed out for the original objective 1, it is unlikely that it went up substantially due to
COVID-19. As seen in section 5, the ex-post ERR of Line 4 was significantly higher than the one for
Line 5 and higher than the 2017 ex-ante estimate for Line 4, despite the project delays, changes in cost, and
the COVID-19 pandemic impact on passenger demand. The project had no indicator to measure cost-
efficiency of Line 4.

he project improved mobility of public transport users in the Vila Sonia – Luz Corridor in an environmentally
friendly way, but the environmental benefits are negatively impacted by COVID at least in the short
run. Without taking COVID into account, in Line 4 Phase 2, gross GHG emission savings were estimated as
2,880,000 tCO2eq, which are valued US$74.6 million over 50 years (ICR para 55). Similarly, to what
is pointed out for the original objective 1 above, the current GHG emission reductions from Line 4 are lower
than they could have been because of the COVID pandemic, but the project had no GHG emission target.

In sum, the project partially improved the mobility for public transport users in the Vila Sonia-Luz (Line 4)
corridor. With the opening of the Vila Sonia station, planned for mid-December
2021, important additional mobility improvements are likely to be realized. The project is however not
expected to benefit the amount of passengers originally forecasted at this station because, based on more
recent demand data for the metropolitan area, the original target was unrealistic. The cost-efficiency of Line 4
was largely achieved despite the impact of COVID-19 on ridership. The latter did
negatively affect the environmental benefits of Line 4 by project end. Therefore, the achievement of this
objective is rated modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve the mobility of public transport users in the Vila Sônia-Luz (Line 4) corridor in a cost-efficient and
environmentally-friendly manner.

Revised Rationale
The theory of change and key assumptions remained unchanged. One outcome target was revised during
2019 restructuring.

Outputs

Same as those reported under original objective 2.

Outcomes


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



This section assesses the outcomes of mobility improvements for public transport users, cost-efficiency of
mobility, and the environmental friendliness of mobility separately based on the revised outcome target set
at the 2019 restructuring.

The project partially improved the mobility of public transport users in the Vila Sonia – Luz Corridor. The travel
time target was not revised. Therefore, as mentioned under objective 2 (original targets) above, while this
target was only partially achieved by project end, it is likely to be achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia
station envisaged for mid-December 2021. The target for the “annual total annual passenger boarding in Vila
Sonia (both directions, in millions)” was reduced from 47 million to 26.5 million in 2019 and, as
mentioned above, is likely to be achieved once the station is inaugurated and the negative impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on ridership subsidies.

There were not indicators to measure the cost efficiency and environmental friendliness of improved mobility
and what is mentioned under objective 2 (original targets) applies.

In sum, the project partially improved the mobility for public transport users in the Vila Sonia-Luz (Line 4)
corridor. With the opening of the Vila Sonia station, planned for mid-December 2021, important
additional mobility improvements are likely to be realized. This opening and the easing of the COVID-
19 pandemic is also expected to attract a sufficiently large number of passengers, to meet
the revised boarding target for this station. The cost-efficiency of Line 4 was largely achieved despite the
impact of COVID-19 on ridership. The latter did negatively affect the environmental benefits of Line 4 by
project end. Therefore, overall, the achievement of this objective is
rated substantial with minor shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Not Applicable.

Rationale
Not Applicable.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To facilitate the integration between metro and bus at the metro stations.

Revised Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



Objective 3 was introduced under the 2017 restructuring.

The theory of change indicates that the project’s activities of constructing of metro stations (discussed under
the first objective) with bus terminals at these stations, which enable to connect with multiple bus lines, would
have as output the necessary facilities to physically connect between the metro and buses. In addition, (i)
technical assistance activities to reorganize the bus network in the influence area of Lines 4 and 5 to reduce
bus services and feed passengers into Metro stations and to revise the fare level to optimize ridership and
enhance affordability, and (ii) the policy dialogue with the Borrower would lead as outputs to the
reorganization of the bus network and the adoption of a new fare structure conducive to integration. In turn,
these outputs were expected to result in the outcome of facilitating the integration between the Metro and
buses at the metro stations. In the long run, this result was expected to attract more public transport users,
hence reduce GHG emissions, improve air quality, and promote social equity by increasing affordable access
to economic opportunities and urban amenities for low-income residents.  The key assumption was that
the State and the Municipality of São Paulo would coordinate their transport policies to restructure the bus
network and optimize the integrated fare level to facilitate metro-bus integration.

Outputs 

On Line 5, the project financed the construction of a bus terminal next to the Santa Cruz metro station. On
Line 4, bus terminals were constructed next to the São Paulo-Morumbi, Butanta, and Pinheiros stations. Once
the Vila Sonia station becomes operational, it will have a major bus terminal connecting multiple bus lines
(ICR para 40). According to the Bank project team, these bus terminals allow for the seamless transfers of
passengers between buses and Lines 4 and 5. The team also pointed out to IEG that these
terminals are large. For example, the bus terminal at Pinheiros station serves 41 bus lines, at Morumbi station
it serves 21 bus lines, and at Butanta station it serves 22 bus lines. 

The project supported the development of a public transport fare model for the SPMR. The model enables
fare simulations based on passenger trips and costs and revenue distribution by mode and line. The fare
simulation model was used to simulate the optimum integrated fare levels to reach the desired ridership and
affordability. 

According to the Bank project team, the project financed the strategic transport plan, which, among others,
included transport modeling to support the reorganization and rationalization of the bus routes. This
activity built on the initial bus network restructuring plan and followed the principles of bus-rail integration. 

The Bank project team also informed IEG that the World Bank through the fare simulation model, continued
the policy dialogue with the key stakeholders regarding the impact of fare policies to facilitate both the
adoption of an optimum integrated fare level and the restructuring of the bus network to avoid overlaps with
metro services and support integration. 

Outcomes

The physical integration of the Metro stations and the bus system was substantially achieved. At project
closing, all Line 5 stations were integrated with buses as originally targeted, and 91 percent of Line 4 stations
were integrated with buses against the original target of 100 percent. The ICR notes that this target would be
achieved once the Vila Sonia station opens in December 2021. However, the achievement is not fully



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



attributable to the project because not all metro stations have bus terminals, and as explained by the Bank
project team to IEG, the bus stops close to the metro stations existed already before the project.

Despite the fact that at appraisal (i) the State and the Municipality of São Paulo had started to coordinate their
transport policies and planned to restructure the bus network to integrate the municipal buses with the
suburban rail and metro services (PAD page 26) and (ii) the technical assistance and policy dialogue during
project implementation, the State and the Municipality of São Paulo did not restructure the bus network and
adopt a new optimized, integrated fare structure. Both are difficult decisions; the first, because of the strong
opposition of bus operators and the social implications on them since many drivers, fare collectors, and other
related workers would lose their jobs, and the second, because of the important budget implications for both
the State and the Municipality of São Paulo.

Nevertheless, the number of passengers on Line 5 that transferred from buses increased from 32.2 million
per year in 2016 to 50.0 million per year in 2019, a 55 percent increase (no targets were set). At the end-of-
line station, Capao Redondo, transfers from buses increased from 16.0 million to 21.6 million between 2016
and 2019, representing 75 and 76 percent of all trips (ICR para 42). The ICR does not mention if and how the
COVID-19 pandemic impacted transfers from buses to the metro line. The project did not have a target that
measured the passenger that integrate.

The number of buses running in the corridor of Line 5, which was one of the outcome indicators to measure
integration, did fall considerably. In 2020, the total number of buses was 412, achieving the original target of
under 652 (the baseline was 955). The number of buses in 2019 (pre-COVID) was 682, slightly higher than
the original target of 652. The full achievement of the target in 2020 is not attributable to the project
interventions but due to travel restrictions under COVID-19.

The frequency of buses operating in the corridor of Line 5 during peak hour, however, did not go down as
expected. In 2020, the frequency of buses during peak hour was 459 (488 pre-COVID), 44 percent higher
than the original target of below 258 and a baseline of 411. In the pre-COVID period it was 47 percent higher.

Normally, if the number of buses goes down, the frequency is also expected to decrease. An increase in
frequency with significantly lower buses could mean that buses are covering lower distances, hence
instead of providing point to point connections, they actually do serve the metro lines (however, this is
an assumption that would have to be confirmed).

In sum, the physical integration of the metro and the bus system was largely achieved and is likely to be
achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia station. The planned bus route restructuring did not materialize,
but the targeted reduction in the number of buses in the Line 5 corridor was nearly achieved even before the
COVID-19 pandemic. The bus frequency during peak hour did not go down. The planned fare optimization to
support integration did also not materialize. Nevertheless, a significant number of bus users did integrate
with the metro. Overall, the rating of this objective is modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 29
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)




                            Revised Objective
                            To facilitate the integration between metro and bus at the metro stations.

                            Revised Rationale
                            The theory of change and key assumption remained unchanged. Two outcome targets were revised during
                            2019 restructuring.

                            Outputs

                            Same as those reported under the original objective 3.

                            Outcomes

                            As mentioned under objective 3 (original targets) above, the physical integration of the metro stations with the
                            bus system was substantially achieved and is likely to be fully achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia
                            station in December 2021. Even if the State and the Municipality of São Paulo did not restructure the bus
                            network and adopt a new optimized, integrated fare structure to support integration, the number of
                            passengers on Line 5 that transferred from buses increased substantially.

                            With the 2019 restructuring, the target for the number of buses in the corridor of Line 5 was
                            increased significantly 1031 to reflect that the bus network was not restructured. With 682 buses in 2019 and
                            412 buses in 2020, this target was largely exceeded even before the COVID-19 pandemic.

                            The same happened to the target for the frequency of buses operating in the corridor of Line 5 during peak
                            hour, which was increased from 258 to 438. The revised target was nearly achieved in 2020, when the
                            number of buses was 459 (5 percent short of the revised target). Before COVID-19, the number of buses
                            was 488, about 10 percent short of the revised target.

                            In sum, the physical integration of the metro and the bus system was largely achieved and is likely to be
                            achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia station. The planned bus route restructuring did not materialize,
                            but the targeted reduction in the number of buses in the Line 5 corridor was exceeded even before the
                            COVID-19 pandemic. The bus frequency during peak hour nearly reached the revised target in 2020,
                            but was about 10 percent short in 2019. The planned fare optimization to support integration did also not
                            materialize. Nevertheless, a significant number of bus users did integrate with the metro. Overall, the rating of
                            this objective is substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            PDO 1. The project improved mobility for public transport users in the influence area of Line 5 with minor
                            shortcoming, and the impact of COVID-19 on ridership reduced the benefits of the improved mobility for

                                                                                                                              Page 17 of 29
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



        users, the environmental benefits, and the cost-efficiency of the new mobility solution. The efficacy is
        rated substantial, with moderate shortcomings

        PDO 2. Not applicable.

        PDO 3. Not applicable.

        The overall efficacy is rated substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



        Overall Efficacy Rating
        Substantial

OBJR1_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
        PDO 1. The project improved mobility for public transport users in the influence area of Line 5. However, the
        impact of COVID-19 on ridership reduced the benefits of the improved mobility for users, the environmental
        benefits, and the cost-efficiency of the new mobility solution. The achievement of this objective is
        rated substantial, with minor shortcomings.

        PDO 2. The project partially improved the mobility for public transport users in the Vila Sonia-Luz (Line 4)
        corridor. With the opening of the Vila Sonia station, planned for mid-December
        2021, important additional mobility improvements are likely to be realized. The project is however not
        expected to benefit the amount of passengers originally forecasted at this station because, based on more
        recent demand data for the metropolitan area, the original target was unrealistic. The cost-efficiency of Line 4
        was largely achieved despite the impact of COVID-19 on ridership. The latter did
        negatively affect the environmental benefits of Line 4 by project end. Therefore, the achievement of this
        objective is rated modest.

        PDO 3. The physical integration of the metro and the bus system was largely achieved and is likely to be
        achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia station. The planned bus route restructuring did not materialize,
        but the targeted reduction in the number of buses in the Line 5 corridor was nearly achieved even before the
        COVID-19 pandemic. The bus frequency during peak hour did not go down. The planned fare optimization to
        support integration did also not materialize. Nevertheless, a significant number of bus users did integrate
        with the metro. The achievement of this objective is modest.

        With PDO 1 rated substantial, with minor shortcomings, PDO 2 and 3 rated modest, the overall efficacy rating
        is modest.



        Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
        Modest                                                    Low achievement
OBJR2_TBL




        OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2

                                                                                                           Page 18 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
  PDO1. The project improved mobility for public transport users in the influence area of Line 5. However, the
  impact of COVID-19 on ridership significantly reduced the benefits of the improved mobility for users. COVID-
  19 also negatively affected the environmental benefits and the cost-efficiency of the new mobility solution.
  The achievement of this objective is rated substantial, moderate shortcomings.

  PDO 2. The project partially improved the mobility for public transport users in the Vila Sonia-Luz (Line 4)
  corridor. With the opening of the Vila Sonia station, planned for mid-December 2021, important
  additional mobility improvements are likely to be realized. This opening and the easing of the COVID-
  19 pandemic is also expected to attract a sufficiently large number of passengers, to meet
  the revised boarding target for this station. The cost-efficiency of Line 4 was largely achieved despite the
  impact of COVID-19 on ridership. The latter did negatively affect the environmental benefits of Line 4 by
  project end. Therefore, the achievement of this objective is rated substantial with minor shortcomings.

  PDO 3. The physical integration of the metro and the bus system was largely achieved and is likely to be
  achieved with the opening of the Vila Sonia station. The planned bus route restructuring did not materialize,
  but the targeted reduction in the number of buses in the Line 5 corridor was exceeded even before the
  COVID-19 pandemic. The bus frequency during peak hour nearly reached the revised target in 2020,
  but was about 10 percent short in 2019. The planned fare optimization to support integration did also not
  materialize. Nevertheless, a significant number of bus users did integrate with the metro. The rating of this
  objective is substantial, with moderate shortcomings.

  The achievement of all three objectives is substantial, with moderate shortcoming. The overall efficacy is
  substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

At appraisal, the project carried out a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) for Line 5. The analysis used a 30-year
time horizon and a 10 percent discount rate. The benefits were derived from (i) time savings for users of all
public transport modes, (ii) operating cost savings for all modes, (iii) road maintenance cost savings, (iv)
accident savings, and (v) air pollution savings. Costs are represented by (a) investment costs for the acquisition
of civil works, expropriation, trains and signaling systems and (b) operating costs including personnel,
consumption and maintenance of Metro infrastructure, fleet and systems. The cost-benefit analysis resulted in
an Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of 16.7 percent a net present value (NPV) of US$1,208 million (PAD Annex
9).

The ex-post ERR for Line 5 was 4.5 percent and the NPV was US$409 million, based on the discount rate of 4
percent and a time horizon of 50 years. The ICR notes that the use of a lower discount rate is aligned with 2016
World Bank guidance “Discounting costs and benefits in economic analysis of World Bank Projects”. The

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



analysis used the same benefits as at appraisal except for the updated demand figures based on the 2017 origin
and destination data. The analysis also used the actual cost data. Although justified for this type of project, the
use of a lower discount rate and a longer evaluation period compared to the appraisal CBA increases the
economic feasibility of the project and makes the ex-ante and ex-post CBA results not comparable. Therefore,
the ICR (para 44) recalculated the appraisal EER based on the updated mode shift estimates and using a 4
percent discount rate. This resulted in a 10.1 percent ERR at appraisal. The ICR does not report the NPV.

The lower ex-post ERR compared to the ex-ante analysis for Line 5 was due to (a) cost overruns; (b) use of
updated demand data, which showed a lower mode shift from bus and car; (c) project implementation delays;
(d) the gradual rise in ridership after station openings instead at the full demand being realized all at once; and
(e) the impact of COVID-19.

A CBA was conducted at appraisal for the investments for Phase 2 of Metro Line 4. The estimated ERR at
appraisal was 7.6 percent, with an NPV of US$46 million. The CBA was updated in 2016; it used the updated
2007 origin and destination survey data and took into account the impact of the opening of Metro Line 5 on the
demand of the Line 4 stations. The estimated ERR was 9.4 percent (with a discount rate of 6 percent), and the
NPV was estimated at US$439 million (ICR Annex 4 para 110). The CBA was once more update in 2017,
considering sunk costs and the opening of an additional station. The analysis again used a discount rate of 6
percent and resulted in an ERR of 8.7 percent and a NPV of US$141 million (ICR, para 110). The ICR does not
mention that time horizon used for these evaluations.

The ex-post CBA for Line 4 used the same methodology and assumptions as the analysis for Line 5 (including
the discount rate and evaluation horizon) and the updated demand and cost data. It resulted in an ERR of 10.2
percent and a NPV of US$908 million. The ICR, para 112 notes that ex-post ERR is slightly higher than the ERR
calculated at appraisal due to the use of a lower discount rate and a longer evaluation horizon. The project’s
sensitivity analysis showed that using a 6 percent discount rate (the same as at appraisal), the project still has a
positive NPV of US$363 million (the ERR remains the same). 

Administrative Efficiency

Line 5 experienced cost overruns of 34 percent (actual cost US$3.77 billion compared to US$2.81 billion
estimated at appraisal) and delays of about 5 years (see section 2). The cost overruns were in the civil works
category, which was 93 percent above the appraisal estimate after considering contingencies. There were
substantial cost savings of 43 percent in both systems and in rolling stock (ICR para 46).

Line 4 Phase 2 incurred only minor cost overruns of 7 percent, but the project was executed over a much longer
time frame compared to the expectations at appraisal (Line 4 was expected to be completed in 2012).

Given the substantial administrative inefficiency in project implementation, and the significantly lower ERR than
estimated at appraisal for Line 5 (even if the ERR for Line 4 improved compared to the ex-ante estimate), the
project’s efficiency is rated modest.

Note: The ERR for this project is only available for Lines 4 and 5 separately. Therefore, the information in the
ERR table below only refers to Line 5.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                       Page 20 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        80.00
Appraisal                                                    16.70
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        94.00
ICR Estimate                                                 10.10
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Outcome under original objective and targets. With a substantial relevance of objectives and efficacy (with
moderate shortcomings) and modest efficiency, the overall outcome under the original objective and outcome
targets is rated Moderately Satisfactory (4).

Outcome under 2017 revised objectives and targets. With substantial relevance of objectives and
modest efficacy and efficiency, the overall outcome under the revised objectives and targets is
rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (3). 

Outcome under 2019 revised targets. With substantial relevance of objectives
and efficacy and modest efficiency, the overall rating is Moderately Satisfactory (4).

Overall outcome. The disbursement percentage at the restructuring in 2017 and 2019 were 52
percent, 38 percent and 10 percent out of a total financing of US$650.4 million. The overall outcome rating
is moderately satisfactory, the weighted value is 3.6 (0.52*4+.0.38*3+ 0.1*4=3.6) (rounded up to 4).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Travel Demand Risk. The public transport demand might not recover back fully after COVID. Some
travelers may shift to cars or motorcycles, which may lead to increased motorization. Some commuting and
shopping trips will likely be altogether forgone, especially for travelers that will be able to work remotely after
the pandemic and for shopping trips replaced by delivery options.

In addition, the ICR mentions (para 68) that affordability for informal workers could also negatively affect the
demand for metro services. Since bus-bus transfers are free of charge whereas bus-metro transfers have to


                                                                                                        Page 21 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



be paid for (SPMR requires employers to pay for transport costs of their employees, but this policy does not
cover informal workers) and the metro corridors continue to be well served by buses, especially along the
Santo Amaro Corridor (the area of influence of Line 5 includes four low-income municipalities and highest
proportion of informal jobs), affordability issues may discourage the integration between buses and the metro
and reduce the metro demand.

Financial Risk. The ICR mentions (para 93) that the private operators of Lines 4 and 5 had strong balance
sheets and had achieved a healthy financial performance prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. The concession
contract was designed with a minimum demand guarantee, i.e., if ridership falls below a minimum threshold
the government will compensate the private operators. Therefore, the financial risk for operators in the short
run is low. In the long run, if the travel demand does not significantly pick up after the pandemic, there is a
significant financial risk both for the private operators and the Borrower.

Operations and Maintenance (O&M) Risk. The O&M risk is low. ViaMobilidade is the operator of Line 5
and has a 20-year concession for the operations and maintenance since 2018. ViaQuatro is the operator for
Line 4, with a concession contract of 30 years awarded in 2010 that also includes maintenance.

Government Ownership/Commitment Risk. This risk is low because in March 2021 the SSP announced a
project to further expand Line 5 with additional track of 4.33 km.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design included lessons from previous World Bank financed rail projects in São Paulo and
  other urban transport projects. This includes: (i) strengthening of sector policy to minimize distortions
  resulting from inefficient physical and financial coordination between modes and to promote
  multimodal integration; (ii) procurement of civil works should be relatively advanced to minimize delays;
  (iii) availability of counterpart funds and fiscal space for the project must be assured to avoid costly
  construction delays; and (iv) careful scrutiny of demand forecasts. The PAD notes (para 26) that the
  recommendations from the Independent Evaluation Group "A Decade of Action in Transport: An
  Evaluation of World Bank Assistance to the Transport Sector, 1995-2005" were also considered in terms
  of building up the sector’s monitoring and evaluation efforts and aligning them with the new World Bank
  transport strategy, which emphasized urban transport and multimodal transport.

  The environmental and social aspects of project preparation were satisfactory. The financial management
  arrangements were also satisfactory. Metro had extensive experience with the World Bank’s fiduciary
  requirements under the Phase 1 of Metro Line 4 Project and the São Paulo Trains and Signaling
  Project. However, the project had shortcomings in its quality of entry:

         Risk mitigation strategies were not sufficient to avoid three substantial risks that materialized
          during implementation: (i) delays in non-World Bank financed components, such as civil works
          which were stalled for two years at the beginning of the project, (ii) civil works costs were higher
          than those confirmed at appraisal, and (iii) lower than expected demand due to issues of
          competition and affordability (ICR para 60).


                                                                                                      Page 22 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



        The design of the project’s results framework, namely the selection of outcome indicators, had
         important shortcomings (see section 9a below).

  Therefore, the quality at entry quality at entry was moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank project team was proactive in financing the additional civil works for Line 4, utilizing US$210
 million from loan savings from this project. In 2016, the Borrower had requested an Additional Financing for
 Line 4 additional civil works. This was not approved due to the fiscal constraints and the political situation in
 Brazil.

 At least two supervision missions were carried out per year. Safeguards supervision and the Bank's
 fiduciary support were satisfactory. The ICR indicates (para 89) that the technical capacity of the World
 Bank team was adequate to sustain a dialog with the client, as well as bringing insights from international
 experience. Given the very high capacity of the staff of São Paulo Metro, the World Bank also helped
 create opportunities for them to provide technical support to peers in Latin America. The World Bank
 supported the São Paulo Metro in the development of a new Origin-Destination survey and the
 development of an innovative application to collect data.  

 As for Phase 1 of Line 4, the São Paulo Metro and the World Bank agreed to hire a project management
 oversight consultant Service (PMOC) to provide an independent view of the project progress and
 evaluate risks and their mitigation, which could inform the President of Metro and the Secretary of
 Transport in critical decisions. The ICR does not mention if the PMOC was hired for Line 5 too.

 One shortcoming of supervision was that the Bank team did not adequately restructure the results
 framework, including “lowering the bar” for several outcome targets close to project end at least
 partially to match achievements on the ground.

 Overall, the quality of supervision was satisfactory. 



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


                                                                                                      Page 23 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



a. M&E Design
 The project included the following original outcome indicators (a) travel time plus waiting time between 2
 pairs of stations (to measure mobility); (b) percentage of new stations integrated with bus lines (integration
 related objective); (c) number of passengers boarding in new stations; (d) number of low-income (less than
 4 minimum salaries) riding on Line 5; (e) number of bus-km in the corridor; and (f) Metro and Line 5
 working ratio.

 These indicators, together with the additional evidence provided in the ICR, were largely sufficient to
 measure the achievement of the objectives. In terms of M&E design shortcomings, the project did not
 define the key terminology, such as cost-efficiency, environmental friendliness, and integration. Regarding
 the outcome indicators, although it is important to monitor who and how many people use a new mass
 transport system, the “number of passengers” is not necessarily the best indicator to
 measure improved mobility because passenger numbers can go up or down for reasons unrelated to the
 quality of mobility (in this project because of COVID-19). In addition, the project lacked indicators to
 measure the environmental friendliness of mobility for both Lines and the cost-efficiency of the mobility for
 Line 4. The project could have included indicators to measure GHG reduction or improvements in
 air quality and affordability. It could also have measured the number of metro services in the corridors or
 the average percentage of income spent by metro users for commuting (i.e. service frequency and
 affordability as aspects of improved mobility). Finally, the project should have had an indicator to measure
 the number of people integrating from buses in key stations.

 Baselines were provided and target values set at appraisal.  However, some of the targets set at appraisal
 or with the restructurings were not fully adequate and had to be revised (see below under M&E
 Implementation).

 According to the PAD (page 32), the Project Management Unit was responsible for monitoring the outcome
 indicators. The data collection was to be done by the operating divisions of each of the transport agencies
 involved in the project and was to be verified by the project management consultants. 



b. M&E Implementation
  During implementation, some targets for outcome indicators were revised in the 2017 and 2019
  restructurings mainly because new travel data for the metropolitan area became available and partially
  also to match achievements on the ground. However, these revisions did not correct some of the
  shortcomings mentioned in the M&E Design section.

  The data was collected, analyzed and reported semi-annually by the Project Management Unit. The
  monitoring of indicators was carried out in a timely manner (ICR para 72).

  The project not only monitored the indicators but other aspects, such as accessibility. It also collected
  additional data for the ICR, such as on fare integration and proximity to bus stops around the stations
  (ICR, para 69). The project also carried out an assessment of the new metro lines on climate change and
  other studies and technical assistance activities that included the collection and processing of mobility
  data for the Sao Paulo metropolitan area.

  The ICR indicates that an impact evaluation on living and travel conditions was being conducted in the
  areas of influence of Line 5 with project funds. The baseline data was collected in 2017 and

                                                                                                    Page 24 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



  the endline will be collected post COVID-19 once mobility patterns recover since survey fieldwork
  is temporarily suspended. The World Bank project team explained that uncertainty has prevented the
  client from providing a timeline for completion.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 73) that the M&E was utilized to monitor project performance. However,
  the project’s results framework did not provide sufficient details to become a usable tool for project
  redirection and resource allocation. However, the project used data and information produced under the
  project for decision making on mobility in the metropolitan area. Once the impact evaluation of Line 5 is
  completed, the results will also be used to inform policymaking and future investment decisions.

  Although the design of the project’s results framework had important shortcomings, the project dedicated
  significant efforts to data collection, processing, planning, and monitoring. Therefore, on balance, the
  quality of M&E is rated substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an Environmental Category "A" and four safeguards policies were triggered:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The safeguards category was not changed at
   restructuring.

   The ICR notes (para 75) that all safeguards instruments were prepared according to World Bank guidelines,
   including Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).

   The ICR reports (para 75) that the compliance with the environmental safeguards was rated between
   moderately satisfactory and satisfactory, with the latter rating prevailing over the last 5 years. The
   environmental management of civil works for both Lines 4 and 5 did not experience any major negative
   impacts. The most critical environmental aspects during the project were: (i) on Line 5, the stabilization of
   the slope in Patio Guido Caloi, and (ii) on Line 4, the excavation of the tunnel under the Itarare stream and
   the management of contaminated areas. The Bank project team informed IEG (email dated August 17,
   2021) that the processes for the remediation of the contaminated area were completed and "the
   Rehabilitation Terms for the contaminated areas are being issued".

   Regarding the Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) management of workers and communities, the Bank
   project team explained (email dated August 17, 2021) that equipment such as ambulances able to enter
   tunnels, was procured, to respond to possible emergencies. Also, at construction sites measures were put
   in place for emergency evacuation.



                                                                                                  Page 25 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



  The compliance with the "Pest Management" safeguards policy is not discussed in the ICR. The
  project team confirmed (email dated August 17, 2021) that the project complied with the Pest Management
  Safeguard policy.

  According to the operations portal, the compliance with Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards
  Policy was satisfactory. The construction of Line 5 resulted in land acquisition, which affected 355
  buildings (239 housing units and 116 commercial units). The ICR reports (para 77) that most of the project-
  affected people received cash compensation. However, there were 48 vulnerable families which received
  special attention and were given options to: (a) choose between cash compensation, or (b) a voucher for
  housing purchase or a new housing unit in a residential complex built by the State Company of Urban
  Development and Housing. Owners of commercial locations received cash compensation and got an option
  to provide evidence and request compensation for “foregone profits”. The project team confirmed (email
  dated August 17, 2021) that the project complied with the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard policy
  for Line 4.

  The compliance with the "Physical Cultural Resources" safeguards policy is not discussed in the
  ICR. According to the project team (email dated August 17, 2021) "the project complied with the Physical
  Cultural Resources Safeguard policy".




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). There were no FM issues (ICR para 79). The Project Management Unit
  (PMU) was well staffed with skilled and experienced financial management staff. Fiduciary compliance was
  satisfactory throughout the project, except in 2010 (the first year of implementation), when FM was rated
  moderately satisfactory. This was due to some minor issues on financial reports and external audits. These
  were addressed adequately. The project team clarified that at project start, IFRs would be automatically
  generated from the São Paulo Metro Information Technology (IT) system. However, due to the complexity
  of the IT system, the reports were created manually in excel. The FM Specialist reviewed each report to
  ensure that the IFRs accurately reflected the Project’s total expenditures.

  All financial audit reports were received on time. The auditors expressed unqualified opinions on the
  Project’s financial statements and the reports were considered acceptable by the World Bank.

  Procurement. The ICR reports (para 79) no procurement issues. The Project Management Unit was well
  staffed with skilled and experienced procurement staff. In the beginning of the project, there were
  significant delays due to contractual and procurement-related impasses. Delays in the procurement of civil
  works were caused by the anti-corruption investigation Lava-Jato which involved large Brazilian
  infrastructure contractors, who were also part of the project. These allegations were not related to this
  project. The project team clarified that although only civil works contracts were suspended, the uncertainty
  created by this situation prevented other World Bank-financed contracts (for rolling stock and systems)
  from progressing satisfactorily, causing delays in the procurement process. As a result, there was limited
  progress on project execution between 2010 and 2012. Thereafter, the procurement performance
  improved.




                                                                                                  Page 26 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  Due to moderate shortcomings
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  in quality at entry.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    High


12. Lessons

Following lessons are adapted from the ICR:

For complex International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) contracts, failure to put
in place a conflict resolution mechanism early might cause problem and delays in contract
implementation. São Paulo Metro hired specialists to support arbitration processes to enhance the
agency’s capacity to negotiate with the contractor after the termination of the first contract for Line 4
Phase 2 civil works due to the non-performance of the contractor. São Paulo Metro also had
difficulties to find a de facto independent engineer with knowledge of (FIDIC) contracts. This caused
problems and delays. By providing FIDIC training to experienced project supervision professionals
and putting the conflict resolution mechanism in place immediately after contract effectiveness the
project could have to speeded up conflict resolution and reduced the need for cases being taken to
arbitration.

It is important to include contractual clauses to deal with possible risks of scheduling
mismatch between different components of the project. Managing interfaces between civil
works, equipment, and systems is one of the most complex parts in large infrastructure
undertakings. Each of these elements has a different type of provider, procurement and
implementation timing, and risks associated. The project experience showed that the bidding
process for the acquisition of the rolling stock and systems was conducted at about the same time
as the bidding process for the civil works. However, significant delays in the civil works led to a
situation in which trains were completed and delivered, but the storage areas planned were not
ready because the project’s train yard was not yet completed. The best course of action is to include
clauses under the existing contracts to determine alternative solutions to mitigate the risk of
mismatch between schedules.




                                                                                                     Page 27 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



All relevant data from national and international sources needs to be reviewed for estimating
costs at appraisal to avoid that these are over- or underestimated. The project succeeded at
significantly reducing the cost of the acquisition of rolling stock and systems, generating savings of
about US$210 million, given that the winning offer was significantly below the anticipated cost.
During appraisal, Metro had considered a conservative cost estimation for the acquisition of the 26
trains, based on prior bidding processes in Brazil that did not have the participation of new market
players from Korea and China. Thus, it is important that cost estimates gather all the relevant data
and evidence from recent national and international experience.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Assessment is recommended mainly to assess how metro and bus integration happened and what the broader
  project impacts are given the delay in the completion of the impact assessment due to COVID-19.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This is a very well-written and candid ICR, which provides a detailed overview of this complex project in line
with the OPCS guidelines. The project context and background are clearly presented with very useful graphs of
the metro system. The project description and the many changes introduced by various restructurings are
nicely and clearly laid out, also with the support of tables or graphs. The ICR provides a good discussion on the
indicator targets changes, explaining which of them were reduced and increased in ambition and the reasons
for such changes. This focus on clarity and detail, however, made the ICR significant longer than the standard
15 pages. Cutting back on some narrative especially in the context and background section would not have
jeopardized the ICR’s clarity.

The ICR strongly focuses on results, and the quality of evidence is mostly excellent. For example, metro
passenger numbers are present through graphs as trends over time, and not just as the results by project end.
The ICR also uses evidence from other sources not linked to indicators to support the project’s achievement.
The quality of analysis is good, and the narrative and available evidence supports the ratings. The ICR contains
an excellent discussion of the COVID-19 impact on project outcomes. The ICR also includes a detailed, well-
grounded, and candid discussion of the shortcomings in the results framework. The ICR’s lessons are clear,
useful, and based on evidence.

However, the ICR could have discussed the theory of change for the new objective 2 “to facilitate the
integration between metro and bus at the metro stations” in more detail and provide a more comprehensive
picture of the respective achievements.




                                                                                                   Page 28 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 (P116170)



On balance, given the great complexity of this project, the excellent quality of this ICR outweigh its
shortcomings. Therefore, overall, the quality of the ICR is rated high.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                     Page 29 of 29
