     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022629

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P095003                                    NG-RAMP PHASE 2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51540                                  31-Dec-2018                                         160,023,609.42

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2012                                31-Dec-2020

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            170,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             170,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         160,023,609.42                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan          Elisabeth Goller             Victoria Alexeeva               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.5) dated September 9,
   2013, the project objective is “to improve transport conditions and bring sustained access to rural population,
   through rehabilitating and maintaining key rural transport infrastructure in a sustainable manner in the
   participating states.” The project objective statement in the project appraisal document (p.10) is similar,
   except for a minor difference that reads as “selected Nigerian states” instead of “the participating states.”



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



   The project was implemented in four states—Adamawa, Enugu, Niger, and Osun—between 2013 and 2020.
   These four states constituted the tier-1 states, the project was to be scaled up to additional states that would
   be the tier-2 states (which did not happen).

   In this review, the project objective will be parsed as follows:

        1. To improve transport conditions in the participating states; and
        2. To bring sustained access to the rural population in the participating states.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the Financing Agreement (p.5), the project consisted of three components:

   A. Upgrading and Rehabilitation of Rural Transport Infrastructure. (Appraisal cost: US$162.70 million;
   actual cost: US$193.69 million)

   This component included the following activities to be implemented in the states of Adamawa, Enugu, Niger,
   and Osun: (i) Upgrading and rehabilitation of 1,450 kilometers (km) of rural and state roads and carrying out
   related design studies and supervision activities; and (ii) upgrading and rehabilitation of 65 river crossings
   and carrying out related design studies and supervision activities. An approximate 800 km of rural roads
   were already identified during project preparation that were to be implemented in the first stage. The
   remaining 650 km were to be identified during project implementation and implemented as the second
   stage.

   B. Community-based Road Maintenance and Annual Mechanized Maintenance. (Appraisal cost:
   US38.40 million; actual cost: US$27.04 million)

   This component was to support the maintenance of the roads upgraded or rehabilitated under Component 1
   and other pilot roads to build up the maintenance system while the project roads are being improved.
   Communities living alongside the roads were to perform routine maintenance, and contractors to be hired
   were to perform annual mechanized maintenance at the end of the rainy season. The latter could also be
   performed through force account but had to be covered by counterpart funds only.

   C. Project Management and Strengthening of State and Federal Road Sector Institutional, Policy and
   Regulatory Framework. (Appraisal cost: US$11.60 million; actual cost: US$17.00 million)

   This component consisted of two sub-components. Under the first sub-component, the project was to
   support activities at the state level, and under the second sub-component at the national level.

        a. This component was to support the strengthening of institutional capacity for project implementation
          and roads management and maintenance at the state level through the following activities: (i)

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



         preparation of road prioritization studies and geographic information system-based (GIS-based) road
         inventories; (ii) strengthening of road assets management; (iii) development of road transport
         regulations, establishment of road data management systems, and preparation of road transport
         strategies; (iv) reform of state road sector institutions; (v) technical assistance on safeguards
         enforcement, fiduciary management, governance and accountability, and infrastructure planning; (vi)
         promotion of stakeholders and civil society participation; and (vii) project implementation support at
         the state level.
      b. Specific activities were to be supported under this component at the national level to assist the
         Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD) and other relevant federal
         institutions in project management and federal road policy development, such as the following: (i)
         day-to-day project administration, financial management, procurement, and monitoring and
         evaluation of project activities at the federal level; (ii) monitoring the performance of non-participating
         states on governance indicators and designing project scale-up activities; (iii) dissemination of
         lessons learnt and best practices; (iv) carrying out of project baselines and impact evaluation
         surveys; and (v) development of federal policies for the improvement of rural road transport and its
         articulation within existing federal transport policies and broader agendas. FMARD was responsible
         for this project at the national level.

  Revised Components

  There were no changes to the components during project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The total project cost was originally estimated at US$242.71 million, including US$3.00
  million for refinancing of project preparation advance and US$27.00 million for price and physical
  contingencies. In December 2020, the project closed with a total cost of US$237.73 million. The cost,
  financing, and co-financing data reported in this section come from ICR, annex 3. There are discrepancies
  between this data and the data in the ICR datasheet and not all amounts do fully add up.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit was estimated at US$170.00 million. The project disbursed
  US$160.02 million. Because of the fluctuation of the exchange rate between the Special Drawing Rights
  (SDR), the currency used in the financing agreement, and the US dollar, around US$1.34 million was
  recorded as a loss.

  As co-financier, the French Agency for Development (FAD) was to provide US$60.00 million. The ICR does
  not report the actual disbursement of the FAD funds.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$12.70 million.

  Restructurings: There were two project restructurings:

        First Restructuring (Level 2 – December 28, 2018): The project closing date was extended by 22
         months from December 31, 2018 to October 30, 2020 to allow time for the completion of project
         activities. The project implementation was delayed because of a 14-month delay in project
         effectiveness due to lengthy approval process of the Borrowing Plan by the national assembly,
         worsening security situation in Adamawa State, and governance issues with the state project

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



          implementation unit (SPIU) in Enugu State (Restructuring Paper, Report No: RES24852, p.7).
          Because of these delays, the implementation schedule of the financing of maintenance activities by
          IDA funds was revised as follows: 100 percent expenditures incurred until June 30, 2019 (originally
          June 30,2015); 50 percent for expenditures incurred until June 2020 (originally June 2017); and no
          IDA financing thereafter. In the results framework, the intermediate indicator of “kilometer of roads in
          tier-2 states with design studies completed” was dropped because the concept of different tier states
          was no longer valid; a new indicator, i.e., “number of tier-1 states that adopted the Low Volume
          Manual for management of its rural roads,” was added to monitor the achievement of the
          sustainability of the project outcomes; and the target value of the indicator “kilometer of roads
          receiving efficient annual mechanized maintenance” was revised down from 1,650 km to 900 km to
          reflect the actual length of roads completed where annual mechanized maintenance could be
          implemented before the new project closing date (Restructuring Paper, Report No.: RES24852, p.7).
          Lastly, the credit amount set aside for physical and price contingencies was reallocated to other
          expenditure categories.
         Second Restructuring (Level 2 – September 30, 2020): The project closing date was extended by
          two months from October 30, 2020 to December 31, 2020 because of the impact of COVID-19
          pandemic on project implementation. In 2020, construction sites were closed, contractors could not
          move materials because of interstate movement restrictions, and foreign personnel of contractors
          could not return to Nigeria because of flight restrictions (Restructuring Paper, Report No: RES42835,
          p.10). Eight out of the ongoing 25 contracts were expected to be completed by the new project
          closing date. All contracts not completed before the new closing date were to be funded by the
          respective state governments. At this restructuring, it was also decided to reallocate funds among
          expenditure categories to increase funds for safety measures due to the worsening security situation
          in the project states and to compensate for the loss caused by the depreciation of the US dollar
          against the SDR.

   Dates: The project was approved on September 25, 2012 and the financing agreement was signed on
   September 9, 2013, almost one year after the approval of the project. The project became effective on
   November 22, 2013. The Mid-Term Review was conducted in October 2016. The original closing date was
   December 31, 2018. It was extended by two years, and the project closed on December 31, 2020. The
   reasons for closing date extensions have been outlined in the project restructuring entries above.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The key terms of the project objectives were not defined in the project appraisal document; hence, the
project objectives were not clearly specified. It is only after reading the project activities that the objective of
the project could be understood as the improvement of the conditions of rural roads through upgrading or
rehabilitation and the rural population’s lasting year-around access to project roads through the initial road
improvement and sustained and timely routine and periodic maintenance. However, there was a mismatch
between the real intention of the project and how the project objective was formulated. The real intention of
the project was to support the agricultural sector because the lack of accessibility due to poor road
conditions was identified as one of the major barriers for the development of the sector that is the backbone
of Nigeria’s rural economy (PAD, p.4). Roads in bad conditions increase transport costs, restrict access to
markets and services and decrease productivity. Therefore, the improvement of road conditions is a

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



necessary condition for the transportation of more agricultural products to markets but may not be sufficient
unless supported by additional interventions, such as availability of transportation vehicles, and storage and
marketing of agricultural products.

The project objectives were relevant to the country context. Inadequate and poor road infrastructure is still a
major barrier for the development of service and agricultural sectors and economic development in Nigeria.
The percentage of rural population with access to road worsened during the course of project
implementation. According to the World Bank’s report titled “Measuring Rural Access: Update 2017/18” that
was published in February 2019, Nigeria’s rural access index is estimated at 25.5 per cent indicating that
only one quarter of the rural population have access to an all-season road within an approximate walking
distance of 2 km compared to rural access index of 47 percent at the time of appraisal. While over 90
percent of passengers and freight are transported by roads, only 30 percent of the country’s road network is
paved and majority of the federal, state, and rural roads are in poor condition (Project Appraisal Document
of Nigeria Rural Access and Agricultural Marketing Project, p.2). The country has insufficient funds to invest
in roads. The annual allocation of funds in the national budget in 2019 was only five percent (US$1.25
billion) of the amount (US$25 billion per year) recommended in the infrastructure master plan published in
2015. On the other hand, poor road maintenance has been a major and recurring issue in the country, as
seen in the significant drop in the rural access index. The project was to address this issue through
technical assistance and provision of funds for road maintenance to be gradually covered by local
governments, but the capacity in the country was insufficient to achieve this objective. Therefore, while the
project objectives were relevant to Nigeria’s development status, they were not appropriately pitched for the
capacity in the country.

The project objectives were fully aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Nigeria, FY2021-25. The project sought to address the development
problem of insufficient road access to economic opportunities, i.e., transporting agricultural products to
markets, and social services, such as health and education. The project was to address this problem
through the improvement of conditions of rural roads and their sustainability through regular and annual
maintenance activities. These objectives correspond to the CPF’s (p.50) Complementary Priority 5,
“Enhance connectivity and support development of economic corridors and cities as livable growth poles”
under the third pillar of “Promoting jobs and economic transformation and diversification,” which covers rural
businesses that are disadvantaged by spatial remoteness and poor transport conditions along with low
access to power grid and telecommunications. The project objectives also support the achievement of the
CPF’s core objectives to increase access to quality basic education and improve primary healthcare, and
complementary priority to modernize agriculture (CPF, p.30).

The World Bank had sufficient country and sector experience in Nigeria. The project was designed based
on the experience gained and lessons learned during the implementation of the Rural Access and Mobility
Project, Phase 1 in Kaduna State between 2008 and 2016. The project’s approach was innovative for
Nigeria in the sense that it introduced a community-based approach to address the routine road
maintenance issue in Nigeria. Although this model was successfully implemented in other regions of the
world, such as Latin America, given the rural capacity constraint in the country, this was overly ambitious for
Nigeria.

Lastly, while the project objectives remained relevant throughout the project cycle and was a necessary
response to a development gap in Nigeria, a significant shortcoming was the lack of clarity in the objective’s




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



               formulation around what outcomes would be achieved through improving road conditions and bringing
               sustained road access to rural population.

               Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial, but only marginally because the objectives
               were not clearly formulated, were closer to the output level rather than the outcome level and did not fully
               capture the real intention of the project to support the agricultural sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve transport conditions in the participating states.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change for Objective 1

                             The project’s theory of change indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., IDA credit, were to be used to finance
                             the civil works for the rehabilitation of rural earth roads and construction of river crossings. Technical
                             assistance was to be provided to improve the technical and institutional capacity of the project-supported
                             states in road management through the creation of GIS-based road inventories and road asset management
                             systems. These activities would be expected to directly lead to the achievement of project outputs of roads
                             rehabilitated and river crossings constructed with sufficient capacity to manage these roads. In turn, these
                             outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of improved road conditions. In the long-run, these results
                             would be expected to increase the productivity and commercialization of agriculture—the main economic
                             activity in the four project-supported states—and household income of the rural population. Overall, the
                             causal pathways from inputs to expected results were valid and direct, and the results achieved could be
                             attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the expected results were closer to output level in the results
                             chain rather than outcome level.

                             Outputs

                             The project’s results framework captured the following outputs:

                                        Roads rehabilitated: This indicator is defined as “Kilometers of rural or state roads rehabilitated by
                                         the project according to agreed standards” (PAD, p.32). The project financed the rehabilitation of
                                         1,929 km of rural roads. The target was 1,450 km. However, the ICR (p.25) notes that “the technical
                                         quality of road and infrastructure works of the first stage [the first 800 km of roads identified at
                                         appraisal] was in general, unsatisfactory” because of insufficient technical capacity at the SPIUs to
                                         review road and bridge designs and supervise the quality of civil works. (The project team commented

                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



       to IEG that the quality of works was subsequently corrected and improved before the rehabilitation
       was completed.) Furthermore, the roads were rehabilitated to earth road standard that was not
       appropriate in areas subject to heavy rains (ICR, p.30).
      Number of river crossings built: The project financed the construction of 98 river crossings. The
       target was 65.

The ICR reports the following outputs, the achievements of which were not captured by the results
framework, and for which no target values were established:

      Spot improvements and rehabilitation of culvert of access roads: The project financed the spot
       improvement of 310.74 km of roads.
      Technical audits of civil works: These audits were completed in the Adamawa and Niger states but
       not in the Enugu and Osun states.

Outcomes

In the results framework, the indicator given below was defined to measure the outcome of the road
rehabilitation activities. However, this indicator was at the output level rather than outcome level and did not
capture the development impact of the project activities.

      Roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads: This indicator was defined
       as “percentage of rural roads in good or fair condition as a share of total registered rural road network
       in targeted [four] states” (PAD, p.32). The baseline was estimated between zero and one percent. The
       target was 10 percent. According to the borrower’s project implementation completion report, the
       achievement was 15 percent (ICR, p.54). However, evidence in the ICR is not fully sufficient to
       validate this achievement given that the technical quality of 800 km of roads rehabilitated under the
       first stage was generally unsatisfactory. And even if the project team stated that the quality of these
       roads was corrected and improved before the completion of rehabilitation works, the level of
       improvement is unknown. The ICR does not provide information if and how technical assistance and
       technical audits contributed to the improvement of road infrastructure in the project areas. The project
       team subsequently commented to IEG that the technical assistance supported project implementation,
       built capacity in project staff, and improved quality of works over-time through third party monitoring.

The project was successful in achieving the output targets, but the technical quality of the roads rehabilitated
in the first stage was initially low even if it was later corrected , and the earth road standard was not
appropriate for some sections of the road. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to
improve transport conditions is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To bring sustained access to the rural population in the participating states.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)




Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 2

The project’s theory of change for Objective 2 indicates that the project’s inputs, i.e., IDA credit, were to
finance the routine maintenance for the roads improved under Objective 1, while technical assistance were to
support activities, such as the preparation of low volume roads manuals, road asset management systems,
reform of the state road sector institutions, development of road transport regulations, and preparation of road
transport strategies. These activities would be expected to directly lead to the achievement of project outputs
of improved roads maintained under the project and establishment of the regulations and policies for road
management and maintenance. In turn, these outputs would be expected to result in the outcome of road
maintenance sustained beyond project closure that would ensure the sustained access of the rural
population. Although Objective 2 does not spell it out, based on information in the PAD, such sustained road
access of rural population was to improve access to social services and decrease agricultural transport costs,
and eventually increase household income, the last being a higher objective. These development impacts of
sustained access were not captured by the project’s results framework, but by beneficiary surveys to be
conducted before and after the project, which assessed aspects such as improved access to social services,
reduction in time required to access such activities, improved transportation of agricultural goods, and
reduced time to fetch water. Overall, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid and direct, and
the outcomes achieved could be attributed to the project’s intervention. However, the expected outcomes
were overly ambitious given the weak institutional capacity of the state institutions and the project’s limited
intervention to reform the road sector institutions at the state level. Additionally, the success of the project’s
intervention depended on the availability of sufficient funds to cover maintenance expenditures, the absence
of which has been a major barrier to the maintenance of federal, state, and rural roads in Nigeria.

Outputs

The project’s results framework captured the following outputs:

      Rural roads receiving efficient, permanent routine maintenance: The target was 1,650 km of rural
       roads rehabilitated under the project to be maintained by rural communities. The project rehabilitated
       2,239.74 km of roads, including 310.74 km of spot improvements and rehabilitation of culverts of
       access roads. Out of this total amount, the project financed the maintenance of 2,165 km of rural
       roads.
      Rural roads, receiving efficient, annual mechanized maintenance: The target was annual
       mechanized maintenance of 1,650 km of roads rehabilitated under the project by contractors. This
       target was decreased to 900 km at the first restructuring to reflect the actual length of roads completed
       where annual mechanized maintenance could be implemented before the project closing date. The
       project financed annual mechanized maintenance of 599.18 km of roads rehabilitated under the
       project.
      Number of states with GIS-based road inventories: GIS-based road inventories and state road
       maps were completed in all four states as planned.
      Number of states that adopted the Low Volume Manual for management of rural roads: The
       target was two states. At project completion, three states had adopted the Low Volume Manual,
       except Niger. This manual consists of three sub-manuals for roads with low volume traffic: Low
       Volume Road Design Manual, Low Volume Maintenance Manual, and Low Volume Road Technical
       Specifications.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)




      The following technical assistance outputs were not achieved at the time of project closing (ICR,
       pp.36-37): (i) rural transport regulations; (ii) sustainable road data management systems (the ICR is
       not clear on what these systems included because it also mentions that the GIS-based road inventory
       and Road Asset Management Systems were prepared (ICR, para 43)); (iii) intermediary means of
       transport strategies; (iv) reform of state road sector institutions, including the institutionalization of the
       state project implementation units as rural roads management units (The project team stated that new
       laws were promulgated in two states for the establishment of new rural roads agencies); and (v) policy
       study on road maintenance management and financing. According to the borrower’s project
       implementation completion report, the absence of a road sector specialist for almost five years after
       project’s effectiveness with the requisite knowledge to implement the technical assistance activities
       was the main reason why these outputs could not be delivered (ICR, p.53).

Outcomes

In the results framework, two indicators were defined to measure the outcome of the road rehabilitation
activities.

      Increase of share of rural population with access to an all-season road (Rural Access
       Indicator): This indicator was defined as “percentage of the rural population in targeted [four] states
       living less than 2 km away from an all-weather road” (PAD, p.32). The target was to increase this ratio
       by six percent. The achievement was 8 percent. However, according to the borrower’s project
       implementation completion report (ICR, p.54), the number of people with access to all season rural
       roads increased from a baseline value of 3.7 million to around 5.92 million, which is an increase of 60
       percent. The target was 5.28 million, an increase of around 43 percent. Therefore, the achievements
       reported as “increase of share or rural population with access to an all-season road” and “number of
       rural people with access to all season roads” could not be validated.
      Roads receiving adequate levels of maintenance: This indicator was defined as “kilometers of rural
       roads (either pilot roads or roads rehabilitated by the project) with both efficient, permanent routine
       maintenance and annual mechanized maintenance” (PAD, p. 32). In other words, this indicator
       merges the two output indicators given in the above Output section; therefore, it is at the output level,
       too. The ICR reports the lower of the two maintenance figures, i.e., 599.18 km as achievement for
       roads that received both routine and annual maintenance. The target was 1,650 km.

Based on the beneficiary surveys conducted during project implementation, the ICR reports the following
results that were not captured by the results framework:

      Means of access to social services (ICR, pp.64-65): According to the baseline survey, walking was
       the primary means of access to education, work, healthcare, and worship in all four states, while
       public buses and vans were the primary means of access to clothing in Adamawa, Enugu, and Osun.
       Walking was a primary means of access to clothing in Niger. The follow-on survey found that this
       general trend has not changed after the project’s intervention. However, in Adamawa there was a
       notable decrease in the ratio of people walking to education (from baseline of 91.5 percent to 76.6
       percent) indicating that people use motorized vehicles more. In Adamawa, the ratio of people using
       more than one means of access, too, increased from 3.9 per cent to 12.3 percent. In Enugu, the
       impact of the project was similar (the ICR does not report any values for Enugu and the other two
       states): a decrease in the number of people walking to education, work, healthcare, clothing, and
       worship, and an increase in the those using more than one means of transport. The project’s impact in


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



       Niger was not notable; there was only an incremental decrease in the proportion of people who walk
       to access education, clothing, worship, work, and healthcare. In Osun, the project’s impact was
       negligible; there was a slight decrease in the proportion of people who walk to access education, but
       on the contrary, an increase in the proportion of those who walk to access work, healthcare, clothing,
       and worship. The survey also found that there was a decrease in the usage of public buses and vans
       to access clothing, but evidence is insufficient to conclude whether this outcome would mean that
       usage of private motorized vehicles has increased in Osun or not.
      Time to access social services (ICR, pp.65-66): According to the baseline survey, bad road
       conditions were the main reason for people to walk to access social services rather than using other
       modes of transportation. In Adamawa, after project completion, most of the population in the project
       area were able to access healthcare and food in less than 10 minutes compared to 43 minutes before
       the project. There was no change in the time required to access work and clothing (more than 41
       minutes) and school and worship (less than 10 minutes). In Enugu, the time required to access work
       substantially decreased from more than 41 minutes to less than 10 minutes for the majority of the
       survey respondents. This high achievement is in accordance with the finding that fewer people walked
       to work in Enugu after the project. There was a substantial improvement in the time required to access
       food; before the project it was more than 41 minutes, but after the project 24 percent of the population
       were able to access food within ten minutes and another 26 percent between 21 and 30 minutes. The
       time required to access healthcare, education and worship facilities remained the same at around 10
       minutes for the majority of the respondents. The project did not have any impact in decreasing the
       time required to access clothing which remained above 21 minutes for more than half of the
       respondents. In Niger and Osun, the project did not have a significant impact on the time required to
       access social services. Although the ICR states that the time required to access clothing in Niger and
       healthcare in Osun decreased, the evidence is insufficient to support these assertions (ICR, p.66).
      Access to water: The project did not have any significant impact on reducing the time required to
       fetch water, as all four states “appeared to have fair access to varied water sources, such as piped
       water, surface water, and wells, in the dry and wet (rainy) seasons” that did not require fetching water
       from long distances (ICR, p.65).
      Transportation cost of agricultural goods: In Adamawa and Niger, there was a decrease in the
       transportation costs, while a substantial increase took place in Enugu and Osun. The ICR (p.67)
       claims that the increases in the latter two states suggest that “there was an increase in agricultural
       production and increased transportation of goods to market.” The evidence is insufficient to support
       this assertion.

The evidence shows that the ratio of the rural population with access to all-season roads has increased, but
there are concerns about the reliability of the data. The beneficiary surveys conducted before and after the
project show that there were some improvements in the variety of transportation means and time required to
access social services at different levels in all four states, but the project did not have a major impact on the
general trends in accessing social services. The project did not have any impact on access to water, and the
evidence is inconclusive about the impact of the project on the transportation of agricultural goods. The ICR
points out that the impact evaluation, which is being currently conducted and of which the beneficiary surveys
are part, will be published in December 2021. It is expected provide more in-depth findings about the impact
of the project (ICR, pp.22-23).

The project successfully implemented a community-based road maintenance approach with the participation
of 2,445 people, of which 726 were women. However, for the sustainability of maintenance services, the main
outcome expected from the project’s intervention was that the cost of maintenance activities would eventually


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



                            be covered by the states. According to the revised implementation schedule of the financing of maintenance
                            activities, the project was to finance 100 per cent of maintenance expenditures incurred until June 30, 2019,
                            50 per cent for expenditures incurred until June 2020 and none thereafter. The project did not achieve this
                            outcome and financed 100 percent of the maintenance expenditures through to project closure. According to
                            the project team, external factors, such as economic downturn and security issues, adversely affected the
                            implementation of the maintenance schedule. State Road Maintenance Funds in each state were not
                            established, nor were sufficient funds allocated for road maintenance (ICR, p.45). The ICR (p.23) notes that
                            “the funding and management of maintenance have not been sustainably addressed in the four participating
                            states.” Therefore, it is uncertain how the roads rehabilitated under the project will be maintained, if ever.
                            Additionally, the evidence is insufficient to show that the project was successful in strengthening institutional
                            capacity of local authorities in road management and maintenance, although GIS-based road inventory and
                            road asset management systems were available. Despite the successful demonstration of the community-
                            based maintenance mechanism, its sustainability is uncertain because of lack of institutional arrangements at
                            the state level for managing rural roads, insufficient institutional capacity, and insufficient funds (ICR, p.30).
                            The Environmental and Social Safeguards Audit conducted in March 2021 notes that “some roads in certain
                            states have deteriorated and been in bad conditions because road maintenance has not been properly
                            carried out. In some states, contractors have been procured to ensure annual maintenance of these roads,
                            but efforts need to be accentuated in order that the roads are maintained promptly and routinely” (ICR, p.73).



                            Overall, because of the significant shortcomings in ensuring the sustainability of road maintenance, the
                            project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to bring sustained access to the rural population through
                            maintaining key rural transport infrastructure in a sustainable manner in the participating states is rated
                            Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While there were shortcomings in the technical quality of the rural roads rehabilitated in the first stage, the
                            project was successful in rehabilitating more rural roads than the target value. Therefore, the project’s efficacy
                            in achieving the objective to improve transport conditions is rated Substantial, but with moderate
                            shortcomings. On the other hand, because of significant shortcomings in ensuring the sustainability of
                            maintenance of rural roads rehabilitated under the project, the project’s efficacy in achieving the objective to
                            bring sustained road access to the rural population is rated Modest. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving
                            the project objectives is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason

                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



  Modest                                                    Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, an economic evaluation study based on the Road Economic Decision Model (RED) developed by
the World Bank for low volume roads was conducted using data gathered through traffic surveys for the first tier
of 800 km of rural roads to be rehabilitated under the project. The RED model uses the consumer surplus
approach to estimate road user costs savings, such as vehicle operating costs savings, passenger time costs
savings, and accident cost savings (PAD, p.25). For the economic evaluation, costs were taken as rehabilitation
costs and maintenance costs. The assumptions used at appraisal were appropriate: 12 percent discount rate,
six percent traffic growth rate, and 20 year evaluation period. The calculation resulted in an economic rate of
return (ERR) of 39 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$155.57 million.

At project closing, a similar economic evaluation based on the RED model could not be conducted because of
COVID-19, which resulted in restricted movement of people and goods distorting traffic data. Alternatively,
actual average costs of road rehabilitation were compared to the average costs estimated at appraisal. In
Adamawa, the average cost of 1 km road rehabilitation was US$70,032, which was lower than the average cost
of US$97,406 estimated at appraisal. Similarly, in Niger the actual cost of road rehabilitation was lower than the
average cost estimated at appraisal; US$70,870 and US$96,936, respectively. But both in Enugu and Osun
actual average costs of road rehabilitation were higher than average costs estimated at appraisal: Enugu,
US$123,098 and US$95,642; and in Osun, US$68,103 and US$62,320, respectively.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Project effectiveness was delayed by 14 months because of the lengthy approval process of the Borrowing Plan
by the national assembly. This delay, together with other delays caused by external factors, such as worsening
security situation or governance issues in some states, resulted in slow project implementation. The counterpart
funds at the state level, except in Osun, were insufficient to cover supervision and implementation costs and
process the payment of compensations to project-affected persons under resettlement action plans. These
caused further project implementation delays. The SPIUs’ supervision of civil works was inadequate because of
weak technical capacity that resulted in low quality road and infrastructure works in the first phase. Although, as
pointed out by the project team to IEG, the civil works quality was subsequently corrected and improved, this is
not an efficient way to proceed. Important technical assistance activities to reform the sector could not be
completed because of the absence of a road sector specialist and the focus of the SPIUs on the civil works that
had greater visibility and direct benefits for the population. The phased approach to road rehabilitation works
was implemented with the expectation that the first stage of works would provide experience to SPIUs and
lessons for the second stage. However, this approach created very complex procurement processes for both
phases resulting in each state to implement around 100 contracts with limited institutional capacity.



Overall, while the average costs of road rehabilitation were comparable to estimated average costs at appraisal,
there were significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency as explained in the previous
paragraph. Hence, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is rated Modest.



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      100.00
 Appraisal                                                 39.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While the project objectives were not clearly formulated, were closer to the output level rather than the outcome
level and did not fully capture the real intention of the project, they remained relevant throughout the project
cycle. Therefore, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial, but only marginally. The overall efficacy in
achieving the project objectives is rated Modest because of low achievement in sustaining all-weather road
access to rural population. The project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is also rated Modest
because of significant shortcomings in project’s operational and administrative efficiency. Overall, the outcome
is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial and governance: Insufficient funds for the maintenance of roads is a major risk for the
sustainability of rural population’s access to roads rehabilitated under the project. State Road Maintenance
Funds were not established in the states, a major setback in adequately maintaining the roads. Some states
procured contractors to have the roads annually maintained, but more funds are needed to finance timely
routine and periodic maintenance of roads. The road asset management reform is not complete. The newly
created institution for management or rural roads does not have sufficient funds, nor institutional capacity, to
support the maintenance of rural roads.

Exposure to natural disasters: According to the environmental and social safeguards audit conducted in
March 2021, some roads rehabilitated under the project are located in flood plains and prone to flooding. In
the event of a major flood, the road quality can deteriorate and adversely affect the transportation conditions.
Heavy rains can easily damage earth roads and worsen their conditions.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At project entry, the goal to improve rural population’s sustained access to economic opportunities and
  social services through rural roads in accordance with national strategies was of high strategic
  importance (PAD, pp.1-4). The project appraisal document was thoroughly prepared and provides
  detailed information about the sector and the project’s interventions. The project’s approach to
  investment activities was straightforward; however, given that the project’s real intention was to support
  the agricultural sector, it could have included interventions to address additional barriers to agricultural
  marketing, such as storage, transportation services, and marketing. The project was to finance civil works
  for the rehabilitation of rural earth roads, construction of river crossings, and maintenance activities.
  However, the expectation that the project’s financing of maintenance activities would decrease gradually
  on a yearly basis, and that local states would cover the cost of maintenance beyond project closure was
  overly optimistic because of lack of local funds, insufficient institutional capacity, and governance issues
  at the state level. These issues were well known to the Bank team considering that this was the second
  operation on rural access (the first was Rural Access and Mobility Project – P072644) and that the Bank
  had a longstanding engagement in the road sector in Nigeria. Similarly, it was not realistic to expect that
  the project’s technical assistance support would be sufficient to reform the state road sector
  institutions and strengthen road sector policy and regulatory framework, which require the involvement of
  relevant parties at the federal, state, and local levels. Hence, most of the technical assistance activities
  could not be completed. While the economic aspects of the project were sound and economic analysis
  was based on appropriate assumptions, in hindsight, the earth road standard was not appropriate for
  areas subject to heavy rains on the technical side. The technical capacities of the SPIUs, which were not
  sufficient to supervise the quality of civil works, were not adequately assessed; hence, the technical
  quality of civil works implemented in the first stage was low. Procurement arrangements were complex.
  Because of the two-stage approach of the project, the SPIUs, which did not have sufficient procurement
  capacity, had to manage over 100 contracts. The monitoring and evaluation design was sufficient to
  measure the project’s outputs. However, the development impact of the project’s intervention to be
  assessed through the surveys were not monitored in the results framework (see section 9. M&E Design,
  Implementation and Utilization below). Most of the major risks were adequately assessed, and overall,
  the project risk was rated high. Mitigation measures were identified, but some were not effective, such as
  the design risk related to the sustainability of maintenance activities beyond project closure. The risk
  related to the availability of local funding was not adequately identified at appraisal.

  Because of significant shortcomings in identification, preparation, and appraisal of the project, the quality-
  at-entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



 Supervision missions were regularly held every six months until the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020 after
 which the project team virtually supervised project implementation. According to the borrower’s project
 implementation completion report, the Bank’s supervision teams did not include a monitoring and
 evaluation (M&E) specialist and an institutional development specialist (ICR, p.59). After the worsening of
 the security situation in the Adamawa state, a third party was hired for the supervision of project activities
 and verification of project outputs. The project team’s focus on the implementation of technical assistance
 activities was insufficient; most of such activities that would have contributed to the sustainability of
 project’s outcomes could not be implemented. The project team’s supervision of fiduciary and safeguard
 aspects of the project was mostly adequate except for ensuring that bidding documents sufficiently
 included environmental and social safeguards requirements. The performance reporting in the
 Implementation Status and Result Reports and Aide Memoires was candid and adequate.

 The quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were not clearly specified, and the stated and implied goals of the operations did not
 fully coincide (see section 3. Relevance of Objectives). The results framework did not include any indicator
 measuring the sustainability of rural population’s access to roads, except for capturing the kilometers of
 roads receiving regular maintenance. Given that the project outcomes where pitched closer to the output
 level in the results framework, the project objective level indicators captured the project outputs rather than
 outcomes, such as share of roads rehabilitated under the project in total classified roads, increase in share
 of rural population with access to all-season road, and roads receiving adequate levels of maintenance.
 The intermediate results indicators were sufficient to capture the outputs of civil works, but the results
 framework did not include indicators to capture the outputs or outcomes of technical assistance activities,
 except the indicator measuring the establishment of GIS-based road inventories. The intermediate
 indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound. The data were to be collected
 from work progress reports of supervision firms or consolidated progress reports of state project
 implementation units, which lacked sufficient technical capacity to supervise civil works. The development
 impacts of sustained access were not reflected in the results framework, such as reduction in time required
 to access social services, increase in the use of mechanized vehicles, and increase in economic activities
 because of improved road access, even if the project had impact assessments to measure them.




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



b. M&E Implementation
  Because of the delayed start of project activities—four years into project implementation—the M&E staff
  was demobilized, and their remobilization when needed was challenging. The indicators included in the
  results framework were measured based on the supervision firms and SPIUs’ reports, but the ICR does
  not provide sufficient information to assess the SPIUs’ attention to effective M&E implementation.
  Similarly, the evidence is insufficient for assessing the reliability and quality of the data. The weaknesses
  in the M&E design were not adequately corrected during implementation, except the inclusion of a new
  intermediate indicator related to adoption of “low volume road manuals” by the project-supported states.
  The surveys provided additional information about the impact of the project, but the reliability and quality
  of the surveys could not be adequately assessed because of insufficient information about the
  methodology used and quality control. An Impact Evaluation is being conducted to assess the project’s
  impact on welfare and well-being of the rural population (see section 4. Efficacy, Objective 2, Outcomes),
  which is planned to be published in December 2021.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR does not provide information whether the M&E findings were communicated to stakeholders.
  There was no clear evidence to assess the impact of the M&E findings on decision-making or shifts in
  the implementation direction of the project (ICR, p.26). However, the M&E findings and experience
  gained in this project informed the scaling up of this project in the state of Imo funded by the French
  Development Agency and the follow-on Rural Access and Agricultural Marketing Project (P163353)
  covering 13 states by incorporating rural agricultural marketing mechanisms to increase the projects’
  development impact. The M&E findings were used to provide evidence of achievement of the project
  outputs. Findings of surveys were also partly used to provide evidence for the project’s impact on human
  development.



  Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest because of significant shortcomings in the design and
  implementation of the M&E system that consequently restricted the utilization of M&E findings in
  decision-making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and the Involuntary
   Settlement (OP/BP 4.12) safeguard policies.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The environmental impact of project activities was expected to
   be limited because the project activities did not include the construction of new roads and the project

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



  activities were to remain within the existing rights-of-way. An environmental and social management
  framework (ESMF) was prepared and disclosed for Enugu and Osun states in May 2008. After the inclusion
  of Niger and Adamawa states to the project scope, the ESMF was updated and re-disclosed both in country
  and the Bank’s InfoShop. Four Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), one for each state,
  and corresponding Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the 800 km of roads identified as the first
  stage at appraisal were also disclosed in country and the Bank’s InfoShop.

  During implementation, the early bidding documents did not adequately include environmental safeguards
  requirements. The ICR (p.27) notes that “contractors and supervising consultant teams did not include
  environmental social health and safety officers.” However, the ICR does not provide information if this was
  because of the lack of requirements in the bidding documents or the contractors’ failure to mobilize these
  officers, nor does it report whether this affected a few contracts, and it was eventually addressed or if it was
  a problem throughout project implementation. The waste management in project sites were not compliant
  with the provisions of ESMPs. Increased generation of dust, especially during dry seasons, from roads was
  an issue that was partly addressed by asphalting certain roads around schools, rural settlements, markets,
  and clinics in the second stage of the project. Gender based violence clauses were added to the contracts
  during project implementation. The SPIUs did not initially have sufficient capacity to implement the
  safeguard policies. Compliance with the environmental safeguard policy improved in the second stage of
  project implementation (ICR, pp.73-74). A grievance mechanism was in place in all four states.

  Involuntary Settlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this policy because of the possibility that
  project activities might affect some persons. A resettlement policy framework (RFP) and abbreviated
  resettlement action plans (ARAPs) for each state were prepared and disclosed in Nigeria and the Bank’s
  InfoShop. A total of 2,423 persons were affected by the project activities. Compensations to these project-
  affected persons were delayed because of late release of counterpart funds by state governments in
  Adamawa, Enugu, and Osun. This slowed down project implementation and was one of the reasons for the
  project closing date extension.



  The ICR does not provide information about the implementation of the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and
  the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) safeguard policies. The project team subsequently informed
  IEG that “all Implementation Status and Results Reports rated the implementation of OP/BP 4.04
  Satisfactory with no further details. Implementation of OP/BP4.11 was Satisfactory until June 2016 when
  shrines were encountered along some priority roads (Phase 1) in Enugu State and identified during the
  preparation of the Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP). The issue was solved with the revision of
  the ARAP (not archived in WB docs).”




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  SPIUs submitted interim financial reports with occasional delays. These reports were acceptable to the
  World Bank. The Office of the Auditor General carried out annual project audits. The ICR does not report
  whether these audit reports were qualified or not. The project team informed IEG that audit reports were
  unqualified and submitted within the six-month window of submission on the reporting year. There were

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



   significant delays in the flow of counterpart funds from state governments to project implementation units
   because of fiscal constraints. The funds were insufficient to cover supervision and implementation costs
   and process the payment of compensations to project-affected persons under resettlement action
   plans. No issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with the project are reported in the ICR.

   Procurement

   SPIUs had limited procurement capacity. Therefore, three of the states, i.e., Adamawa, Niger, and Osun,
   appointed a procurement consultant after a competitive selection. These consultants supported the project
   implementation units in procurement and also in developing capacity. The procurement was very complex
   with each state implementing around 100 contracts. As mentioned in the Safeguards section above, early
   contracts did not include adequate clauses related to environmental social safeguard requirements. Enugu
   did not initially hire a procurement consultant and was slow in reviewing and evaluating bids. Procurement
   was conducted according to the relevant World Bank procurement guidelines.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Because of significant
                                                                                 shortcomings in ensuring the
                                                                                 sustainability of road
                                Moderately           Moderately
Outcome                                                                          maintenance and the rural
                                Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 population’s sustained access,
                                                                                 and significant operational and
                                                                                 administrative inefficiencies.
                                                                                 Among others, because of (i)
                                                                                 overly ambitious expectations
                                                                                 that road sector reform could be
                                                                                 achieved under the project and
                                Moderately           Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                 that local authorities would cover
                                Satisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 those costs; (ii) adoption of earth
                                                                                 road standard that was not
                                                                                 appropriate for areas subject to
                                                                                 heavy rains, and (iii) ineffective


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



                                                                                mitigation measures for the
                                                                                design and sustainability risks
                                                                                related to maintenance services.
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on information in the ICR.

Lack of sufficient funds and institutional arrangements for maintaining rural roads can
adversely affect the rural population’s sustained access to improved roads beyond project
closure. While the quality of civil works to rehabilitate the first stage roads was low, the project
activities resulted in the improvement of the road conditions in the four states. However, local state
authorities do not have sufficient funds nor are institutional arrangements in place to adequately
maintain the roads. The State Road Maintenance Funds could not be established. At the time of the
Environmental and Social Safeguards Audit in March 2021, it was observed that some roads
rehabilitated under the project had already started deteriorating and been in bad conditions because
of lack of maintenance.

The community-based road maintenance approach can be a viable solution for routine
maintenance of rural earth roads while positively impacting the social and economic well-
being of women. Communities in the project areas demonstrated interest in participating in routine
maintenance of earth roads after their rehabilitation. This increased the local communities’
ownership of the road infrastructure and also provided an opportunity to women to contribute to the
community while economically benefitting from these activities in the form of direct and indirect
income. A total of 2,445 people from the communities participated in road maintenance of which 726
were women (30 percent of the participants). However, the sustained success of this approach
depends on the availability of local funds to maintain roads under this approach.

A heavy procurement load for investment activities can force the project implementation
units with low capacity to focus more on civil works and neglect technical activities for
sector and institution reforms. The procurement processes of road rehabilitation works that were
to be implemented in two phases were complex for the SPIUs that did not have sufficient
procurement capacity. First, approximately 800 km of roads that were identified during project
preparation as the first phase of roads were to be rehabilitated, and lessons learned during the
implementation of the first phase were expected to be used to improve the efficiency of the
intervention in the second phase. Each SPIU had to procure and manage more than 100 contracts
for road rehabilitation during project implementation. Therefore, the SPIUs focused mostly on the
implementation of road rehabilitation and river crossings works, which had greater visibility and
direct benefits to the population. This resulted in SPIUs paying less attention to the technical
assistance activities to reform the rural road sector, and most of these activities could not be
implemented.




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG-RAMP PHASE 2 (P095003)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. Although the quality of evidence could not be assessed
adequately, the evidence from supervision and SPIUs’ reports are presented in a parsimonious way. The ICR,
including its annexes, presents an appropriate base to support the achievements reported, which are at the
output level; the M&E data are used to provide evidence of application of inputs or achievement of outputs,
rather the achievement of the outcomes. On the other hand, there is also a genuine effort to use the findings of
the beneficiary surveys to provide evidence for the project’s development impact. The interrogation of evidence
from different sources related to the sustainability of maintenance services and the rural population’s sustained
access to roads is insufficient. The ICR is mostly internally consistent; the logical linking and integration of the
various parts of the report is adequate. The lessons are based on evidence and analysis and mostly respond to
the specific experiences and findings of the project. However, there are some shortcomings in following the
guidelines; M&E Quality, Quality of Supervision and Fiduciary sections could have benefited from a more
detailed discussion in accordance with the guidelines. The ICR does not report the implementation of the
Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policies. The ICR’s ratings are not in line with the
guidelines. The overall efficacy rating is substantial while the project’s efficacy in achieving both objectives is
rated high, and the outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory, although the relevance of objectives
is rated high and efficacy and efficiency are rated substantial, which would result in a satisfactory rating. Some
aspects of the discussion of the theory change on page 11, i.e., “[i]t is expected that the project will reduce
transport times and costs,” are not reflected in the theory of change figure.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                      Page 20 of 20
