     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022649

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P103999                                    BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                 Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-47340,IDA-60930,TF-58153               31-Dec-2015                                       161,276,208.07

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2010                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           170,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            183,011,932.82                                              0.00

 Actual                                        161,276,208.07                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kishore Laxmikant           Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Nadkarni




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   Original objective: The objective of the Project is to increase the sustainable access to safe water and
   improved sanitation, as well as to support the establishment of a long-term water supply, sanitation, and
   drainage infrastructure and operational management program in Chittagong (Schedule 1 of the Financing
   Agreement dated July 26, 2010 and paragraph 20 of the Project Appraisal Document).

   For the ICRR, the original objective is parsed as follows:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



   Objective 1: To increase sustainable access to safe water in Chittagong.

   Objective 2: To increase sustainable access to improved sanitation in Chittagong.

   Objective 3: To support the establishment of a long-term water supply, sanitation, and drainage infrastructure
   development and operational management program in Chittagong.

   Under a Level I project restructuring in 2014, the PDO was revised as follows:

   Revised objective: The objective is to increase access to safe water and improve CWASA's institutional
   capacity and investment planning for sanitation and drainage in Chittagong City, (Schedule 1 of the Financing
   Agreement dated April 15, 2014). (CWASA refers to the Chittagong Water Supply and Sewerage Authority).

   For the ICRR, the revised objective is parsed as follows:

   Revised Objective 1: To increase access to safe water in Chittagong City.

   Revised Objective 2: Since the original Objective 2 was dropped under the 2014 restructuring, this objective
   is not included for further assessment in the ICRR.

   Revised Objective 3: To improve CWASA's institutional capacity and investment planning for sanitation and
   drainage.

   Split evaluation: The 2014 restructuring resulted in a change in the PDO which reduced the ambition of the
   project, accompanied by significant changes in PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators (IRIs).
   Consequently, a split evaluation is undertaken in the ICRR.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  16-Apr-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   (Reference PAD paras. 24 to 26 and Annex 4 and ICR paras. 9 to 11)




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 29
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



The project components at appraisal are indicated below. Changes in these components during project
restructurings are discussed later in Section 2 under the respective restructurings.

Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation: (appraised cost US$164.4 million; revised cost after
restructuring US$240.5 million; actual cost at completion US$209.7 million).

Component 1 was to consist of the following subcomponents:

1. Construction of a water treatment plant (WTP) at Modunaghat with a water treatment capacity of
delivering 90 million liters per day (mlpd).

2. Transmission system for treated water from the Modunaghat WTP, including rehabilitation of the pumping
station at Patenga.

3. Rehabilitation and extension of CWASA's water distribution system, including extension of the water
supply and sanitation system to selected urban slums.

4. Extension of water supply and sanitation service provision to urban slums.

5. Implementation of a pilot septic sludge handling system.

6. Supply of water supply related operational equipment, spare parts, and technical assistance for
improvement of operations and maintenance (O&M) of CWASA's water supply facilities.

7. Technical assistance to CWASA for contracts management, engineering design reviews, and supervision
for construction/rehabilitation activities.

8. Technical assistance for studies related to saline intrusion of the Halda river.

Component 2: Sewerage and Drainage: (appraised cost US$9.5 million; revised cost after restructuring
US$5.3 million; actual cost at completion US$4.2 million).

Component 2 would consist of technical assistance to be provided for the following subcomponents:

1. Confirmation, packaging and design of priority sewerage and sanitation investments.

2. Updating of drainage master plans and identification of priority investments. .

3. Rehabilitation of storm-water drainage canals.

4. Development of storm-water drainage and sewerage/sanitation plans.

5. Development of an institutional framework for provision of sewerage/sanitation and drainage services
among the principal stakeholder agencies:

Component 3: Institutional and Operational Development and Project Management Support:
(appraised cost US$12.9 million; revised cost after restructuring US$11.9 million; actual cost at completion
US$11.0 million).


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



  Component 3 would consist of the following subcomponents:

  1. Support for comprehensive institutional development of CWASA: Technical assistance, including
  consultancy services, equipment and supporting systems would be provided to CWASA for (i)
  modernization of CWASA's operational system and facilities; (ii).capacity building at all operational levels to
  improve CWASA's efficiency in delivering services; (iii) establishment of expanded facilities to support
  CWASA's expansion of delivery of services; and (iv) relevant training to CWASA staff.

  2. Direct support to the PMU: This would include: (i) provision of a team of experts to support the PMU's
  core team; (ii) .equipment and systems for oversight and monitoring functions; and (iii) technical assistance
  for financial management, procurement and contracts management, environmental and safeguards
  monitoring.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$186.8 million. Under restructurings,
  including the Additional Financing, the estimated total cost was increased to US$257.6 million. At project
  completion, the actual cost as reported in the Data Sheet of the ICR was US$196.4 million. However, there
  are some discrepancies in the ICR in reporting the actual cost at completion - Annex 3 of the ICR provides a
  figure of US$225 million. The project team clarified to IEG that the difference was due to cancellations of
  unused funds that were not reflected in the Annex 3 figures.

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was financed by an IDA grant of US$170 million. Under the Additional
  Financing, the IDA contribution was increased by US$47.49 million, resulting in total IDA financing of
  US$217.49 million. After project restructurings, which included some cancellations, the IDA contribution
  was reduced to US$183.1 million. At project closing, the amount of IDA funds disbursed was
  US$161.3 million. The unutilized balance was cancelled.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the planned contribution from the Borrower was
  US$16.8 million. After project restructurings, the planned contribution was increased to US$52.3 million. At
  project completion, the actual Borrower contribution was US$35.2 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 23, 2010 and became effective on October 27, 2010. The
  original closing date was December 31, 2015. This was extended four times by a total of 60 months (five
  years) to December 31, 2020.

  Mid-Term Review (MTR): A Mid-Term Review was carried out in December 2013.

  Restructurings: During its implementation period (2010 to 2020), the project underwent six restructurings
  as follows:

  First Restructuring: (March 2014, disbursed amount US$6.98 million or 4.3 % of total IDA funding).

  This was a Level I restructuring resulting in significant changes in project scope that reduced the ambition of
  the project in regard to achieving improved access to sanitation. Changes were made in the PDO and


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 29
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



associated PDO indicators, intermediate result indicators (IRIs) and targeted outputs. Principal changes
included:

Changes in PDO: The PDO was revised to " the objective of the project is to increase access to safe water
and improve CWASA's institutional capacity and investment planning for sanitation and drainage in
Chittagong City".

Changes in PDO Indicators: (ICR para. 24 and Table 1).

Dropped indicators: All indicators related to improved access to sanitation were dropped. This included the
indicators in regard to:

      Number of people in project area ward slums with access to safe water and improved sanitation.
      Clarified institutional mandates and responsibilities for sewerage and drainage.
      Establishment of a pilot septic sludge handling system.

Also dropped was the indicator "CWASA maintains O&M cost coverage from total revenues".

New indicators added:

      CWASA to cover O&M costs from direct water sales revenues.
      CWASA to maintain a Water Utility Maturity level of at least 3.0.
      Total value of priority sewerage and drainage investments of at least US$150 million to be identified
         and ready for financing.

Changes in Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs): (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

New indicators were added as follows:

Under Component 2:

      Sanitation and drainage strategy and Master Plans to be prepared and approved by CWASA's
         Board.

Under Component 3:

      Institutional development program to be prepared and approved by CWASA.
      Percentage of institutional development activities supported by the project that are completed and
         approved by CWASA's Board.
        Number of staff trained under approved staff training and development program.
        Standard operating procedures (SOPs) and O&M manuals are prepared and staff trained in their
         use.
        CWASA's Board to prepare and approve commercial management plan; management information
         systems plan; customer services improvement plan; and staff training and development program.
        Number of zonal offices to be refurbished and equipped under the project.



                                                                                               Page 5 of 29
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



Changes in Project Components: (ICR para. 15 and Restructuring Paper, Section on Proposed Changes).

Component 1: The component was renamed "Water Supply Improvement". The component was revised to
focus only on water supply improvement. Activities related to increasing access to improved sanitation were
dropped. The scope of the water distribution network was reduced to focus on priority investments identified
through hydraulic network analysis. The scope of water supply improvement in Low-Income Areas (LICs)
was reduced to focus only on two pilot slums selected by CWASA based on an assessment of needs as
well as other factors such as availability of water and the need to complete essential transmission and
distribution network improvements.

Component 2: The component was renamed "Investment Planning for Sanitation and Drainage". The
component was amended to focus only on provision of technical assistance for improving strategic and
investment planning for sewerage and drainage in Chittagong City. Physical investments related to
rehabilitation of drainage canals were dropped because priority needs were not identified, the institutional
framework for drainage activities was not clear, and CWASA lacked the relevant experience.

Component 3: The component was renamed "Institutional Capacity Development and Project Management
Support". There were no significant changes. The nature and scope of activities were better defined. Nine
new intermediate results indicators were added to enable better tracking of progress in achieving the
objective.

Second Restructuring: (June 2017, disbursed amount US$98 million, 62% of total IDA funding)

This was a Level I restructuring. Additional Financing was approved through an IDA grant of US$47.49
million partly to cover cost overruns resulting from increased costs of water supply improvements, including
transmission and distribution networks, and effects of exchange rate variations. The Borrower's contribution
was increased by US$35.6 million (from US$16.8 million to US$52.4 million).

Third Restructuring: (August 2019, disbursed amount US$127 million, 78% of total IDA funding).

This was a Level II restructuring. Component costs were revised due to cost savings realized from
competitive bidding for contracts. An amount of US$10 million was cancelled from the IDA credit.
Reallocations were made between categories.

Fourth Restructuring: (March 2020, disbursed amount US$148.23 million, 92% of total IDA funding).

This was a Level II restructuring. The closing date was extended by 2.5 months to June 30, 2020 due to
allow for delays due to COVID-19 impacts.

Fifth Restructuring: (June 2020, disbursed amount US$148.23 million, 92% of total IDA funding).

This was a Level II restructuring. The closing date was extended by 6.5 months to December 31, 2020 to
allow for delays due to COVID-19 impacts.

Sixth Restructuring: (December 2020, disbursed amount US$161.3 million, 100% of total IDA funding).

This was a Level II restructuring. An unutilized amount of US$10 million was cancelled from the IDA credit.



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Reference PAD paras. 1 to 5 and ICR paras. 28 to 30).

Country and Sector Context: At appraisal in 2010, out of an estimated population of 142 million,36 million
(25%) lived in urban areas. Of these, about 71% had access to safe water supply through piped water
supply (39%) and hand pump tube wells (32%). However, household access to water reached only a small
proportion of the population living in low-income neighborhoods and/or newly developed areas. Access to
improved sanitation services covered only about 50% of the population in urban areas. Inadequate
drainage systems in most urban areas exacerbated the water supply and sanitation situation. While overall
responsibility for the water supply and sanitation sectors fell under a central government ministry, the
sectors were managed by Water Supply and Sewerage Authorities (WASAs) in the larger cities (including
Chittagong) and by water supply and sanitation departments of local governments in the smaller cities.

Overall, the water supply and sanitation sectors were adversely impacted by significant capacity constraints
in the responsible institutions leading to inefficient operations, excessive and poorly targeted subsidies, and
inequitable access, especially for the lower-income segments. The Government of Bangladesh (GoB)
recognized the importance of addressing the sector issues under various national-level strategies and plans
including the National Strategy for Accelerated Poverty Reduction II (FY2009-2011); National Policy for
Safe Water Supply and Sanitation; National Sanitation Strategy; and Pro-Poor Strategy.

However, key issues that still remained to be addressed adequately were (i) improving and extending the
sectors' infrastructure to meet existing and growing demand and (ii) improving the efficiency and
sustainability of urban water and sanitation utilities, and improving accountability to
stakeholders. Chittagong was (and remains) Bangladesh's second largest city (after Dhaka). However, at
appraisal, access to piped water supply was available to only about 7% of the population and sanitation
services were seriously deficient, particularly in the urban slums and low-income communities
(LICs). CWASA is the main institution responsible for the water and sanitation services in Chittagong.
However, CWASA's functioning was affected by operational and management capacity constraints and
a lack of clarity in the institutional responsibilities particularly for the sewerage and drainage sectors.
The Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project (the Project) aimed to provide support in
addressing these issues.

Alignment with the Country Partnership Framework: At appraisal, the project's objective was consistent
with the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for 2011 to 2014 and the revised objective remains consistent
with the latest Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Fiscal Years 2016 to 2020. The CPF has three
focus areas (i) Growth and Competitiveness; (ii) Social Inclusion; and (iii) Climate and Environment


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 29
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



               Management. The project's objective is consistent with the following CPF objectives (CPF para. 46, Table
               8):

                                       CPF Objective 1.3 "improved delivery of basic services in urban areas.
                                       CPF Objective 2.3 "Improved social protection coverage to the poor".
                                       CPF Objective 3.2 "improved water resource infrastructure for climate resilience".

               The CPF confirms that, to support inclusive growth, the World Bank Group (WBG) activities will aim to
               consolidate the equity and access gains, and to address challenges related to quality improvements in
               health, access to clean drinking water and sanitation, and education and skills management. (CPF para.
               46).

               Alignment with National Priorities: At appraisal, the project's objective was consistent with the national
               priorities prevalent at the time as reflected in the GoB's national-level strategies and plans mentioned earlier
               above, and the revised objective remains consistent with the national priorities indicated in the GoB's
               Seventh Five Year Plan for the period 2016 to 2020 which specifies inclusive growth and eradication of
               poverty and includes strategies and targets related to water supply and sanitation. (ICR para. 30).

               Prior Bank Experience: The Bank has been involved in Bangladesh's water supply and sanitation sector
               since the 1960s including two water supply related projects in Chittagong, the last of which was completed
               in 1988. The latest Bank engagement in the sector is the Dhaka Water Supply and Sanitation Project.

               Relevance of Project Development Objectives: Given the context described above, the PDO was
               consistent (and remained consistent) with the priorities in the national programs and the Country Assistance
               Strategy/Country Partnership Frameworks. The PDO indicators and intermediate results indicators (IRIs)
               were largely relevant, measurable and adequate for signaling attribution of results to the project
               interventions, except as discussed later in Section 4 in the ICRR.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the sustainable access to safe water in Chittagong.

                             Rationale
                             The ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the theory of change (TOC). To increase access to safe
                             water in Chittagong, it was necessary to (i) increase water treatment capacity; (ii) rehabilitate and expand the
                             water transmission and distribution network; (iii) increase the number of new/rehabilitated piped household


                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



water connections and increase the number of new/rehabilitated community water points; and (iv) strengthen
the institutional capacity of CWASA to deliver efficient water supply services. The project would provide inputs
for financing investments and technical assistance. The inputs for investment financing would directly lead to
relevant physical outputs including (i) increase in water treatment capacity; (ii) rehabilitation and expansion of
the water transmission and distribution network; .and (iii) increase in the number of new/improved piped water
household connections and new/improved community water points. The inputs for financing of technical
assistance would lead to capacity building outputs of strengthening CWASA's institutional capacity in regard
improved delivery of water supply services. These outputs would directly lead to the outcome of increased
access to safe water for the population in Chittagong, including in selected low-income slum areas. The
longer-term outcome would be improved health and living conditions for the population in Chittagong.

The causal links and full results chain in the TOC in regard to Objective 1 were clear. The PDO and
intermediate results indicators (IRIs) adopted were relevant, measurable, and appropriate for assessing the
achievement of the objective. One area which could have been defined further was the meaning of "safe
water". No metrics were provided in regard to the minimum expected standards to be applied in assessing the
quality of the water.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

For assessment of efficacy under the original objectives, the ICRR assesses the achievement against the
original targets.

Targeted outputs and IRIs:

Targets achieved or overachieved

      Volume of safe water produced by CWASA (in million liters per day - mlpd) (baseline 172 mlpd;
         original target 260 mlpd; revised target 360 mlpd; actual 360 mlpd; achievement level against original
         target 209%).
        Length of new pipelines installed (baseline 0 km; original target 65 km; revised target 60 km; actual
         111 km; achievement level against original target 171%).
        Length of pipelines replaced and/or rehabilitated (baseline 0; original target 65 km; revised target 73
         km; actual 69 km; achievement level against original target 106%).
        Piped water household connections benefiting from rehabilitation under the project (baseline 0;
         original target 15,000; revised target 17,000; actual 17,200; achievement level against original
         target 101%).
        Number of water utilities supported under the project (baseline 0; original target 1; revised target 1;
         actual 1; achievement level against original target 100%).

Targets underachieved

      New piped household connections established under the project (baseline 0; original target 25,000;
         revised target 10,0000; actual 13,300; achievement level against original target 53%).
      Improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated under the project (baseline 0; original
         target 1000; revised target 150; actual 160; achievement level against original target 16%).




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)




      Number of other water service providers supported by the project (baseline 0; original target 10;
       revised target 2; actual 2; achievement level against original target 20%).

Other outputs:

      A Water Treatment Plant (WTP) with a capacity to deliver 90 mlpd of treated water was constructed
       and made operational, albeit with some delay as compared to the original schedule.
      Selected low-income communities were provided with water supply service.

PDO Indicators:

      Number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources under the project
       (baseline 0; original target 100,000; revised target 648,000; actual 790,000; achievement level 790%).
       The target was several times overachieved.
      Number of people in the project area ward slums with access to safe water and improved sanitation
       services (baseline 0; original target 250,000; revised target 0; actual 16,642; achievement against
       original target 6.6%). The target was not achieved.

Outcomes: The PDO indicator in regard to the number of people provided with access to improved water
services under the project was overachieved several times over. The project benefited from the increase in
the scope of this objective under the restructurings and the much longer than planned implementation
period. Most targets in regard to construction and improvement of water supply related infrastructure,
including water treatment capacity, transmission and distribution network improvement, and
household/community connections were achieved or overachieved, The target for production of treated water
was exceeded by 38% and for the number of connections (household and community-points) was exceeded
by 13%. The total number of beneficiaries was estimated at 790,000 exceeding the target of 100,000 several
times over. The ICR (para. 40, footnote 9) indicates that this increase in number includes the effects of a
change in the basis of computation. At appraisal, the assumption was that, on average, one new household
connection would serve four persons; with the planned installation of 25,000 new household connections, the
original target for increased access was 100,000 beneficiaries. At the 2014 restructuring, the target for new
household connections was reduced but that for community water connections was increased. As compared
to a new household connection, the new community connections were estimated to benefit 26 persons per
connection. This led to an increase in the targeted number of beneficiaries to 648,000. The actual
achievement was estimated at 790,000 beneficiaries. The ICR (para. 34) indicates that the project measured
access to safe water utilizing the definition employed under the WHO-UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme
(JMP) which refers to water sources that, by nature of their construction or through active intervention. are
protected from outside contamination, particularly fecal matter. These include piped water into a dwelling, plot
or yard, and other improved sources. However, the ICR does not provide any other metrics in regard to
acceptable water standards for assessing the quality of the water supplied.

The PDO indicator in regard to the number of people in the project area slums with access to safe water and
improved sanitation was not achieved.

On balance, while the achievements in regard to overall increase in access to safe water would normally have
merited a High rating, taking into account the low achievement of improved access to water supply in slums




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



(low-income communities or LICs), the ICRR rates the efficacy for Objective 1 as Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase access to safe water in Chittagong City.

Revised Rationale
As indicated earlier in Section 2, the original PDO was revised under the 2014 project restructuring.
Regarding the objective of increasing access to safe water, the revised PDO dropped the word "sustainable"
that was used in the original PDO and changed "Chittagong" to "Chittagong City". The ICRR has parsed
the Revised Objective 1 as indicated above.

The theory of change (TOC) remains essentially the same as discussed under Objective 1 above.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators: (as reported in the ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

For assessment of efficacy under the revised objectives, the ICRR assesses the achievement against the
revised targets.

Targeted outputs and IRIs:

Targets overachieved, achieved or substantially achieved

      Volume of safe water produced by CWASA (in million liters per day - mlpd) (baseline 172 mlpd;
         original target 260 mlpd; revised target 360 mlpd; actual 360 mlpd; achievement level against
         revised target 100%).
        Length of new pipelines installed (baseline 0 km; original target 65 km; revised target 60 km; actual
         111 km; achievement level against revised target 185%).
        Length of pipelines replaced and/or rehabilitated (baseline 0; original target 65 km; revised target 73
         km; actual 69 km; achievement level against revised target 95%).
        New piped household connections established under the project (baseline 0; original target 25,000;
         revised target 10,000; actual 13,300; achievement level against revised target 133%).
        Piped water household connections benefiting from rehabilitation under the project (baseline 0;
         original target 15,000; revised target 17,000; actual 17,200; achievement level against
         revised target 101%).
        Improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated under the project (baseline 0; original
         target 1000; revised target 150; actual 160; achievement level against revised target 107%).
        Number of water utilities supported under the project (baseline 0; original target 1; revised target 1;
         actual 1; achievement level against revised target 100%).


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)




        Number of other water service providers supported by the project (baseline 0; original target 10;
         revised target 2; actual 2; achievement level against revised target 100%).

Other outputs:

        A Water Treatment Plant (WTP) with a capacity to deliver 90 mlpd of treated water was constructed
         and made operational, albeit with some delay as compared to the original schedule.
        Selected low-income communities were provided with water supply service.

PDO Indicators:

        Number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water sources under the project
         (baseline 0; original target 100,000; revised target 648,000; actual 790,000; achievement level against
         revised target 122%). The target was overachieved.

Outcomes: The PDO indicator in regard to the number of people provided with access to improved water
services under the project was overachieved. The project benefited from the increase in the scope of this
objective under the restructurings and the much longer than planned implementation period. Most targets in
regard to construction and improvement of water supply related infrastructure, including water treatment
capacity, transmission and distribution network improvement, and household/community connections were
achieved or overachieved, The revised target for production of treated water was fully achieved and the
number of connections (household and community-points) was exceeded by 13%. The total number of
beneficiaries was estimated at 790,000 significantly exceeding the revised target of 648,000. Reasons for the
increase in the number of beneficiaries as compared to appraisal estimates are given above under Objective
1. As mentioned under Objective 1 above, the ICR does not provide any other metrics in regard to acceptable
water standards for assessing the quality of the water supplied.

Given the significant overachievement in the estimated number of beneficiaries of improved access to safe
water, the ICRR rates the efficacy for Revised Objective 1 as High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the sustainable access to improved sanitation in Chittagong.

Rationale
At appraisal, sanitation services in Chittagong lagged significantly behind needs. Sanitation services were
particularly weak in the urban slums (LICs). Responsibility for sanitation, sewerage and drainage services
was fragmented between different institutions, notably CWASA (Chittagong Water and Sanitation
Agency), CCC (Chittagong City Commission), and CDA (Chittagong Development Authority). Together with
capacity constraints and funding limitations, this limited the possibility for significant immediate expansion of
services. The focus under the project was on (i) piloting core approaches, including community-based


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



services;(iii) improving the institutional framework for provision of sanitation, sewerage and drainage services;
and (iii) limited investments in interventions with more immediate returns. The ICR provides a diagrammatic
presentation of the theory of change (TOC) as follows: The project would provide inputs through technical
assistance and limited investment financing to CWASA, CCC and CDA which would lead to the following
outputs: (i) selected LICs (Low Income Communities) would be provided with improved sanitation services; (ii)
a pilot septic sludge handling system would be implemented; (iii) prioritized drainage canals would be
rehabilitated; and (iv) sewerage and drainage master plans would be prepared and priority investments
identified. These outputs would contribute to outcomes of (i) increased delivery of sanitation services to
underserved areas; (ii) improved management of on-site sanitation facilities; and (iii) establishment of a long-
term sanitation, sewerage and drainage program in Chittagong. The longer-term outcomes would be (i)
improved health and productivity of the population and (ii) improved sustainability of the services.

While the TOC's causal links and full results chain were clear, the risks in regard to achievement of the
outputs and outcomes were not adequately assessed. The weaknesses in the institutional structure led to
serious delays in implementation of the component, leading to dropping of the objective at the 2014
restructuring.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

The efficacy of achievement of Objective 2 is assessed based on achievements as compared to the original
targets.

      Establishment of pilot septic sludge handling system. The target was not achieved

PDO Indicator:

      Number of people in project area ward slums with access to safe water and improved sanitation
       (baseline 0; original target 250,000; actual 16,642; achievement level against original target 6.6%).
       The target was not achieved.

Outcomes: As acknowledged in the ICR (para 35),the project was not able to increase access to improved
sanitation among the population of Chittagong. Objective 2 regarding providing sustainable access to
improved sanitation services was only negligibly achieved. The focus under the project was on improving
access to sanitation in slum areas, and this was not achieved. The PDO single indicator in this regard had an
achievement level of only 6.6% as compared to the original target (ICR para. 35). The pilot septic sludge
handling system, which was intended to serve as a model for future interventions, was not established.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 2 was dropped at the 2014 project restructuring. Consequently, there was no Revised Objective 2.

Revised Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



Under the 2014 project restructuring, the PDO was revised to focus on providing increased access in regard
to water supply alone, and the objective regarding increasing access to improved sanitation was dropped.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support establishment of a long-term water supply, sanitation and drainage infrastructure development
and operational management program in Chittagong.

Rationale
At appraisal, sewerage and drainage services in Chittagong were lagging significantly behind needs due to
a lack of clarity in institutional responsibilities for infrastructure development and operation among the main
institutional bodies involved and limitation of available funds. The ICR provides a diagrammatic theory of
change (TOC). The project would provide inputs through financing of technical assistance and investments
which would lead to required outputs including: (i) confirmation, packaging and design of priority sewerage
and sanitation investments; (ii) updating of drainage master plans and identification of priority drainage
investments; (iii) rehabilitation of a limited number of drainage canals on a priority basis; and (iv) development
of storm-water drainage and sewerage/sanitation plans. These outputs would lead to the outcomes of
(i) establishing a long-term water supply, sanitation and drainage infrastructure development and operational
program in Chittagong and (ii) improving CWASA's investment planning for sanitation and drainage in
Chittagong. The longer-term outcomes would be improved sustainability of sanitation and drainage services
in Chittagong with benefits for the health and productivity of the population of Chittagong.

The TOC's causal links and results chain were clear. The PDO indicators and IR indicators were valid,
relevant and measurable, and were adequate in signaling that the results obtained were attributable to the
project activities.

Outputs and Intermediate Results Indicators: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework).

In regard to establishment of an infrastructure development program for water supply, sanitation and drainage
in Chittagong:

      Establishment of a development program for water supply: The target was not achieved.
      Establishment of a master plan for sanitation: The target was achieved.
      Establishment of a master plan for drainage. The target was achieved.
      Mandates and responsibilities for sanitation and drainage in Chittagong to be clarified. The target was
       achieved.
      Establishment of a mutually agreed framework between CWASA , CCC and CDA ,under which
       CWASA was to take responsibility for development and O&M of the sanitation system and CCC was
       to be responsible for the drainage system. However, the ICR notes (para. 36) that roles and




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



       responsibilities related to fecal sludge management were not established. The target was partially
       achieved.

In regard to the establishment of an operational management program for water supply, sanitation and
drainage infrastructure in Chittagong:

      Establishment of an operational management program for water supply by CWASA. The target was
       achieved,
      Establishment of an operational management program for sanitation. The target was not achieved.
      Establishment of an operational management program for drainage, The target was not achieved.

PDO Indicators:

      Clarified institutional mandates and responsibilities for sewerage and drainage established (baseline -
       no; target - yes; revised target - yes; actual - yes). The target was partially achieved.;
      CWASA achieves O&M cost coverage from total revenues (baseline 99%; original target 100%; actual
       92%; achievement level against original target 92%). The target was underachieved.
      CWASA maintains O&M cost coverage from direct water sales revenues (baseline 93%; original target
       100%; revised target 85%; actual 86 %; achievement level against original target 92%). The
       target was underachieved.

Outcomes: In regard to the targeted establishment of long-term infrastructure development plans, the project
achieved the targets to establish master plans for sanitation and drainage but did not achieve that in regard to
water supply. Other significant achievements were the establishment of an institutional framework for defining
and demarcating responsibilities between CWASA, CCC and CDA in regard to sanitation and drainage.
Regarding establishment of operational management programs, while one was set up for water supply
CWASA, those for sanitation and drainage were not completed at project closing. Regarding the PDO
indicators for this objective, the target in respect of clarified mandates was partially achieved except in sludge
management. Targets in regard to CWASA's O&M cost coverage were underachieved.

On balance, taking into account the underachievement of the PDO indicators, the ICRR rates efficacy for
Objective 3 as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve CWASA's institutional capacity and investment planning for sanitation and drainage in Chittagong
City.

Revised Rationale
At the project restructuring in 2014, the project component for sanitation and drainage was modified to drop
activities related to carrying out investments for physical infrastructure for significant lack of progress in

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



identifying priorities, preparing procurement documents, and unclear institutional framework in regard to
responsibilities. The component was amended to focus only on providing technical assistance for strategic
and investment planning for sanitation and drainage. The ICR provides a diagrammatic presentation of the
TOC. The project would provide inputs by financing technical assistance, including consultancies, supporting
equipment and systems, and relevant training for CWASA staff. These inputs would directly contribute to
outputs related to strengthening CWASA's institutional capacity, including for planning and operations. The
outputs would include: (i) improvements in CWASA's organizational framework; (ii) development of plans for
Management and Information Systems, Commercial Management, and Customer Services Improvement; (iii)
development of a decentralized management model including Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and
O&M Manuals; and (iv) relevant training to the concerned CWASA staff in regard to improved planning and
operationalization of the improved procedures and practices. These outputs would lead to the outcome of
strengthened planning and operational capacity for CWASA, including for sanitation and drainage. The
longer-term outcomes would be improved performance by CWASA in delivering water supply, sanitation, and
drainage services to the population in Chittagong City contributing thereby to improved health and productivity
benefits for the population.

The TOC's causal links and full results chain were clear. The PDO indicators and the IR indicators were
relevant, measurable and adequate for signaling attribution of the results to the project interventions.

Outputs and Intermediate Result Indicators: (ICR Annex 1 - Results Framework)

Targets overachieved, achieved or substantially achieved

      Sanitation and drainage strategy and master plan prepared by CWASA and approved by CWASA's
         Board. The target was achieved.
        Volume of safe water produced by CWASA (million liters per day - mlpd): (baseline 172 mlpd; target
         360 mlpd; actual 360 mlpd; achievement level 100%).
        Volume of safe water sold/billed by CWASA (million liters per year- mlpy): (baseline 45,554 mlpy;
         target 105,120 mlpy; actual 92,471 mlpy; achievement level 88%).
        Institutional development plan prepared by CWASA and approved by CWASA's Board. The target was
         achieved.
        Plans for Management and Information Systems, Commercial Management, and Customer Services
         Improvement prepared by CWASA and approved by CWASA's Board. The individual targets were
         achieved.
        Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and O&M Manuals prepared by CWASA and staff trained in
         their use. The target was achieved.
        Percentage of institutional capacity development activities supported by the project that are completed
         and approved by CWASA's Board. (baseline 40%; target 60%; actual 98%; achievement level 163%).
        Staff training development program prepared by CWASA and approved by CWASA's Board. The
         target was achieved.
        Number of staff trained under approved training and development programs: (baseline 0; target 350;
         actual 467; achievement level 134%).
        Number of zonal offices refurbished and equipped under the project (baseline 0; target 4; actual 4;
         achievement level 100%).

Targets underachieved


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)




      CWASA's bill collection rate (baseline 99%; target 99%; actual 83%; achievement level 84%).

PDO Indicators:

      CWASA to achieve O&M cost coverage from direct water sales revenues (baseline 93%; original
       target 100%; revised target 85%; actual 86%; achievement level 101%). The revised target was
       achieved.
      CWASA to achieve a Water Utility Maturity (WUM) target level (target 3.00; actual; 3.06; achievement
       level 102%). The target was achieved. (The WUM proposes a generic assessment framework under
       which the utility's maturity level is assessed using five broad institutional dimensions (i) organizational
       behavior; (ii) structure/processes; (iii) capabilities; (iv) organizational; tools; and (v) influence. Each
       dimension is defined by four or five attributes adding up to a total of 22. (ICR para. 41, footnote 10).
      Total value of priority sanitation and drainage investments identified, prepared, and ready for financing
       (baseline 0; original target US$150 million; revised target US$150 million; actual US$476 million;
       achievement level 317%). The target was substantially overachieved.

Targets underachieved

      CWASA's bill collection rate (baseline 99%; target 99%; actual 83%; achievement level 84%)

Outcomes: In regard to improving CWASA's institutional capacity, most targets in regard to outputs and
intermediate results indicators were achieved or overachieved. The PDO indicator targets regarding
CWASA's utility maturity level and O&M cost coverage through direct water sales were met. The ICR reports
(para. 41) that the achievement of the target regarding utility maturity level was confirmed by an independent
audit in 2019. The maturity level indicates that actions to realize strategies and policies are in place in
CWASA to sustainably execute its mandate and achieve its organizational objectives. The ICR reports that
the graduation in maturity level was underpinned by successes across multiple attributes including strategic
and customer orientation, technical operations, commercial orientation, and financial management. The ICR
reports (para. 42) that CWASA has put in place a 5-year Strategic Plan, and made significant improvements
in enhancing commercialization, accountability, and effectiveness of key technical operational processes
including development and utilization of SOP and O&M Manuals. The ICR reports (para. 42) that these
improvements have resulted in service improvement in regard to supply reliability, water pressure and
customer service, which were confirmed by a Customer Satisfaction Survey in 2018. However, significant
weaknesses still remain in CWASA's financial situation including bill collection rates that were less than
targeted and less than full coverage of its O&M costs.

In regard to improving CWASA's investment planning for sanitation and drainage, the PDO indicator in regard
to identification and preparation of priority investments was substantially overachieved. The ICR reports
(para. 43) that priority investments totaling US$476 million have been identified and prepared for execution
(compared to the target of US$!50 million). These strategic investments are contained in two master plans -
for sanitation and drainage respectively - approved for Chittagong City in 2017. The plans specify priority
investments up to 2030. The sanitation master plan will be implemented by CWASA while CCC will be
responsible for implementing the drainage master plan. The ICR reports (para. 43) that three projects
identified in the master plans have secured funding from the Government, indicating a start of implementation
of the master plans. With the capacity building and clarification of institutional responsibilities supported by
the project, the major constraints that led to the dropping of the original Objective 2 in regard to improving



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 29
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



                              access to sanitation are being addressed and the prospects of successful implementation of the priority
                              sanitation investments have improved.

                              Based on the foregoing, taking into account the overachievement of all three PDO indicators, and while noting
                              the persisting weaknesses in CWASA's financial self-sustainability with less than full coverage of O&M costs,
                              the ICRR rates the efficacy for the Revised Objective 3 as Substantial.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As discussed earlier in Section 4, the ICRR ratings are:

                            Objective 1 - Substantial with moderate shortcomings

                            Objective 2 - Negligible

                            Objective 3 - Modest

                            Based on the above, the ICRR rates overall efficacy as Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            As discussed earlier in Section 4, the ICRR ratings are:

                            Revised Objective 1 - High

                            Revised Objective 2 - Not rated (Objective 2 was dropped at the 2014 project restructuring)

                            Revised Objective 3 - Substantial

                            Based on the above, the ICRR rates the revised efficacy as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating

                                                                                                                             Page 18 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

At appraisal: The economic efficiency of the project was assessed using a cost-benefit methodology based on
an incremental net benefits approach, i.e. incremental costs and benefits attributable to the project derived from
a comparison of the "with project" and "without project" scenarios. The analysis was carried out only for the
water supply component under the project (covering about 90% of project costs). Economic costs included the
capital investment costs, estimated O&M costs, and periodic re-investment costs. Economic benefits included (i)
incremental consumption due to the project; (ii) health and cost savings from households switching from non-
network sources to piped water supply that replaces existing water supply; (iii) time cost savings by bringing
water closer to the households; and (iv) improvement in unaccounted water with the rehabilitation of the water
supply transmission and distribution networks. The indicators of economic viability adopted were the Economic
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) and the Economic Net Present Value. The valuation was carried out for a period
of 25 years using a discount rate of 10%. Based on this, the appraisal estimates of economic viability were:
EIRR 16.7% and ENPV BDT 5,531 million. (PAD - Annex 9).

Post-completion: For the ICR, the post-completion analysis (ICR - Annex 4) has been carried out using the
same methodology as at appraisal to enable comparisons with the appraisal estimates. However, the analysis
includes some changes in assumptions. The main assumptions are indicated below:

Incremental consumption due to the project: (i) includes incremental consumption by existing customers as well
as new customers provided with piped water connections; (ii) bases valuation on prevailing water tariff rates
which were assessed to be low and therefore not indicative of peoples' willingness-to-pay.(WTP). It should be
noted that this valuation is conservative since the prevailing tariffs are low and an alternative valuation of
benefits based on WTP estimation from customer surveys would likely result in higher valuation than assumed in
the ICR.

Cost-savings on non-incremental water source switching: (i) estimated on the basis of households switching
from non-network sources to piped water from the network for reasons of health and cost saving; (ii)
estimates that more than 1 million people were relying on non-network sources before the project; (iii)
assumes that 50% of this number would switch to piped water supply from the project.

Time cost saving by households: (i) estimates that 13,300 piped water connections provided by the project
would benefit over 65,000 households; (ii) .estimates time saving per household was 1 hour per day; (iii) bases
valuation on opportunity cost of the time spent on water collection. This was valued using average labor costs in
Chittagong as a proxy for the cost of time spent on water collection.

Reduction in unaccounted for water: (i) according to CWASA, the level of unaccounted for water was 27% in
2019. This level was higher than assumed at appraisal; (ii) the post-completion analysis assumes that, in the
absence of the project, this level would have been higher and would increase in the future; (iii) .bases valuation
on average water supply tariffs.

Based on the above, the post-completion estimates of the project's economic efficiency are:


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



EIRR - 22% (exceeding the estimates of 18.5% at appraisal and 16.7% at Additional Financing).

ENPV - BDT 10,761 million (exceeding the appraisal estimate of BDT 5,531 million).

The ICR notes (para. 47) that the post-completion economic viability indicators were higher than the appraisal
estimates despite the delays that occurred in project implementation, and this was mainly due to the higher than
expected benefits derived from time-cost savings (due to reduction in time spent on water collection) which were
valued at the opportunity cost of wages that would have been lost due to time spent non water collection. This
valuation was fortuitously increased by the significant increase in average labor costs over the implementation
period of the project.

Implementation Efficiency

Project duration: As compared to the planned implementation period of 5,5 years, the actual implementation
period was 10.5 years including four extensions of the project's closing date. As acknowledged in the ICR (para.
50), there were substantial delays in the early years of implementation mainly due to weaknesses in
procurement processes and capacity. Two of the extensions were for reasons exogenous to the project - the
impact of national elections and floods in 2018 and the COVID-19 pandemic in 2019-2020.

Project cost: As compared to the estimated cost of US$186.8 million at appraisal, and the supplementary
funding of US$83.1 million provided through the Additional Financing in 2017, the actual project cost at
completion was US$196.4 million. During the implementation period, there were three cancellations of IDA
funding for a total of US$34.5 million. The cancellations resulted from a combination of factors including
dropping of some of the originally planned investments (in regard to sanitation and drainage) and cost savings
resulting from competitive bidding for contracts.

Assessment of Efficiency

Although the estimated post-completion economic viability indicators are higher than those estimated at
appraisal, as noted in the ICR (Annex 4), this occurred despite the much longer than planned implementation
period, and was principally the result of exogenous factors - an unanticipated increase in labor costs that
contributed to increased value of time cost saving benefits - one of the principal components of project benefits.
The project's implementation period was substantially longer than planned partly as a result of serious delays in
the earlier period of implementation. While project costs were substantially lower than estimated at appraisal
and Additional Financing, this also included the effect of dropping of some activities related to the sanitation and
drainage component. On balance, the ICRR concurs with the ICR rating and rates the project's efficiency as
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



                                                                                          90.00
Appraisal                                                    16.70
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          93.00
ICR Estimate                                                 22.00
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Indicator                  Before Restructuring        After Restructuring
Relevance                  Substantial                 Substantial
Efficacy                   Modest                      Substantial
Objective 1                Substantial                 Not rated
Objective 2                Negligible                  Not rated
Objective 3                Modest                      Not rated
Revised Objective 1        Not rated                   High
Revised Objective 2        Not rated                   Not rated
Revised Objective 3        Not rated                   Substantial
Efficiency                 Modest                      Modest
                           Moderately                  Moderately
Outcome Rating
                           Unsatisfactory              Satisfactory
Outcome Value              3                           4
Disbursement               US$ 6.98 million            US$154.84.3million
Disbursement
                           4.3%                        95.7%
percentage
Weight value               0.13                        3.83
                           0.13 + 3.83 = 3.96
Total weight                                                          ---
                           (rounded to 4.00)
Overall Outcome
                           Moderately Satisfactory
Rating




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical and operational risks: These are rated Moderate. While CWASA has the requisite technical
capacity to carry out its operations, its operating efficiency will depend on its ability to maintain and operate

                                                                                                         Page 21 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



its equipment and facilities in good working order. Timely and adequate availability of financial resources to
cover its O&M expenses will be crucial for efficient performance. Despite the support of the project, CWASA
was not able to reach full cost coverage of its O&M expenses from its water sales revenues. Continued
government support for improving its operating revenues will be a key requirement for future sustainability.

Financial risks: These are rated Moderate. As discussed above, continued government support would be
needed to enable CWASA to realize sufficient operating revenues through its water and sanitation activities.
However, tariffs for these activities are affected by political and social considerations, resulting in lower than
cost-recovery levels. In addition, as reported in the ICR (para. 89), CWASA has accumulated high levels of
debt and, starting from the year 2024, it will face increasing debt service levels. These obligations will have
to be factored in the setting of adequate levels of tariffs.

Institutional capacity risks: These are rated Moderate. While CWASA's institutional capacity has been
significantly strengthened under the project, sustainability of these gains will require continued commitment
from CWASA management along with strong support from the government. Lacking these, the gains could
be progressively eroded.

Sanitation service delivery risks: These are rated Moderate. CWASA's model for service delivery to LICs
relies on community-based organizations as key stakeholders in the process. Critical to success would be
the ability of these organizations to carry out their responsibilities. Future scaling up of the current pilot-level
activities will depend upon demonstrated success in applying this model.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project represented a re-engagement by the Bank with CWASA after a period of two decades. The
  strategic relevance and PDO were well aligned with the GoB's development agenda and the Bank's
  Country Assistance Strategy. The project design included a poor-inclusive and comprehensive approach
  by including service provision to low-income communities (LICs) and initiating steps to address the
  sanitation and drainage issues by improved planning and development. The project design followed a
  phased-support approach by laying emphasis on priority water supply related investments while laying
  the foundation for future greater involvement in the sanitation and drainage sectors. Pilot activities were
  included to test and demonstrate approaches that had not been explored e.g. community-based water
  supply and sanitation services and a pilot septic sludge handling system with the aim of scaling-up based
  on experience. The Bank's appraisal took into account the need to balance investments in physical
  infrastructure with substantial institutional development. Technical, financial and economic aspects were
  well covered at appraisal. Appropriate arrangements were included in regard to environmental and social
  safeguards. The risk assessment was relevant and adequate mitigation measures proposed. However,
  as recognized in the ICR (para. 83), the project design and preparation had some deficiencies including
  incomplete diagnostics for sanitation and drainage activities; weaknesses in the PMU, particularly in
  regard to procurement management, (iii) insufficient readiness for implementation; and (iv) some

                                                                                                         Page 22 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



  weaknesses in the M&E system - the ICR indicates that this was particularly the case for sanitation
  activities and led to the dropping of the objective at the 2014 restructuring.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project experienced serious delays in the earlier years of project implementation. While the project
 was approved in June 2010, by the time of the first restructuring in 2014, only about 4% of the IDA funds
 had been disbursed. Implementation progress picked up after the Mid Term Review (MTR) in 2013 that led
 to the 2014 Level I restructuring. The restructuring reduced the project scope to selected critical works and
 technical assistance activities and the amount of the credit was reduced from US$170 million to US$157.8
 million. This resulted in a revised PDO, and substantial changes in the Results Framework, including
 the PDO and IR indicators, as well as targets. Key support provided following the restructuring included
 technical assistance for CWASA's institutional strengthening program; an assessment of LICs provided
 through the Bank's Water and Sanitation Program; and hydraulic modeling of the distribution network as a
 basis for rationalizing CWASA's water distribution network. Following the restructuring, the project
 supervision team proactively followed up with CWASA and the PMU on implementation progress including
 technical quality management of the subprojects, contract management, and administrative actions
 required to expedite progress. Hands-on support, coaching and training, including in regard to procurement
 and financial management, were provided by Bank specialists as needed. However, one significant
 shortcoming during project supervision was the failure to address the substantial weaknesses in the M&E
 system that led to limited use of the M&E data for decision-making, identifying implementation problems
 and taking remedial actions in regard to improving project implementation progress. (This is discussed
 later in the ICRR in Section 9 under M&E Utilization).

 The Bank fielded a total of 20 supervision missions during the implementation period. The project had
 three TTLs over its span. The missions were adequately supported by safeguard and
 fiduciary specialists. The back-to-office reporting in the ISRs was candid with PDO ratings ranging from
 unsatisfactory to satisfactory over the implementation period. Following the 2014 restructuring,
 implementation progress was consistently rated at Moderately Satisfactory until project closing.

 On balance, given the substantial delays in implementation in the earlier years of project implementation,
 and inability to address some persistent weaknesses in the M&E system, the ICRR rates Bank
 performance during Supervision as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 23 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The ICR indicates (para. 69) that the project's M&E system was developed to optimize use of CWASA's
 routine monitoring and reporting system used for producing CWASA's Management Information Report. It
 was complemented with other project management reports. The project-related M&E system included a
 well-developed Results Framework including PDO indicators and Intermediate Result Indicators with
 intermediate and final targets. In most cases, baseline values were included. The indicators were relevant,
 measurable and generally adequate for signaling attribution of results to the project interventions. However,
 the ICR notes (para. 69) that there was one significant deficiency in regard to the PDO objective "To
 increase the sustainable access to sanitation". None of the PDO indicators adopted at appraisal was
 explicitly related to this outcome. The PDO indicator used for assessing access to sanitation actually
 related only to access to safe water. The indicator was dropped at the 2014 restructuring with the dropping
 of the objective of increased sustainable access to sanitation.



b. M&E Implementation
  Shortcomings in the M&E framework as designed were addressed during project implementation,
  particularly at the 2014 restructuring under which the PDO was revised and the PDO indicators and IR
  indicators formulated and aligned with the PDO, along with revisions in the associated targets based on
  experience. The Results Framework was strengthened through additional IR indicators, particularly in
  regard to the objective of CWASA's institutional strengthening and investment planning,. This included a
  new PDO indicator Water Utility Maturity level which measured utility institutional strength across key
  dimensions (discussed earlier in Section 4 under Revised Objective 3). The PDO indicator target
  regarding number of people gaining access to improved water supply was revised twice - under the 2014
  restructuring and the 2017 Additional Financing. Under the latter, the target was revised upwards by over
  four times while the target for number of connections increase only slightly. The ICR reports (para. 70)
  this was due to revisions reported by CWASA regarding the number of beneficiaries supported per water
  connection. The ICR acknowledges (para. 70) this reflects a weakness in the M&E design which
  persisted for some time during implementation as well. The ICR reports (para. 71) that tracking and
  reporting of indicators faced challenges from a lack of dedicated staff within the PMU, resulting in
  irregular progress reporting and difficulty in validating authenticity and reliability of the information through
  comparison between different sources.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para. 72) that utilization of the project's M&E system was limited top providing updated
  information on project progress required for reporting to the Bank's supervision missions. The ICR
  further reports that lack of progress shown in the M&E results at early stages of project implementation
  did not prompt any appropriate remedial actions. Continued weaknesses in the M&E system hampered
  the PMU's ability in regard to decision-making and meeting project deadlines. The ICR reports that that
  M&E data were not used in contract management processes to flag issues and prompt actions to
  address poorly performing contracts.




                                                                                                        Page 24 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



  Assessment of M&E Quality

  Based on the shortcomings identified above, the ICRR concurs with the ICR rating and rates the quality
  of the M&E system as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards

   At appraisal, the project was designated a Category B project that triggered two safeguard policies,
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). These
   were maintained through all subsequent project restructurings. Two policy frameworks were developed: the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).

   Environmental: The ICR reports (paras 74 and Annex 7 - paras. 4 to 11) that Environmental Impact
   Assessments (EIAs) were prepared for the execution of the contracts for the WTP, transmission and
   distribution pipelines, and pumping stations. It affirms that provisions of the ESMF and EIAs complied with
   the provisions of OP/BP 4.01. The implementation of the safeguard measures was the responsibility of the
   contractors, with supervision by the PMU. The Bank team followed the progress of implementation,
   including through site visits. The safeguard measures being followed were found to be satisfactory. No
   cases of significant non-compliance were reported in the ICR.

   Annex 7 to the ICR confirms (para. 12) that routine safeguard activities under the project were implemented
   by including the provisions in the contractual obligations. However, it observes that implementation of the
   "Capacity Building and Technical Assistance" part of the activities was poor and most of the resources
   allocated for this purpose could not be utilized. In paras. 6 to 12, it identifies some environment-related
   capacity-building issues that were not satisfactorily addressed during implementation. These include: (i) the
   Environmental Management Framework (EMF) described in the PAD was ambitious and some of the
   components could not be provided; (ii) most of the capacity building components identified at appraisal
   could not be implemented, partly due to the lack of support from CWASA management which did not accept
   the need for a separate environment focused unit in CWASA; and (iii) the intended training did not make
   any headway. The Annex also indicates the need for publishing the Water Resources Study that
   was carried out in regard to dealing with the issue of salinity of water sources (including from the Halda
   River) since the issue is of critical importance in ensuring quality of treated water from the Modunaghat
   WTP supported under the project.

   Social: The ICR reports (para. 76) that the mitigation measures stipulated in the RPF were fully
   implemented. Possible sources of adverse impacts were anticipated for all major works with adequate
   mitigation provided. No acquisition of private land was required during implementation. Required lands were
   obtained through intergovernmental transfers. Civil works for transmission pipelines and the distribution
   network were implemented in a manner to minimize disruptions to businesses and the population. The only


                                                                                                  Page 25 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



  resettlement impact under the project was the displacement of two temporary makeshift structures (affecting
  three households) which was done in accordance with an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan reviewed and
  cleared by the Bank's Regional Safeguards Advisor. The ICR reports (para. 78) that, during the Covid-19
  outbreak, CWASA suspended all construction and civil works at all worksites and re-started work on a
  limited scale in the middle of June 2020 when the lockdown was withdrawn. The ICR affirms that the
  interim guidance note was implemented to the extent possible including through provision of extra and safer
  labor camps, daily temperature and symptom checks for all workers and contractors, and on-site
  handwashing and wearing of facemasks. However, practicing social distancing among workers was a
  challenge. Annex 7 (para. 13) affirms that a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was set up under the
  project but reports that beneficiaries were unaware of the GRM and the redress process. It recommends
  that the GRM should be a critical component of citizen engagement and should receive widespread publicity
  in the project areas.

  The ICR does not report what were the Safeguards ratings in the last ISR before project closing. The ICR
  Annex 7 (para. 22) confirms that CWASA's overall social safeguards performance was always rated
  satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: The ICR reports (para. 79) that, despite some issues, procurement was generally carried
  out in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines and the Consultant Guidelines (for the original project)
  and Procurement Regulations (for the Additional Financing). The main issues faced were related to
  inadequate procurement capacity in the PMU due to delays in recruitment of procurement staff and
  consultants in the PMU. This contributed to significant delays at the start of the project. The ICR reports
  that the issue was resolved later during implementation with the provision of dedicated procurement staff in
  the PMU. The Bank supervision team also provided capacity-building support. However, weaknesses in
  the project's M&E system (discussed earlier in Section 9) led to limited utilization of the system for
  monitoring of contracts, another factor contributing to delays in implementation. Despite these deficiencies,
  the ICR reports that, overall, CWASA was able to successfully complete procurement processes for five
  high-value works contracts executed with adequate quality. The ICR reports that there was one case of
  fraud in regard to oversight of procurement and controls in contract management during the second half of
  project implementation. This involved an international consulting firm engaged under a supervision
  contract. The Bank's INT (Integrity Vice Presidency) found that the firm, along with its sub-contractor firm,
  engaged in various forms of fraud and corruption, including corrupt payments to key officials. The ICR
  does not report on the actions taken after the investigation. In reviewing the draft ICRR submitted to them
  for comments, CWASA commented as follows: "CWASA is totally unaware of of this allegation. As far as
  we know, no such case was found about the key officials' involvement in corrupt practices". (Letter dated
  November 16, 2021 from the CWASA Managing Director to the Bank's Country Operations Manager in
  Dhaka).

  Financial Management: The ICR reports (Annex 8) that, during project implementation, annual external
  audits for the project were conducted on a regular basis and audit reports were duly submitted to the Bank
  for review. However, from time to time, there were some significant issues in regard to compliance:

        Initial delays in submission of quarterly unaudited financial reports (IUFR).

                                                                                                  Page 26 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



         No internal audit was carried out for the first three years of the project as an internal auditor was not
          appointed until after the MTR. An internal audit report was submitted only towards the end of the
          project.
         During the first four years of implementation, submission of CWASA's entity audit reports
          was significantly delayed. Even by the end of the project, the delay had been brought down to
          about one year which the ICR claims was remarkable progress.
         There was a two year delay in setting up the Project Audit Committee that reviewed the audit
          reports.

   The ICR does not report on the fiduciary (procurement and financial management) ratings in the last ISR
   before project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report any significant unintended impacts.



d. Other
   Gender: The project's objective included increasing access to safe water. The project interventions
   included increasing and improving the number of household and community connections which led to
   convenience and time saving benefits for the households. Although gender was not specifically a focus
   under the project, to the extent that women played a special role within households in regard to ensuring
   adequacy of water and the health of children, they benefited from the project interventions.

   Poverty Reduction: The original project had a component focused on increasing access to safe water and
   sanitation for urban slums and low-income communities. The objective in regard to sanitation was dropped
   at the 2014 restructuring and the scope of the water supply component reduced to address the needs of
   two slums on a pilot basis. Nevertheless, the project supported CWASA to prepare a model for providing
   community-based water supply and sanitation services. CWASA expects to be able to scale-up the delivery
   based on the experience with pilot schemes.

   Institutional Strengthening; This was a major focus area under the project and the achievements were
   discussed earlier in Section 4 of the ICRR.

   Mobilizing Private Sector Support: This was not a focus under the project.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment



                                                                                                     Page 27 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                    The ICRR rates Bank
                                                                                    performance for Quality-at-Entry
                                                                                    as Moderately Satisfactory due
                                                                                    to insufficient readiness for
                                                                                    implementation and weaknesses
                                                                                    in the M&E framework and Bank
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    performance during Supervision
                                                                                    as Moderately Satisfactory in
                                                                                    view of delays in the earlier
                                                                                    years of implementation and
                                                                                    persistent weaknesses in the
                                                                                    M&E system.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras. 94 to 98) provides a number of lessons learned from the project's experience.
Based thereon, IEG derives the following lessons:

Defining the scope of the project based on incomplete diagnostics can adversely affect
project performance. The project's experience has shown that large infrastructure works, such as
the water treatment and transmission/distribution facilities supported under the project, need to be
preceded by robust preparation and analytical works that clearly define the priorities to be followed
during implementation. Uncertainty in this regard led to delays in identifying and initiating priorities to
be addressed for improving CWASA's network. It was only after a hydraulic modeling exercise was
carried out at the 2014 restructuring that the network improvement priorities were established and
addressed.

Establishment of a well-staffed and well-equipped Project Management Unit prior to the
start of implementation is crucial for ensuring efficient implementation: The absence of a
strong, well-staffed and well-managed PMU was a critical factor in the significant delays in the
earlier years of implementation. In the case of the project, adequate staffing of the PMU, including
consultants, dedicated staff with designated functions, and a project manager were not in place until
after the 2014 restructuring i.e. four years into project implementation. This contributed in part to the
delayed completion of the project.

 Adequate attention needs to be paid throughout project implementation to ensuring that the
project's M&E system remains updated and functional: The experience under the project
showed that M&E analysis and data were not readily available to PMU staff to monitor
implementation progress and initiate remedial actions. The ICR notes that this contributed to the
delays in implementation.



                                                                                                       Page 28 of 29
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BD: Chittagong Water Supply Improvement (P103999)



Institutional development of a utility is a long process and, if possible, should build on the
client's own program/platform: The ICR assesses that CWASA's ownership of the institutional
strengthening and reforms supported under the project was reinforced by the fact that this was built
on the already ongoing "Go-Ahead" Program that was being implemented by CWASA. CWASA's
continuing strong commitment to institutional reform would be crucial in sustaining the institutional
improvement gains made under the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, candid, and generally follows the OPCS guidelines (except in regard to length - 26
pages compared to the recommended 15 pages). The ICR provides a good theory of change in regard to the
causal links and full results chain, and the reporting is outcome-focused. The analysis is generally evidence
based but constrained to some extent by weaknesses in the project's M&E system. The ICR does have some
shortcomings. In regard to the technical assistance provided under the project, it focuses more on reporting
project outputs but does not provide sufficient information on the impacts of the outputs e.g. operationalization
of the plans/programs and evidence of improved performance. The ICR also has some inconsistencies in
reporting of project costs as provided in the Data Sheet and Annex 3.

On balance, the ICRR rates the quality of the ICR as Substantial with minor shortcomings.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 29 of 29
