     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0022706

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P147010                                     Higher Education Reforms Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nepal                                       Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55860                                   30-Jun-2020                                            60,303,795.84

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Feb-2015                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              65,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                               62,656,481.70                                                 0.00

 Actual                                           60,303,795.84                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Katharina Ferl               Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez                 IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                           Maldonado




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.viii) and the Financing Agreement of April 6, 2015 (p.
   5), the objective of the project was “to support reforms in selected institutions for improving quality, relevance,
   and efficiency of higher education; and to assist under-privileged students for equitable access.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                       Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-May-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Implementation of Reforms (appraisal estimate US$60.0 million, actual US$57.5
   million): This component was to finance four Results Areas:

   Results Area 1: Systemic and Institutional Reforms: This results area was to support reforms associated
   with: i) more effective public funding of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs); ii) institutionalization of the
   national accreditation system; iii) greater institutional and academic autonomy of constituent and academic
   autonomy of affiliated campuses; and iv) strengthening of the examination system. For this results area, the
   release of Bank funds was to be linked to the achievement of pre-specified targets for the following
   Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs): i) national accreditation system established and functioning (DLI1);
   ii) performance-based financing extended to HEIs (DLI2); iii) autonomy extended to additional
   campuses/schools (DLI3); and iv) examination reforms implemented and academic calendar enforced in
   Tribhuvan University (TU) (DLI4).

   Results Area 2: Academic Reforms and Relevance: This results area was to support academic reforms in
   all participating universities and campuses focusing on: i) the achievement of better learning outcomes in
   selected programs; and ii) the introduction and expansion of programs in market-relevant and priority areas
   of development for Nepal. This results area was to be supported through the achievement of the following
   DLI: Academic reforms introduced: revision of existing programs and introduction of new programs at
   graduate and undergraduate levels (DLI5).

   Results Area 3: Equity: This results area was to provide scholarship support to meritorious students
   belonging to the two poorest income quintiles selected through nation-wide Proxy Means Testing (PMT),
   with preferential treatment for female students. This results area was to be supported through the
   achievement of the following DLI: Poverty-targeted financial support for under-privileged students (DLI6).

   Results Area 4: Academic Excellence and Research: This results area was to provide competitive funding
   for quality research, development, and innovation (RDI) by students and faculty members with a focus on
   priority areas. This results area was to be supported through the achievement of the following DLI:
   Academic research and excellence (DLI7).

   Component 2: Capacity Building and Project Management (appraisal estimate US$5.0 million, actual
   US$2.74 million): This component was to support effective implementation and monitoring of the National
   Program for Higher Education Reform and Development (NPHERD). It was to finance inputs and activities
   required to achieve the above-stated results, and was to enhance the capacity of the implementing,

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



   coordinating, and participating agencies. Technical assistance was to include inputs and activities such as:
   i) services of consultants in the areas of procurement, financial management, Education Management
   Information System, and information technology; ii) employer, student, and faculty satisfaction surveys; iii)
   studies associated with implementation of the Higher Education Policy (HEP); iv) impact assessments in
   various areas of project intervention; v) strategic planning and institutional capacity building; and vi)
   conferences and workshops.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: According to the ICR (p. 3), the estimated cost of the 2014-2020 NPHERD was US$795
   million. The government’s budget covered almost exclusively the regular operating costs of universities and
   the University Grants Commission (UGC, which allocates public financing and oversees coordination and
   quality assurance for HEIs). There was limited fiscal space to support NPHERD's reform objectives, and
   these were to be financed by the Bank and through expected increases in the government’s education
   budget allocated to higher education.

   Financing: The Bank was to finance US$65.0 million to contribute to the program’s reform objectives. The
   Bank’s actual contribution was US$60.3 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$598 million. Its actual contribution was
   US$559.1 million.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

         On October 25, 2019 the project was restructured to modify the Results Framework.
         On May 29, 2020 the project was restructured to: i) reallocate SDR 2.85 million to support the
          NPHERD to respond to COVID-19 crisis through a new DLI8: HEIs supported to respond to COVID-
          19; ii) reallocate funds from Component 1 (DLIs) of SDR 1.38 million and from Component 2 (SDR
          1.47 million) to the new DLI8; iii) extend the project closing date from June 30, 2020 to December
          31, 2020 to complete the unfinished tasks of DLI1 and DLI7 that had been delayed due to the
          COVID-19 pandemic; and iii) change the implementation schedule.

   The project’s actual closing date was December 31, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
According to the PAD (p. 1), at the time of appraisal, despite relatively stable economic progress, Nepal
remained one of the poorest countries in the world with a per capita Gross National Income of US$730
(2013). While Nepal had achieved the Millennium Development Goal of reducing poverty by 50 percent, in
2010/2011 25 percent of its population still lived in poverty. Approximately 41 percent of the country’s




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



               population was between 10 and 29 years old with many migrating to cities in the search of work. However,
               due to the low quality of education and skills, the potential for securing a well-paying job was limited.

               Even though the higher education sector had been expanding quickly, it was not able to meet the
               economy’s human resources needs. Nepal had nine universities and four health science academies
               that received public funding in varying degrees. TU accounted for almost 90 percent of total higher
               education enrollment in 2012/2013. Nepal faced the challenge of not having enough graduates in critical
               areas including human resources, agri-business, energy, information and communication technology,
               tourism, and science and technology. Therefore, relevance was weak. Also, quality and internal efficiency
               of HEIs were low, with high failure rates in examinations (especially in programs with centralized annual
               examinations). Furthermore, access to HEIs and equity needed to be improved. There were large income
               and geographic disparities in access to higher education, and scholarship programs had not been effective
               in improving access and equity due to poor targeting and inadequate financing.

               In 2014, the government approved the Higher Education Policy (HEP), which aimed to address the issues
               stated above through implementation of the NPHERD and its core elements: examination reforms,
               especially adherence to an academic calendar; expansion of an autonomy agenda to include academic
               autonomy for affiliated campuses; expansion of formula-based funding (FBF), including implementation of
               performance-based funding (PBF); expansion of quality assurance and accreditation systems; continuation
               of a poverty-targeted scholarship program; and expansion of new academic programs and research in
               areas of priority development. The Bank, which was Nepal's only development partner in the sector, had
               been working with the government on higher education through the Second Higher Education Project since
               2007. However, there was still a large unfinished agenda.

               The project's objectives and activities directly supported implementation of the NPHERD. They were also in
               line with the government’s National Education Policy 2019, Fifteenth Plan (2019-2023), and Envisioning
               Nepal 2030. Furthermore, the objectives were in line with several areas of the Bank’s most recent Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF FY19-23). For example, the CPF's Focus Area 3 emphasizes the significant
               gaps in education and skills development outcomes that persist across Nepal’s regions and socioeconomic
               groups. Also, its Objective 3.1 focuses on improving equity in access to quality education. The objective of
               the project also indirectly supports the CPF's Objective 1.2 (strengthened institutions for public sector
               management and service delivery), and Objective 2.5 (improved income opportunities).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support reforms in selected institutions for improving quality of higher education


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)




Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities related to systematic and
institutional reform, including establishing and operationalizing a national accreditation system and extending
performance-based funding to HEIs, would result in intermediate outcomes such as an increase in the
number of institutions undertaking specified reforms. These intermediate outcomes were to result in improved
quality of higher education.

Outputs:

      A Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agency (QAAA) within the UGC, with functional autonomy,
       was established.
      The number of institutions undertaking specified reforms increased from 15 institutions in 2014 to 135
       institutions in 2020, achieving the target of 135 institutions. Funding to HEIs was provided against
       performance in the areas of governance, quality, relevance, resource generation, and planning, and
       based on the development of their strategic plans. Supported reforms included reforms on Quality
       Assurance Accreditation (QAA), performance-based financing, autonomy of campuses and schools,
       examinations and adherence to an academic calendar, revision of existing academic programs, and
       introduction of new academic programs.
      The number of TU/other universities’ institutions/programs granted autonomy increased from four
       institutions in 2014 to 14 institutions in 2020, achieving the target of 14 institutions.
      The project supported 148 PhD and 255 faculty RDI projects in identified priority areas, surpassing the
       target of 130 PhD and 220 faculty RDI projects.

Outcomes:

      The number of HEIs that completed the accreditation/QAA cycle increased from 12 HEIs in 2014 to 76
       HEIs in 2020, not achieving the target of 125 HEIs.
      Research grant recipients published 140 publications in referred journals, surpassing the target of 85
       publications. The indicator lacked a baseline, and therefore it is not known how many publications
       were published before the project had been implemented and what improvements were generated
       under the project.

The project made progress in terms of improving quality, including publications in referred journals,
establishing a QAAA, and HEIs undertaking reforms in critical areas. However, the target for the
accreditation/QAA cycles was not achieved, and it is not clear whether the target for research grant recipients
publishing in referred journals was sufficiently ambitious since the indicator lacked a baseline. Taking
everything together, achievement of the first objective was Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support reforms in selected institutions for improving relevance of higher education

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)




Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities related to academic
reforms and relevance, including implementing examination reforms and enforcing an academic calendar in
TU, and introducing new programs at undergraduate and graduate levels in priority areas, were to result in
intermediate outcomes such as an increase in the number of academic programs being revised and number
of new academic programs being identified in priority areas. These intermediate outcomes were to result in
improved relevance of higher education.

Outputs:

      81 academic programs were revised, surpassing the target of 75 academic programs.
      67 new academic programs were introduced in identified priority areas, surpassing the target of 65
       new academic programs. In total, the target of 140 programs being revised or introduced was
       exceeded (DLI 5).

Outcomes:

      The percentage of students enrolled in identified priority areas increased from 12.6 percent of
       undergraduates and 16.7 of postgraduates in 2014 to 33.85 percent of undergraduates and 22.51
       percent of postgraduates in 2020, surpassing the target of 17 percent of undergraduates and 23
       percent of postgraduates being enrolled in identified priority areas.
      The project conducted an evaluation of TU’s curriculum development. According to the ICR (p. 9), the
       evaluation found that the business and management programs were well received by employers, and
       skills of graduates matched those required in the workplace. Also, the programs in the science
       disciplines were found useful in terms of market relevance, and most of the graduates found
       employment in the private sector. According to the Bank team (October 16, 2021), no more detailed
       data is yet available.



The project achieved its key target of this objective, an increase in students being enrolled in priority areas.
As a result, achievement of the objective was Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support reforms in selected institutions for improving efficiency of higher education (original outcome
targets)

Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



Since the outcome target for this objective was revised, from 3 months to 5.43 months for the announcement
of results of bachelor programs with centralized examinations at TU, a split rating for this objective is required.

Theory of Change: According to the PAD (p. 3), improved efficiency was defined as lower failure rates at
examinations, particularly in programs with centralized annual examinations, which were offered at a large
number of campuses. Most institutions and programs with high failure rates did not follow an announced
academic calendar and had highly centralized academic management. The project’s theory of change
envisioned that project activities such as providing FBF to align regular government funding to inputs and
outputs of universities, decentralize and modernize the examination system, streamline processes, and
enhance the Office of the Controller of Examination's (OCE’s) implementation capacity were to result in
intermediate outcomes such as computerization of records of all students eligible for appearing in
examinations from TU constituent and affiliated campuses. The intermediate outcomes were to result in
improved efficiency of higher education.

Outputs:

      The project provided performance grants for the introduction of FBF, which was designed to align
       regular government funding to inputs and outputs of universities. The funding was based on indicators
       on enrollment, number of students receiving fee waivers, and core minimum administrative costs for
       operating universities at the establishment phase. The target of FBF-based funds being released to at
       least three additional autonomous campuses (cumulative 10) and PBF-based regular funds being
       released to at least additional 20 community campuses (cumulative 100) was achieved.
      The project supported the TU’s plans to decentralize and modernize the examination system,
       streamline processes, and enhance the OCE’s implementation capacity. Also, the project supported
       the TU to maintain the academic calendars of major programs, achieving the target of examination
       reforms being implemented and the academic calendar being enforced (DLI 4).
      All records of all students eligible for appearing in examinations from TU constituent and affiliated
       campuses were computerized, achieving the target of 100 percent.

Outcomes:

      The average time taken for announcement of results of bachelors programs with centralized
       examinations at TU decreased from seven months in 2014 to 5.43 months, not achieving the original
       target of three months.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support reforms in selected institutions for improving efficiency of higher education (revised outcome
targets)

Revised Rationale

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



The theory of change for this objective was not revised.

Outputs:

Same outputs as stated above.

Outcomes:

The average time taken for announcement of results of bachelors programs with centralized examinations at
TU decreased from seven months in 2014 to 5.43 months, achieving the revised target of 5.43 months.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Assist under-privileged students for equitable access

Rationale
Theory of change: The project’s theory of change envisioned that project activities such as implementing
poverty-targeted financial support for underprivileged students were to result in intermediate outcomes such
as an increase in the percentage of females among direct project beneficiaries. The intermediate outcomes
were to result in improving equitable access to under-privileged students.

Outputs:

      The autonomous Student Financial Assistance Fund Development Board (SFAFDB) administered the
       scholarship program, which covers tuition, instructional materials, and minimum subsistence costs
       (including rent when applicable). Also, the SFAFDB monitored school and campus attendance and
       students’ academic progress. The students were selected using PMT and self-reporting of household
       consumption.

Outcomes:

      The project supported a total of 2,087 students in higher secondary education (of which 45.2 percent
       were female) and 7,433 students in a bachelor's degree program (of which 62.6 percent were female),
       surpassing the target of a total of 2,000 students in higher secondary education and just falling short
       of the target of 7,500 students in a bachelor's degree program. The share of female scholarship
       recipients increased during implementation. Both targets for female participation (45 percent for higher
       secondary education and 40 percent for bachelor's degree programs) were surpassed.
      Almost half of scholarship recipients reported that they would not have pursed further education in the
       absence of financial support. Also, 73.2 percent of beneficiaries reported receiving funds on time.
      In total the project benefited 460,000 beneficiaries, not achieving the target of 500,000 beneficiaries



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



                              The project surpassed its target for higher education students being supported, but fell short of the target of
                              bachelor's degree program students being supported. Taking everything together, the achievement of this
                              objective was Substantial.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievement of the first objective (“improving quality”) was Modest. Achievement of the second objective
                            (“improving effectiveness”) and fourth objective (“assisting under-privileged students for equitable access”)
                            was Substantial. Achievement of the third objective (“improving efficiency”) under the original outcome
                            target was Modest, resulting in an overall Substantial efficacy rating under the original outcome targets,
                            though with important shortcomings that place the rating at the "low end" of Substantial.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            After the project was restructured, achievement of the first objective was Modest and achievement of the
                            second, third and fourth objectives was Substantial, resulting in an overall Substantial efficacy rating under
                            the revised outcome targets.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 80) conducted a cost-benefit analysis based on 15 different assumptions such as graduation rates,
   average working life, probability of employment at the higher secondary and tertiary levels, etc. The

                                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



assumptions were reasonable and valid. The analysis identified several benefits, including: i) estimated increase
in the earnings of graduates from the bottom two consumption quintiles whose access to higher education was
to increase; ii) estimated increase in wages for all graduates of accredited and autonomous campuses, including
in priority areas, through increased quality and relevance of higher education; iii) increase in the efficiency of the
system through a reduction in drop-out and repetition rates; and iv) savings from students who otherwise were
to opt to study abroad. The analysis took the following costs into account: i) private household costs of higher
education; ii) opportunity costs to students for obtaining higher education measured in foregone wages for time
spent in college; iii) the cost of the project, including the government's contribution; and iv) service and
commitment charges, interest and principal re-payment of the total credit amount.

Assuming an eight percent discount rate and a one percent quality premium (increase in wages), the analysis
estimated an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 23.6 percent and a Net Present Value (NPV) of about US$102
million

The ICR (p. 38) conducted a cost-benefit analysis based on the actual costs of the project (US$60.30 million)
and the actual total number of 460,000 beneficiaries. The analysis calculated an NPV of US$204 million (with a
discount rate of eight percent) and an NPV of US$86 million (when using a discount rate of 12 percent). Also, an
IRR of 31 percent was calculated.

The higher NPV and IRR in the ICR were the result of the increase in the number of students who were enrolled
in the priority areas. The analysis indicates that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

Project implementation experienced several external challenges: In 2015, Nepal experienced political turmoil.
After eight years of disagreements among political parties, a new constitution was rapidly and unexpectedly
promulgated, resulting in protests and clashes in Nepal’s southern belt bordering with India. Also, there was
persistent contention with the teachers' union due to the potential introduction of a new scheme that would have
required a PhD as a minimum qualification and given lower weight to experience and higher weight to
publication in journals for recruitment and promotion. As a result, DLI7 increased its focus on recognizing
research projects rather than on teachers recruited/promoted. Furthermore, Nepal experienced devastating
earthquakes in 2015, killing an estimated 8,000 persons and causing losses estimated at US$7.1 billion. Early
decisions regarding project implementation were delayed as a result, and project dissemination activities were
suspended. Finally, the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic resulted in classroom teaching being halted and collection
of data for final evaluations being put on hold. Also, the project experienced implementation issues related to
financial management (see Section 10b). However, the project’s implementation period only had to be extended
by six months to allow for the completion of project activities, which were delayed due to the Covid-19
pandemic.

Taking everything together, the project’s overall efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
Appraisal                                                 23.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
ICR Estimate                                              31.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets: Relevance was High, Efficacy was Substantial (at the lower end, with two
objectives substantially achieved and two objectives modestly achieved), and Efficiency was Substantial,
producing an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

Under the revised outcome targets: Relevance was High, Efficacy was Substantial, and Efficiency was
Substantial, producing an Outcome rating of Satisfactory.

Under IEG/OPCS harmonized guidelines, when a project's objectives or outcome targets are revised, the overall
Outcome rating is determined by the share of disbursements at the time of restructuring. In this case, US$48.28
million of a total US$60.30 million, or 80.1% of Bank funds, had been disbursed at the restructuring.

      Under the original outcome targets with an outcome of Moderately Satisfactory (score of 4) and a
       disbursement weight of 0.8, the weighted outcome score is 3.2.
      Under the revised outcome targets with an outcome of Satisfactory (score of 5) and a disbursement
       weight of 0.2, the weighted outcome score is 1.0.

The combined weighted average outcome score is 4.2, which rounds to 4.0, producing an overall Outcome
rating of Moderately Satisfactory, reflecting moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation,
and achievement.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to the development outcome can be analyzed in the following categories:

Government commitment/financing: The government remains committed to improving its higher education
sector as demonstrated in the 2019 National Education Policy and the Fifteenth Plan (2019-2023). The

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



new HEP (2021-2030, awaiting approval) includes a target to accredit/complete the QAA cycle of 297 HEIs
over the next five years. Furthermore, the government continues its engagement with the Bank through the
“Nurturing Excellence in Higher Education” Program for Results Project (2021-2026, US$60 million), which
continues to implement key reforms in the government’s program including: i) improved teaching,
collaborative research, and distance learning; ii) strengthening governance and financing of HEIs; iii)
widening access to quality higher education; and iv) improving and extending digital connectivity.

Political: Nepal has been experiencing several years of political turmoil. In May 2021, the parliament was
dissolved for the second time within five months and mid-term elections were announced. Political stability
will be critical for the sustainability of outcomes achieved under the project.

Institutional strengthening: According to the ICR (p. 14), the project was able to build institutional capacity
at the UGC, TU, and SFAFDB to manage activities and programs implemented by HEIs. Also, the project
built capacity within the HEIs to deliver higher-quality, relevant academic programs as well as manage those
programs to improve their effectiveness and efficiency.

Technical: Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the project was restructured to conduct online programs, assist
underprivileged students to access online learning, support collaborative research on coronavirus, and
upgrade and strengthen UGC networking for online support. These activities were able to strengthen HEIs'
modernization and digitalization, which will also be beneficial in case of future emergencies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (p. 10), the project's design was built on lessons learned from previous Bank
  projects such as ownership and commitment being critical to reforms, results-based financing providing
  the possibility to focus on outcomes and policy interventions, and the importance of incentives to
  encourage HEIs to enhance quality, relevance and efficiency in the sector. The project’s institutional
  arrangements were built on those established under the predecessor Secondary Higher Education
  Project and on the government’s system for M&E, budgeting, and funds flow.

  The Bank identified relevant risks, including: i) limited capacity and monitoring for the implementation of a
  project with DLIs; ii) resistance to reform by vested interest groups; iii) difficulties in reaching political
  consensus on new appointments; iv) possible inadequacy of project resources to transform traditional
  programs to ones that are relevant for the labor market and contribute to priorities for growth and
  development; and v) difficulties in hiring qualified teachers and retaining them in less developed regions.
  The Bank’s measures to mitigate those risks were insufficient, and the risk of insufficient capacity and
  delays in hiring key staff materialized, but not to a degree that significantly affected operational efficiency.

  The project’s Results Framework and M&E plan was adequate (see Section 9a).




                                                                                                       Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 21), the project benefited from continuous supervision by the Bank team. The
 Bank team stated (October 16, 2021) that the Bank conducted a total of 12 supervision missions over the
 project’s implementation period. Also, the two co-task team leaders were based in Kathmandu, which
 allowed for a strong relationship with the counterpart. The Bank team prepared 10 Implementation Status
 Reports (ISRs) throughout project implementation, and fiduciary and safeguard issues were addressed on
 a continuous basis. The Bank team restructured the project twice to reflect implementation progress and
 modify the Results Framework accordingly.

 The project faced several implementation challenges such as the aftermath of political turmoil and
 devastating earthquakes in 2015, persistent contention with the teachers' union and the Covid-19
 pandemic. According to the Bank team (October 16, 2021), these challenges were addressed by the Bank
 through extensive policy dialogue to mobilize proponents of reforms among teachers, key academic
 leaders, and other stakeholders on a regular basis. These efforts also helped to catch up from project
 implementation delays that had been caused due by the earthquake and border closure in the first year of
 the project in 2015. Furthermore, the challenges faced due to the closure of academic institutions during
 the Covid-19 pandemic were tackled through the project's restructuring. The restructuring especially
 focused on digitization and online teaching-learning and extending the project for six months. Finally, when
 the project experienced fiduciary-related delays, the Bank increased its supervision.

 Taking everything together, the Bank’s supervision was Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change and the logic connecting key activities and outputs to intended outcomes
 were sound and reflected in the Results Framework. The project’s objectives were clearly
 specified. Furthermore, the selected indicators encompassed all outcomes of the objective and were
 adequate to assess the contribution of project activities towards achieving the objectives. While
 all indicators included targets and were specific and measurable, not all indicators had baselines. The DLI
 matrix was aligned with the Results Framework, and the DLIs were aligned with the project’s five results
 areas.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



 UGC was to be the main agency responsible for the project’s M&E. The TU Project Implementation Office
 (TUPIO), QAAA, and SFAFDB were to be responsible for M&E activities under their respective sub-
 components.

 According to the PAD (p. 12), the project was to conduct PMT surveys in years one, three, and five. The
 project was also to conduct evaluation studies, including evaluations of the PMT targeting approach,
 research funding, campus autonomy, new programs, and PBF to HEIs.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p. 18), implementation progress was monitored on a regular basis through
  measuring the achievement of DLIs and indicators included in the Results Framework. During the two
  project restructurings, minor revisions were made to the Results Framework to reflect implementation
  progress and adjustments to project activities. However, the project’s M&E experienced delays in regards
  to contracting surveys and evaluations such as the beneficiary satisfaction survey. Also, surveys, tracer
  studies and evaluations experienced delays due to difficulties in collecting data due to the Covid-19
  pandemic. Nonetheless, most of the planned surveys and evaluations were completed by project closure,
  including an evaluation of curriculum revisions and implementation of the semester system at TU, and a
  tracer study report on community campuses (2014-2018). According to the Bank team (October 16,
  2021), the project's M&E was relatively reliable, while still in the developing stage to meet national needs.
  M&E functions and processes are likely to be sustained after project closing, as there is a permanent
  M&E structure at the Secretariat of the UGC.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (p. 19) the project’s M&E was used to link financing to results. Also, the system of
  tracer studies allowed HEIs and UGC to analyze the impact of activities on improving academic quality,
  relevance, and efficiency, and supported the identification of future priorities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples). According to the ICR (p. 19), the
   project prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) based on the country’s environmental
   regulations and the Bank’s environmental safeguard requirements. Also, the project prepared a Vulnerable
   Community Development Framework and a Gender Action Plan as part of the Social Management
   Framework (SMF).




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



  HEIs were responsible for the implementation of the environmental and social (E&S) safeguards. According
  to the ICR (p. 20), the implementation of safeguards was mostly Moderately Satisfactory throughout the
  project’s duration. However, between January and August 2019, the safeguard rating was downgraded to
  Moderately Unsatisfactory due to a lack of screening, documenting, and reporting as required by the EMF
  and SMF. These issues were addressed by the UGC/TUPIO by hiring an E&S consultant to assist grant
  recipients to conduct E&S screening and implement other safeguard measures as well as establish a
  committee to plan, oversee, and manage E&S compliance monitoring. The ICR (p. 20) stated that as a
  result, performance improved partially. However, issues related to gaps in E&S documentation and links
  with the project’s procurement plan remained.

  According to the ICR (p. 20), screening reports did not identify any adverse impacts related to involuntary
  resettlement or indigenous and vulnerable people.

  The project established a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). A technical team consisting of UGC and
  TUPIO members to monitor the GRM was established. According to the ICR (p. 20), complaints were
  documented adequately. Throughout project implementation, 100 complaints were recorded by UGC. Of
  these complaints, about two-thirds were resolved, while the remaining complaints were under review and
  investigation by the time of project closure, but had all been addressed by June 2021. Grievances were
  related to poor work quality, delay in work, and financial irregularities.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  UGC was responsible for the project’s financial management and was responsible for coordination with
  TUPIO and SFAFDB in regards to overall financial management including budgeting, financing reporting,
  and funds flow management. Due to financial management issues in past Bank-financed projects, the
  financial management risk was rated Substantial. In order to mitigate this risk, finance officers were
  assigned to UGC, TUPIO, and SFAFDB. Despite this mitigation effort, the project encountered financial
  management-related issues and was frequently rated Moderately Unsatisfactory in ISRs. For example, in
  2018 financial reports were submitted with delay and lacked information on grant utilization and other data
  that was required for audits. In addition, the UGC did not collect, follow up on, and maintain details on
  Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs), including information on scholarships and research grants from TU
  cost centers. Finally, the allocation of budgets and expenditure recording were delayed. According to the
  ICR (p. 20) the FY 2016/17 external audit was qualified as a result of non-submission of accounts of TU
  units for audit, as well as lack of documentation on grant utilization. In order to address these issues,
  monitoring activities were increased. By June 2020, UGC, TUPIO, and SFAFDB had completed all of the
  actions agreed, and there were no outstanding financial reports.

  Procurement

  The Bank’s procurement guidelines were only applied to expenditures under component 2, since
  disbursements under component 1 were made against EEPs for faculty and staff salaries, student
  scholarships, and RDI grants to faculty and students. According to the ICR (p. 21), procurement staff was
  hired to support the UGC, TUPIO, SFAFDB, and HEIs. The project did not encounter any major
  procurement-related issues. Procurement plans were prepared and updated in a timely manner, and

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



   procurement data were uploaded to the STEP system. The project experienced minor delays in contracting
   that resulted in the downgrading of the procurement rating to Moderately Satisfactory in November 2016,
   and the rating remained at Moderately Satisfactory until project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The objective to improve quality
                                                                               of higher education was
                                                                               modestly achieved, and the
                                                                               objective to improved efficiency
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory   of higher education was
                                                                               modestly achieved under the
                                                                               original outcome targets, under
                                                                               which most of the project's
                                                                               disbursements occurred.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 23-24) included several key lessons, adapted here by IEG:

      Performance Based Funding by the government to HEIs provides an effective
       approach to promote consistent reforms. This project achieved critical results through
       reform grants and formula-based funding to HEIs against performance indicators that
       were clustered in critical areas such as governance, quality, relevance, resource generation,
       and planning.
      Emergencies can provide unique opportunities to address immediate needs but also
       build capacity to respond to future emergencies effectively. As a result of the Covid-19
       pandemic, the project was restructured to support the government’s efforts to expand
       remote, internet-based learning, which was limited before the pandemic. Given the positive


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)



         experience and increased demand, the new “Nurturing Excellence in Higher Education”
         project will support the UGC and HEIs in the digitalization of learning materials and
         programs.
        Strong leadership and timely implementation support can navigate a project
         successfully through political instability, disasters, and other unexpected events. In
         this project, strong leadership by the UGC and TUPIO as well as timely implementation
         support allowed for positive outcomes and only a six-month closing date extension despite
         the aftermath of political turmoil, natural disasters, and a pandemic.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. It included an appropriate
efficiency analysis and useful lessons learned that can be applied to future projects. It was internally consistent.
The ICR would have benefitted from being more outcome-driven and providing more quantitative data (such as
the number of graduates having found employment in the private sector). Overall, the quality of this ICR is rated
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
