     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022656

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P133069                                    Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84250                                 31-Dec-2020                                        150,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2014                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                             150,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                         150,000,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kavita Mathur               Elisabeth Goller             Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve infrastructure and service delivery in
   selected small and medium towns in Shaanxi Province (Loan Agreement page 6 and PAD para 15).

   For this review the PDO is assessed as a whole, namely "to improve infrastructure and service delivery in
   selected small and medium towns in Shaanxi Province". This is not in line with the approach used in the ICR,
   which assessed the PDO in two parts of “to improve infrastructure” and “to improve service delivery”. This
   review uses a different approach because the improved service delivery in this project is a direct

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



   consequence of improved infrastructure and its operation and maintenance, hence both parts of the PDO
   share the same theory of change, inputs, and outputs.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components (the cost figures exclude contingencies). The activities under both
   subcomponents were to be implemented in nine project Counties/Districts: (i) Yanliang District, (ii)
   Chengcheng County, (iii) Wugong County, (iv) Chunhua County, (v) Xunyi County, (vi) Chencang
   District, (vii) Yintai Distric, (viii) Hanyin County, and (ix) Hantai District.

   Component 1. Infrastructure and Services Upgrading (appraisal estimate US$206.3 million; actual cost
   US$205.3 million). This component included two subcomponents: (i) infrastructure improvement, including
   new construction and upgrading of urban roads and missing links in project counties/districts; and (ii)
   infrastructure rehabilitation, including rehabilitation and expansion of water supply source development and
   distribution networks; wastewater collection networks; storm drainage networks; and associated road
   pavement improvements.

   Revised Component 1. Liquan Town of Liquan County was added to the towns benefitting from the
   activities under the original component 1. The following activities were added to the project scope: (a)
   installation and rehabilitation of storm drainage pipelines with associated road pavement in Liquan,
   Chengcheng, Xunyi, and Hanyin Towns; and (b) construction of two roads with associated drainage and
   water supply pipelines in Hanyin Town. The construction of one road and the rehabilitation of roads and
   wastewater and drainage pipelines in Wutun and Guanshan Towns (Yanliang District), Chenglu Town
   (Yintai District), and Chencang Town (Chencang District) were removed. The cost of this component was
   increased from US$206.3 million to US$216.8 million (ICR para 17).

   Component 2. Town Management Improvement and Implementation Support (appraisal estimate
   US$3.0 million; actual cost US$3.0 million). This component included three subcomponents: (i) town
   management improvements in project counties/ districts through introduction of asset management
   practices such as: improved Operations and Maintenance (O&M) plans and budgets, infrastructure
   mapping, preparation of asset registers, and provision of training, study tours and office equipment; (ii)
   carrying out policy advisory studies and provision of advice to Shaanxi Province in order to strengthen
   institutional policies and planning practices, focusing on balanced development, efficient growth, poverty
   reduction, sustainable infrastructure service provision, and improved environmental quality in small towns;
   and (iii) implementation support for project management, design reviews, monitoring, evaluation, and
   reporting, etc.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



   Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$246.83 million, slightly lower than the appraisal estimate
   US$256.9 million and the restructuring estimate of US$260.40 million. There is a slight difference in adding
   up the cost figures of Annex 3 and the ICR datasheet (US$247.21 million) and this is likely due to exchange
   rate differences.

   Financing. The actual IBRD disbursement was US$150.0 million, as planned.

   Borrower Contribution. The actual Borrower contribution was US$97.2 million, lower than the appraisal
   commitment of US$106.9 million and the restructuring estimate of US$110.4 million.

   Dates. The project closed on December 31, 2020 as scheduled.

   Restructuring. The project underwent a Level 2 restructurings in May 2018. The PDO was not revised, but
   target values of some PDOs were revised as follows:

         PDO indicator 2: People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities under the project, of
          which women - the target increased from 194,500 (94,000 women) to 238,200 (114,800 women);
         PDO indicator 3: Area provided with new and improved drainage services - the target was
          decreased from 165.1 to 29.6 square km because Xunyi County made a mistake in calculating the
          target, using 137 km instead of 1.37 km2.
         PDO indicator 4: Increase in area with access to newly built or rehabilitated roads - the target was
          increased to 22.4 square km.

   Split Rating. A split rating was not undertaken because the PDO did not change and the level of ambition
   of the PDO indicator targets increased, except for the target of the PDO indicator 3, which was decreased
   because of a calculation mistake (ICR para 24).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country, Shaanxi Provincial, and Sectoral Context. At appraisal, China was experiencing rapid
urbanization, but most government resources were allocated to highly urbanized cities. Small towns
received significantly less resources for development. Therefore, in these towns, public services and utilities
were lagging behind those in large cities (PAD, p 1).

 About half of Shaanxi’s population was living in cities and towns. The small cities and towns in GuanTian
(GT) Corridor (considered as the engine of economic growth and urbanization in the Shaanxi Province
development strategy) were constrained by urban infrastructure deficiencies and service levels both in
existing built-up areas and urban expansion areas, weak finances, and limited city management capacity.
The average per capita investment for basic urban infrastructure in Shaanxi’s small cities and towns at
appraisal was only 68% of the national level. The percentage of population with access to water supply, the
road space per resident, and the length of drainage pipelines per square km of built-up area were also
substantially lower than at the national level (89 percent, 74 percent, and 67 percent, respectively). There
was minimal maintenance of infrastructure (PAD, p 2).


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



Alignment with the Country and Shaanxi Strategy. The development of infrastructure for basic urban
services was highlighted in China's 12th Five Year plan (2011-2015).

The Shaanxi Province development strategy gave high priority to promoting the development of cities that
constitute county seats and selected key towns at provincial level in the GT Corridor. This included relaxing
hukou restrictions, i.e., the restrictions of the household registration system that categorizes citizens based
on both their place of residence (living in urban/rural areas) and eligibility for certain socioeconomic
benefits, improving access, and supporting urban infrastructure investments.

The State Council’s National Plan on New Urbanization (2014 - 2020) highlighted the need to improve the
quality of urbanization and equal basic urban service provision to all residents in existing towns rather than
developing land for the construction of new cities. The Plan, recognizing the role of small towns in linking
the cities and rural areas - gave priority to the coordinated development of small cities and towns (PAD, p
2).

The PDO is also consistent with the New Urbanization and Integrated Urban-Rural Development Plan
issued by the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) in 2020, which prioritizes
the improvement of infrastructure and public services in towns that serve rural areas around them, and
towns becoming driving forces in local economic development.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. At appraisal, the project was aligned with the two strategic
themes of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the period 2013 -16 “supporting greener growth" and
"promoting more inclusive development". The project was to contribute to CPF Objectives 1.2 “enhancing
urban environmental services”, specifically through the construction of wastewater infrastructure with strong
environmental benefits. The project was also expected to improve infrastructure, enhance opportunities in
small towns, and improve transport connectivity for a more balanced regional development.

At completion, the PDO remained relevant to the second engagement area of the World Bank Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY20–FY25 “Promoting Greener Growth”. The project contributes to the
objective 2.2 (to reduce air, soil, water, and marine plastics pollution) by improving water supply, sanitation,
and drainage services. The PDO is also aligned with the third engagement area “Sharing the Benefits of
Growth”. Under this engagement area, the World Bank was to support the reduction in inequality in small
towns and urban areas through the improvement in infrastructure and service delivery.

Previous World Bank Experience. The project is part of a series of urban development projects in China,
focusing on small towns. These include Sichuan Small Towns Development Project; Chongqing Small
Cities Project; Jiangxi Small Towns Infrastructure Development Demonstration Project; and Gansu
Qingyang Urban Infrastructure Improvement. By aiming at improving infrastructure services, including road
accessibility and access to water supply, wastewater management and treatment in respective provinces,
the PDOs of these operations and of this project are similar. The project draws on the recommendations of
the Bank’s 2014 urbanization study “Urban China: Toward Efficient, Inclusive and Sustainable Urbanization”
(see section 8a “Quality at entry”).

The PDO was realistic. Although this was the first World Bank project in the Shaanxi province, the PDO
was not challenging for a province in China because the expected outcomes of improved infrastructure and
service delivery were closer to the output than the outcome level in the results chain.




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



               Although the PDO fitted well into the country context and was in line with country and Bank strategies, its
               largely output-focused nature makes it little challenging for a China province. Therefore, on balance, the
               relevance of objectives is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve infrastructure and service delivery in selected small and medium towns in Shaanxi Province.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The
                             project included activities such as constructing and upgrading urban roads, including traffic management and
                             road safety measures, constructing water supply wells, installing water supply transmission mains and
                             distribution pipelines, rehabilitating and expanding water distribution, stormwater, and sewerage collection
                             pipelines, building capacity for local government staff, and strengthening institutions in township
                             management. These activities were expected to result in outputs such as improved urban roads with
                             enhanced traffic management and road safety features, a water treatment plant, new drainage, sewer and
                             wastewater pipelines, trained local government staff in urban management, asset registries and management
                             systems, infrastructure maps, O&M plans, and a small-township development strategy. As outcomes, this
                             was expected to lead to enhanced institutional capacity, new or improved infrastructure that is well-designed,
                             managed, and maintained because of this enhanced additional institutional capacity, and improved services,
                             thereby achieving the objective to “improve infrastructure and service delivery in selected small towns in
                             Shaanxi Province”. In the long term, this was to help reduce infrastructure deficiencies, contribute to the
                             equitable provision of basic urban services between rural and urban areas, and facilitate growth and job
                             creation. The critical assumptions were: (i) the project investments reflected the needs of the beneficiaries, (ii)
                             adequate funding for the O&M of the constructed assets and infrastructure is available, and (iii) the improved
                             infrastructure and services would promote agglomeration economies for small towns and bring socio-
                             economic benefits to localities.

                             Outputs

                             Roads infrastructure.

                                        29 km of urban roads were constructed, achieving the revised target of 29 km but underachieving the
                                          original target of 40 km.




                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)




     52.2 km of non-rural roads were rehabilitated, exceeding both the revised target of 45 km and the
       original target of 34 km.

Water and wastewater infrastructure.

     A total of 58.04 km water supply pipelines were laid in eleven towns across nine counties/districts,
       exceeding the original target of 45.5 km.

     A new water treatment plant in Wugong Town was constructed, with a capacity of 3,000 m3 per day.

     182 km of wastewater sewers and storm drains, slightly more than the original target of 168 and the
       revised target of 169.

     31.1 km2 of urban area provided with new and improved drainage services, more than the revised
       target of 29.6 km. As mentioned in section 2, the original target of 165.2 km2 was erroneously
       calculated.

Institutional strengthening and capacity building.

     An asset management system was established in seven counties/districts.

     Asset registries were introduced in 7 counties, exceeding the revised target of 6 but below the original
       target of 9 counties/districts.

     7 Counties/Districts were implementing improved O&M plans with recommended budget allocations,
       exceeding the revised target of 6, but underachieving the original target of 9.

     7 Counties/Districts completed infrastructure mapping exceeding the revised target of 6, but
       underachieving the original target of 9.

     Publication of a handbook on "Exploration and Practice of Asset Management for Small Towns in
       China".

     A study on Shaanxi Small Town Development Strategy was conducted. The recommendations and
       key findings Shaanxi Small Town Development Strategy on institutional policies, balanced
       development, efficient growth, poverty reduction, and sustainable development in small towns were
       incorporated in the province’s urban policy under the provincial and local 14th FYP (ICR para 35).

     In September 2020, more than 100 local government officials from project towns benefited from a
       week-long intensive training sessions designed by the Zhejiang University on sustainable town
       development.

     1,422 local government officials were trained, for instance, in asset and project management.

Outcomes



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



The project provided O&M related tools and training to enhance the towns capacity to manage and
maintain the improved infrastructure and services. The ICR points out (para 49) that through the urban
infrastructure mapping, asset registries, improved O&M plans with budgets, and trainings the
counties/districts gained a clear understanding of the asset values, their locations and condition, O&M needs
and costs, and the departments responsible and timelines for O&M. The ICR also reports (para 34) that these
improvements facilitated cross-agency cooperation due to the systems’ ability to share data among local
urban development departments and municipal asset-related departments. The ICR points out (para 48) that
the feedback on the Zhejiang University training on sustainable town development showed that it was useful,
indicating that the exposure to domestic and international best practices in small-town development would be
likely to enable participants to apply lessons learned in future development projects. The ICR notes (para 49)
that officials from project towns recognized that the improved O&M plans helped the county governments
mainstream O&M budgets into asset management plans to sustain service delivery, prolong asset life, and
defer further capital investments.

The project improved roads infrastructure and increased access. It might also have had positive
impacts on reducing traffic accidents and increasing incomes, but the attribution to the project is not
clear. The area with “increased access to newly built or rehabilitated roads” increased from 0 to 22.9 square
km, exceeding both the original and increased targets (21.7 square km and 22.4 square km respectively). The
area of with “increased access to newly built or rehabilitated roads” does not include11 km Hongyao road,
which was financed with an alternative funding source and dropped from the project (ICR page 33).

With the construction and rehabilitation of urban roads, connectivity between the densely populated old city
center areas and its expanded areas improved, and the accessibility of residents to markets, business
centers, schools, hospitals, and public services improved. The ICR reports (para 30) that according to
the 2021 beneficiary survey, interviewing 949 people, travel time from outskirts to towns was reduced from an
average of 30 to 40 minutes to 10 to 20 minutes because the improved roads provide shorter links.

Traffic accidents in Hanyin Town fell by 15 percent in 2019, compared to 2014. The ICR (para 44) attributes it
to the traffic management measures under the project (improved intersection design, separation of motor
vehicles from non-motorized vehicles, and streetlights), but does not provide clear evidence on such
attribution, such as the 2014 or 2019 figures are not outliers and that there were no other factors at play that
reduced traffic accidents.

The ICR also mentions that the income for local farmers and enterprises increased due to more efficient
transportation of goods and better connectivity under the project. For instance, the ICR reports (para 45) that
according to an external social monitoring report the per capita net income of the sampled rural population in
project towns/districts increased from CNY 11,465 (US$1,753) in 2016, slightly below the national average of
CNY 12,363 (US$1,890), to CNY 17,042 (US$2,605) in 2019, which was 38 percent above the provincial
average and 18 percent above the national average, respectively. The ICR does not specify how the study
controlled for external factors that could also have contributed to a rise in income.

The project improved water infrastructure and the delivery of water services in terms of accessibility,
reliability, and quality. The new water treatment plant in Wugong Town provided 168,800 people with
access to improved water sources by project end (from Guanshan Town, Wutun Town, Chencang Town,
Wugong Town, and Hanyin Town), of which 80,100 were women, exceeding the original target of 151,000
people (of which 72,200 were women). According to the project team, because of the construction of the
water treatment plant and the installation of distribution pipelines, the households in the project towns have
now in-house tap water provision. The reliability improved as the local residents had 24-hour access to safe

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



                            drinking water that met the national drinking water standards. The ICR (para 31) points out that, in
                            compliance with a legal covenant under the project, Wugong County terminated the use of untreated
                            groundwater as a drinking source and shifted water users from self-supply wells to the newly built water
                            supply system through regulations and incentives.

                            According to the Bank project team, water supply is adequate in terms of water demand and quality. In the
                            design of the water supply system in the project towns, population and industry growth was considered and
                            the national standards of the Urban Water Supply Code (GB 50282-2016) was strictly followed, which
                            required water provision (consumption) between 110-210 liter /person day.

                            The project provided improved sewage and wastewater infrastructure, increased access to sanitation
                            facilities, and the sanitation likely contributed to better water quality. According to the ICR (para 32), at
                            appraisal, some of the towns included in this project were not connected to wastewater treatment plants and
                            industrial wastewater and domestic sewage were directly discharged in surface drains. In addition, the
                            stormwater and sewage pipelines in the project towns were not separated, therefore on rainy days
                            wastewater leaked into the ground and creeks, causing pollution of underground waters and rivers. The
                            project-financed infrastructure that separated stormwater from wastewater and increased the coverage of
                            wastewater collection networks and centralized wastewater treatment. As a result, 265,700 people obtained
                            access to improved sanitation facilities, including 128,400 of women, exceeding both the revised and original
                            targets (revised: 238,200 people, including 114,800 women; original: 194,500 people, including 94,000
                            women). The ICR also points out that the improved sanitation infrastructure likely contributed to better water
                            quality in the wider region but did not provide evidence.

                            The project improved road, water, and sanitation infrastructure, and provided tools and training to enhance
                            the capacity to manage and maintain this infrastructure. The project also enhanced the accessibility, quality,
                            and reliability of water services and improved road and sanitation access. This has likely led to a more
                            equitable basic service provision for project beneficiaries. Although most output targets were met and
                            exceeded and the beneficiary targets were exceeded, the quality of evidence on project outcomes in terms of
                            improve services had shortcomings. Therefore, on balance, the project’s efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project improved road, water, and sanitation infrastructure, provided tools and training to enhance the
                            capacity to manage and maintain this infrastructure, enhanced the accessibility, quality, and reliability of water
                            services and improved access and quality of sanitation services. This has likely led to a more equitable basic
                            service provision for project beneficiaries. Although most output targets were met and exceeded and the
                            beneficiary targets were exceeded, the quality of evidence on project outcomes had shortcomings and it is




                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



  mostly based on statements by the Bank project team. Therefore, on balance, the project’s efficacy is rated
  substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency.

At appraisal, the project investments were categorized by sectors: road construction and rehabilitation, water
supply, and wastewater collection and treatment. A mix of cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analyses was
carried out.

A cost-benefit analysis was used for (a) road construction and rehabilitation (including investments in associated
water supply and wastewater pipelines along the roads as it is difficult to separate these costs from road
construction costs) in nine counties/districts; and (b) water supply in four counties/districts.

(a) The economic rate of return (ERR) for road investments ranged from 12.0 percent to 16.5 percent and the
net present value (NPV) ranged from RMB 17.75 to RMB 194.0 million. The time horizon for the analysis
included three years of construction and 20 years of operation. The discount rate used was eight percent (PAD
pages 46 to 48). .

Benefits included: savings in travel time and transport costs, increases in the value of land and properties close
to the roads constructed or rehabilitated by the project, and improvements of road accessibility to public services
(e.g. shopping, medical care and education) and amenities of local residents. The costs included capital
investments and O&M costs (PAD page 45).

(b) The ERR for water investments ranged from 11.0 percent to 14.1 percent and the NPV ranged from RMB
3.93 to RMB 44.4 million. The time horizon and the discount rate were the same as for the roads infrastructure.
The benefits from improving water supply are health and living standard improvements for local residents,
measured through the willingness to pay, and increased productivity of industrial and tertiary sectors, measured
through the productivity change approach. The costs included capital investments and O&M costs (PAD pages
48 to 50).

The cost-effectiveness approach was used for the investments in wastewater collection networks. This included
the (i) installation of 12 km sewer trunk to transport wastewater generated in Run town to the treatment plant in
Chunhua County, (ii) rehabilitation of wastewater and drainage pipelines in Chencang District, and (iii)
rehabilitation and installation of wastewater and sewers/drainage pipelines in Wugong County. For Chunhua
County, two alternative solutions were identified: (i) construction of a small sewage treatment plant in Run town
with total construction, land acquisition and resettlement costs of RMB 16.53 million, and (ii) construction of
trunk sewers to transport sewage from Run town to Chunhua County seat for treatment with the construction
cost of RMB 12.51 million. The second and less expensive alternative was selected (PAD, pages 50 and 51).
The same approach was used for the other two investments in wastewater collection. The PAD (para 35)


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



explains that the cost-effectiveness approach was used due to the difficulties to quantify and monetize the
health benefits of treating wastewater.

At completion, the appraisal methodology was used for conducting the ex-post cost benefit analyses. The
relevant assumptions and parameters used at appraisal were adjusted based on data availability. For the roads
investments, the ERRs ranged from 10.2 percent to 14.3 percent. The ICR provided the NPV only for one
county. The ICR provided the NPV only for one county. The ex-post ERRs were lower than the appraisal
estimates because of an increase in the total road investment and lower environmental benefits that estimated
(ICR, para 15).

For water supply investments the ERR by project end ranged from 10.2 percent to 14.9 percent. This is slightly
lower than the appraisal estimate. Again, the ICR provided the NPV only for one district. For the wastewater
collection networks, according to the ICR (para 29), the costs at completion were lower than the least cost
estimate at appraisal: Chunhua County’s actual cost was CNY 2,106 million, the appraisal estimate was CNY
2,266 million; Chencang County’s actual cost was CNY 5,578 million, the appraisal estimate was CNY 7,326
million; and Wugong County’s actual cost was CNY 6,294 million, the appraisal estimate was CNY 8,815
million. However, the cost figures for Chunhua County in the PAD and the ICR do not match (for the other
counties the comparison of ex-ante and ex-post cost figures is not given in the ICR).

Administrative and Operational Efficiency.

The project was implemented efficiently. There was a low turnover of World Bank staff and Project Management
Office (PMO) staff. Even with additional project activities (which were added at restructuring), the project closed
on December 31, 2020 as scheduled. The actual project cost was slightly lower than the appraisal estimate. The
operational efficiency of the project also came from the promotion of joint constructing and sharing of urban
infrastructure, for instance, through the water pipelines that connected Guanshan Town in Yanliang to the
Shuibei water supply plant or the sewage pipeline in Runzhen Town in Chunhua that connected to the
centralized wastewater treatment plant (ICR, para 44).

On balance, despite lower ERRs at completion for most road and water investments, the project was
implemented efficiently, and is rated substantial.

Note: The ERR for the project as a whole is not available.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable



                                                                                                     Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives, project efficacy, and efficiency are rated substantial. Therefore, the outcome is
rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The institutional risk is low as the project’s capacity-building activities supported O&M of infrastructure built
by the project. Systems and training were provided to staff in local governments to build up their capacity in
managing and maintaining the assets. The project also developed life cycle O&M action plans with proposed
budget allocations to cover the O&M needs, and these plans were implemented by the operators.

The exposure to natural disasters is moderate. Most project towns are located upstream of the Wei River
or midstream of the Han River and are vulnerable to flooding. The engineering design of project investments
considered these potential natural disasters and climate change events and the investments in storm
drainage increased the resilience of project towns. However, continued monitoring of patterns of natural
disasters and their impact on local infrastructure will be necessary.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was based on the recommendations of the Bank’s comprehensive urbanization AAA -
  “Urban China: Toward Efficient, Inclusive and Sustainable Urbanization”. These included, among others,
  promoting coordination among city clusters and improving infrastructure in smaller towns, and improving
  local government management by introducing asset management practices (PAD, p 4). The project was
  proposed at a time when China was conducting a retrospective review of the successes and weaknesses
  of its urban development policies and approaches adopted during the past two decades. However, as
  mentioned in section 3, the objective was not sufficiently outcome oriented and hence challenging for a
  Chinese province.

  The project was prepared in 15 months, 5 months earlier than the average preparation time in China. The
  overall risk rating at appraisal was substantial because of: (i) inclusion of a large number of
  counties/districts with weak technical capacity and no experience in implementing World Bank-financed

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



  projects; and (ii) the fiduciary and procurement risks due to unfamiliarity with the World Bank procedures.
  Adequate mitigation measures were included such as frequent procurement reviews by the Bank; hiring
  of consultant services for detailed design and bid document review, construction supervision, and
  monitoring. In addition, 20% of detailed designs and bid documents were planned to be ready by loan
  negotiations (PAD page 7). This led to timely implementation and commencement after loan
  effectiveness.

  The safeguards identification was satisfactory. The fiduciary and institutional management risk was
  appropriately assessed as substantial. Although, the PPMO had experience in managing Bank funded
  projects, all participating counties lacked this experience and were not familiar with Bank’s fiduciary and
  safeguards requirements. To mitigate this risk, project management consultants were engaged to provide
  support to the PPMO and the project counties/districts on project management, including design review,
  training, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E design had shortcomings (section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were carried out regularly, on average two missions per year. During COVID-19, one
 virtual mission was carried out. The ICR reports (para 74) that the ISRs were candid and presented a
 comprehensive review of project performance. There was consistency in the project team with the same
 task team leader during preparation and implementation. The core project team was located in Beijing,
 which allowed close interaction with the Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO) and County Project
 Management Office (CPMO).

 The ICR reports (para 74) that the team composition was adequate for project supervision. Fiduciary,
 environmental, and social safeguards specialists were part of the supervision missions. In additions,
 international experts were mobilized to advise the client on town development. The project team provided
 hands-on training and organized experience-sharing workshops to strengthen the PPMO’s and CPMOs’
 technical and operational capacities. The ratings in the ISRs reflected the satisfactory project
 implementation.

 However, the Bank could have focused more on the project’s development impacts by revising the PDO or
 at least some key indicators to better monitor the development outcomes of the project. On balance,
 however, quality of supervision is satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was sound in documenting how the key activities and outputs were causally linked to
 the expected results. However, as mentioned previously, the latter were framed more in terms of output
 than outcomes. The M&E design included both intermediate and PDO indicators. The PDO indicators were:
 (i) people provided with access to improved water sources under the project; (ii) people provided with
 access to improved sanitation facilities under the project; (iii) area provided with new and improved
 drainage services; and (iv) increase in area with access to newly built or rehabilitated roads. These are all
 output-focused indicators and do not adequately measure service improvements.

 More outcome-oriented indicators for road infrastructure service improvements could have included travel
 time and fatality reduction (both reported in the ICR, the latter not sufficiently rigorously measured because
 of the lack of counterfactual). For water-related improvements, indicators could have measured the number
 of people who switched from wells to piped water or the different dimensions of water service delivery, such
 as water quality, affordability, adequacy of access, and reliability (again, some of them reported in the ICR
 but not rigorously measured). For the sewage-related infrastructure, the project could have measured the
 wastewater quality or the land pollution levels.

 The intermediate indicators captured physical outputs such as roads constructed or roads rehabilitated,
 wastewater sewers and storm drains constructed / rehabilitated, and length of water supply pipes
 laid. These are adequate to track project activities.

 Baselines and targets were provided in the PAD. The Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO) was
 assigned the responsibility to consolidate information and data.

 Indicators were neither dropped nor revised during project implementation. However, several PDO indicator
 targets were revised.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reports (para 61) that the PPMO and each PMO at the county/district level – regularly collected
  and reported data in the semiannual progress reports. These reports were submitted to the World Bank in
  a timely manner and were of good quality. M&E consultants carried out on-site verifications as planned.
  The asset register and infrastructure mapping developed under the project, further strengthened project
  monitoring. The integrated management information system (MIS) (developed under the project)
  streamlined data collection and information sharing (as the project was implemented in various project
  towns).

  A beneficiary survey was conducted from January 3 to 11, 2021 to measure user satisfaction with
  different types of services. In total, 949 individual beneficiaries were interviewed in nine project
  counties/districts. A total of 79 percent of the individual beneficiary interviewees were aged between 30
  and 60 years and 21 percent of the interviewees were either below 30 years or above 60 years. A total of
  61 percent of the interviewees were male and 39 percent were female. Considering the lack of outcome
  indicators, conducting a beneficiary survey was good. A beneficiary survey provides a before and after
  snapshot. However, it has limitation such as there are no counterfactual (like in an impact evaluation),


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



  comparisons cannot be made regionally or with other provinces. The beneficiary survey does not provide
  a trend.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reports (para 63) that the M&E data enabled the World Bank task team, PPMO and the PMO to
  monitor implementation progress and achievements. The PPMO used the semiannual progress reports
  to communicate its needs from the Provincial Project Leading Group (PPLG) on issues such as
  implementation delays, considerable savings, and progress of land acquisition and resettlement
  relocation. This informed and facilitated project restructuring.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category "B" and three safeguards policies were
   triggered: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01; Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP
   4.11; and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12.

   Environmental Safeguards. The PAD (para 56) reports that an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
   was carried out and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared to determine and lay out the
   mitigation measures, environmental monitoring program and necessary institutional arrangement as well as
   capacity building development. The EIA and EMP were disclosed locally and in the World Bank’s InfoShop
   on February 26, 2014, and an updated version was disclosed on April 15, 2014.

   The ICR reports (para 66) that the project complied with the environmental safeguards policies. The
   independent environmental consultant monitored the implementation of EMP and confirmed that the EMP
   was implemented adequately. There were no occupational health and safety issues during implementation.

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The Environmental Assessment screening found three cultural
   relics - Chenghuang Temple (classified in 1992 as a provincial level protected relic) in Wugong Town; Taita
   Pagoda (classified in 2001 as a national level relic) in Chengguan Town of Xunyi County; and Lianfeng
   Mosque in Puzhen Town of Hantai District. Mitigation measures were developed in line with the World
   Bank’s policy and the national regulatory and legal framework concerning cultural heritage (PAD para 46).

   The independent environmental consultant monitored the implementation of the measures concerning
   cultural heritage, which were incorporated into the tendering documents and contracts of civil works – and
   confirmed that they were well implemented (ICR para 66). In addition, local cultural heritage departments
   were actively involved in the supervision of construction sites. There were no “chance finds” during
   implementation.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



  Social Safeguards.

  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The PAD stated (para 51) that the project would require permanent
  acquisition of 94.3 hectares of land, including 84.2 hectares of cultivated land and 10.1 hectares of housing
  lots. In addition, the project would require 76,278 square meters of structures, including 62,452 square
  meters of concrete and brick houses, 6,805 square meters of brick and wood houses, 4,206 square meters
  of muddy and wood houses, and 2,815 simple houses. As the result, the project would impact 1,008
  families, including 649 families with 2,487 persons by land acquisition and 359 families with 1,337 persons
  by housing demolition. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared.

  The ICR reports (para 67) that the project complied with the social safeguards policies. The
  independent social monitoring reports confirmed that the resettlement activities were carried out in
  accordance with the RAP. Due to the changes made at restructuring, in actual the project required the
  acquisition of 41.5 hectares of land and 42,219 square meters of housing demolition, affecting 629
  households and 2,361 persons - a lower impact than planned.

  In three counties/districts (Yanliang, Chencang, and Yintai), there were challenges in land acquisition and
  resettlement, which took longer than expected due to the master plan revision and land use plan
  adjustment (which were beyond the control of local governments), resulting in delayed implementation of
  the road investments in the initial two years. After the midterm review in 2018 and through restructuring,
  some of the delayed activities were cancelled and replaced with activities that were designed to minimize
  land acquisition and resettlement. Other measures were adopted, these included: selection of experienced
  design institutions; ensuring timely counterpart funds for resettlement, consultations with and advanced
  notification to affected communities, and preparation of action plans for land acquisition before bidding (ICR
  para 56).

  Grievance redress mechanisms were established as planned in each county/district to respond to concerns
  or complaints. However, no complaints were received (ICR para 69).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The ICR notes (para 71) that the project complied with the World Bank’s FM
  policies and procedures. The project audit reports for the fiscal years from 2015 to 2019 were submitted to
  the World Bank in a timely manner, were of acceptable quality and included unqualifies (clean) audit
  opinions. The interim financial reports were also regularly submitted to the World Bank and were of
  acceptable quality. Some minor FM performance deficiencies such as: the delayed establishment of
  project accounting, shortage of financial staff in the early stage of project implementation, and delayed
  counterpart funds contribution, were addressed by the Project Management Office (PMO) promptly.

  Procurement. The ICR notes (para 70) that the project complied with the World Bank’s procurement
  procedures and guidelines. There was sufficient procurement staff and the World Bank provided training in
  ethics and identifying red flags of fraud, corruption, and collusion. The ICR does not report any
  procurement problems under the project.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Substantial relevance of
                                                                                 objective because of limited
                                                                                 outcome orientation in the PDO;
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                 and substantial efficacy because
                                                                                 of minor shortcomings in the
                                                                                 quality of evidence on outcomes.
                                                                                 Because of a limited focus on
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory              outcomes in the PDO and in
                                                                                 M&E
                                                                                 Weaknesses in M&E design and
Quality of M&E                   High                  Substantial               lack of revision of the results
                                                                                 framework
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons in the ICR stood out as important and relevant to other projects and are
presented here with some revisions in editing:

      A competitive approach to selecting counties/districts for investments can create a
         positive implementation dynamic among participating counties/districts. The traditional
         approach in China is that each county/district receives a fixed amount for infrastructure
         investments. The project took an innovative approach to counties /districts selection based
         on predefined criteria that emphasized alignment with national and local development
         strategies, strong ownership and commitment from townships, disparity in infrastructure
         service in urban and peri-urban areas, demands for addressing infrastructure deficit and
         insufficient services, and adequate institutional arrangements/readiness for becoming a pilot
         model for sustainable small-town development (ICR para 9). The selection of investments
         was also strategic to ensure efficiency and technical soundness by focusing on investments
         with a reasonable scale of resettlement impacts, technical soundness, and quality of services
         in built-up areas (ICR para 53). This competitive approach generated incentives among the
         counties/districts to submit well-designed proposals, which proved effective because these
         well-designed interventions secured the county/district government’s commitment and strong
         support from the start.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)



        Complementing investment activities with capacity strengthening for O&M can lead
         from reactive to proactive maintenance. Before the project, local authorities placed high
         priority on building new infrastructure over O&M of existing infrastructure, resulting in
         inefficient use of public resources. This project introduced systematic asset management
         systems to support the long-term success and sustainability of public infrastructure
         investments and service delivery. This included, among others, public utility registrations,
         infrastructure mappings, and approval process of maintaining municipal assets. This led to a
         change from reactive to proactive maintenance of infrastructure, such as the timely clearing
         blockages in sewers and carrying out repairs.

        Innovative approaches for community outreach can help enable inclusive public
         participation to build ownership and facilitate implementation. Engagement with
         communities and beneficiaries in selecting project sites and designing the services is critical
         for communities to understand project outcomes and impacts. The project introduced
         innovative methods for community outreach, including the use of social media and digital
         tools complemented with conventional public participation methods. This allowed a wide
         range of citizens to be engaged throughout project preparation and implementation. The
         project used TV news, WeChat, and TikTok platforms to facilitate broader community
         discussions aimed at developing consensus on the level and type of investments to
         maximize the benefits for local communities. These innovative approaches provided timely
         and transparent information to affected people, created social support from affected
         communities, and improved the quality and effectiveness of construction works incorporating
         the feedback loops.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well-written, provides a comprehensive overview on the project, and complies with the
Bank guidelines for ICR preparation. The ICR is largely results-oriented and presented relevant evidence to
assess project achievements, but the quality of the evidence on outcomes has minor shortcomings and the
presentation of the results of the economic analyses is not easy to follow. The lessons are based on project
experience. Overall, the quality of ICR is substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Proje (P133069)




                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
