     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0022661

1. Project Data



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P148861                                  SC-DPL with a Cat DDO

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Seychelles                               Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-84390                               30-Sep-2017                                         7,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Sep-2014                              30-Sep-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           7,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            7,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        7,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Kavita Mathur             Fernando Manibog             Victoria Alexeeva             IEGSD




2. Project Objectives and Policy Areas

a. Objectives
   The development objective of the operation was "to strengthen the Government of Seychelles’ Disaster Risk
   Management policy and reform agenda and enhance its capacity to efficiently respond to disasters (Program
   Document (PD), page iv).




b. Pillars/Policy Areas

                                                                                                Page 1 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



   The operation had two pillars and three Policy Actions (PAs):
   Pillar 1: Strengthening the institutional/legal framework for disaster risk management.
   PA#1. Adoption of the Disaster Management Act by the National Assembly.
   PA#2. Updating and approval of the disaster risk management policy.
   Pillar 2: Integrating disaster risk reduction into development planning and decision making.
   PA#3. Establishment of a historic loss and damage database.



c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, and Dates
   Program Cost. The actual amount disbursed was US$7.0 million, as planned.
   Financing. The Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Loan was funded by a US$7.0 million
   IBRD Loan.
   Dates. The operation was approved on September 26, 2014 and became effective on December 31,
   2014. It closed on September 30, 2020 after a delay of three years. Since the Cat DDO was not drawn
   down during the first three years, on March 27, 2017, the World Bank received a request from the
   government to renew the Cat DDO and extend the loan closing date by three years to September 30, 2020.
   The extension was processed on July 28, 2017.
   Restructuring. As mentioned above, the first restructuring on July 28, 2017 extended the operation closing
   date by three years.
   Due to the emerging COVID-19 pandemic at the beginning of March 2020, the government requested a
   revision of the drawdown trigger to include major health-related emergencies, which led to a restructuring of
   the operation on March 24, 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives & Design

a. Relevance of Objectives
  Country context: Seychelles is a small island-state. It is exposed to a disproportionately high economic,
  social and environmental impact of natural and environmental disasters. The country’s location, topography
  and landscape make it vulnerable to tropical cyclones, tsunamis, storm surge, extreme rainfall, flooding,
  landslides, rockslides and forest fires. Between 1980 and 2013 the impact of natural disasters totaled
  US$40.1 million, affecting 21,328 people (PD para 7). The Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment carried out
  by the government after the heavy rains resulting from Tropical Cyclone Felleng, estimated recovery and
  reconstruction needs at US$30.3 million.
  Alignment with Country’s Strategy. The program's PDOs were consistent with the following two national
  strategy documents: (i) National Sustainable Development Strategy 2012-2020: this strategy seeks to
  mainstream disaster risk reduction as an important part of the key thematic areas of Climate Change, Land
  Use and Coastal Zones; and (ii) the Medium-Term National Development Plan Strategy 2013– 2017: the
  strategy aims to reduce the risk and vulnerability of the people of Seychelles to natural and man-made
  disasters. This operation financed a set of activities aimed at filling critical gaps in the institutional framework
  to strengthen the government’s ability to respond to natural disasters and effectively manage aftermath of a
  catastrophe.

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 10
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



       There was a need to establish a DRM framework which included both policy and reform agenda and for
       further improvement in capacity to manage disasters. The past efforts on DRM had led to the creation of a
       National Emergency Operation Center (NEOC), a shelter system and development of a first round of
       contingency plans. However, the National Policy was outdated and did not provide adequate guidance to
       implement DRM. There were gaps such as: (i) lack of information on multi-hazard risks, (ii) vulnerable areas,
       and (iii) historic data and means to address future disasters. There was a need to implement a
       comprehensive DRM master across sectors and all levels of administration. Moreover, the technical
       capacities of agencies to produce and utilize disaster risk and spatial information for planning and public or
       private development projects needed strengthening.
       Alignment with World Bank’s Strategy. The PDOs were in line with the World Bank’s Seychelles Country
       Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2012–2015 relevant at appraisal. The operation contributed to the CPS outcome
       to improve the Government’s capacity to respond to natural disasters and climate change (CPS para 66). The
       PDOs were aligned with the second objective of the current World Bank's Seychelles Country Partnership
       Framework (CPF) (FY18-FY23), which centers on improving the capacity to mitigate risks relating to climate
       change, including disaster risk (CPF para 58).
       The DPL with Cat DDO provided an additional layer of contingent financing, should the fiscal space be
       constrained at the time of disasters.
       In conclusion, the program's PDOs were relevant, as they were congruent with the country's context, country
       strategies and with the World Bank's country partnership framework.



       Rating
       ---

   b. Relevance of Design
         ---



       Rating
       ---


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To strengthen the Government of Seychelles’ Disaster Risk Management policy and reform agenda and
     enhance its capacity to efficiently respond to disasters.

    Rationale



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 10
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



Pillar 1 of the program intended to strengthen the institutional and legal framework for disaster risk
management (DRM) through PA#1 and PA#2.
Under PA#1, the program provided a legal framework for disaster risk management including through the
adoption of the Disaster Management Act. The following results were achieved:

  • The DPO provided technical support to five Districts Administrations (as targeted) to update/develop
  District Contingency Plans. The districts are: Anse Aux Pius, La Digue, Point La Rue, Beau Vallon and
  Baie St. Anne. These plans provide the overarching framework for emergency preparedness and
  response at the District level including: (i) counterparts at the district level that will support them during
  emergencies, (ii) list of safety areas, shelters and evacuation routes, (iii) list of transportation and other
  contract services, (iv) information on District emergency brigades and their team members, and (v)
  Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for District emergency brigade team leader and emergency
  shelter focal person. These plans were approved by the Principal Secretary of the Division of Risk and
  Disaster Management (DRDM). The efficacy of districts in updating/development of plans and protocols
  for preparedness and response – as measured by RI-1a is rated substantial.
  • The DPO supported DRDM in carrying out emergency drills and exercises.
      • A total of 16 drills and emergency exercises were carried out during the program implementation
      period (2015-2020), which exceeded the target of at least one exercise per year. These involved: oil
      spill emergency drills, tsunami exercises, school safety as well as health and pandemic exercises or a
      post event evaluation of a fire at the Social Public Transport Corporation.
      • In addition, several Table Top Exercises (TTX) were conducted to test multi-agency coordination and
      communication arrangements through a simulated command post exercise based on a major national
      disaster. For example, in 2019 DRDM delivered two Table Top Exercises (TTX) to test the multi-
      agency coordination and communication laid out in the National Integrated Emergency Management
      Plan (NIEMP) on national, district and incident level protocols. Another TTX was with command posts
      and the National Emergency Operations Center to validate the NIEMP concept (including incident
      command management, communication, tactical capabilities, traffic management as well as shelter
      and emergency provisions) on the scenario of a major event impacting the port and SEYPEC fuel
      storage facilities. In March 2020, DRDM and the police department conducted a TTX at the
      International Conference Center of Seychelles to test its level of preparedness to handle the evolving
      COVID-19 virus infection situation in the country.

These exercises are part of the operationalization of various policy instruments and strengthen the
institutional capacity to responds to disasters. The efficacy of the key stakeholders and multi-agency
coordination and communication - as measured by RI-1b is rated substantial.
The DRM policy instrument strengthened capacity and enabled fast response to COVID-19. The ICR reports
(para 38) that the Cat DDO instrument provided and efficient and immediate source of liquidity at the onset
of the COVID-19 crisis.
PA#2 intended to establish a fully functional early warning system, increase preparedness through updated
sector contingency plans, and conduct information dissemination activities. DRDM delivered media outreach
campaigns activities to raise public awareness and inform about disaster risk reduction and management.
Three awareness and educational campaigns were delivered by DRDM, against the target of two.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 10
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



Educational activities were also carried out by DRDM as part of the annual Disaster Risk Reduction Day
(2018, 2019) and Child Protection Day 2019. In addition, the media outreach campaigns utilized public
advertisement in newspapers, TV spots, interviews by the Principal Secretary on current DRM developments
(including the presentation of the NIEMP on national media), as well as a DRDM online presence on
webpage and Facebook). The ICR reports that DRDM is developing an education and awareness framework
to guide the DRM outreach. However, the ICR does not provide evidence on the extent of improved
awareness intended to secure public cooperation and participation, how effective these awareness campaign
were, or compliance with standards and procedures. The efficacy of public DRM education and awareness
campaigns - as measured by RI-1c is rated substantial, with moderate shortcomings.
RI-1d measured the contingency plans that had been updated and officially approved by the
Cabinet Ministers. Five key ministries (as targeted) revised six sector specific contingency plans and DRM
relevant institutions updated their response plans. Sectors include health, education, tourism, food security
and Nutrition, Port and Airport. RI-1d is rated substantial.
Pillar 2 sought to integrate disaster risk reduction into development planning and decision making. The
production of risk information and the establishment of a platform to disseminate information on historic
disaster events, as well as geospatial data, provided the foundations for activities under this pillar.
PA#3 supported the government in establishing a historic loss and damage database. This database was
established in collaboration with the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction and the
Indian Ocean Commission. The database is hosted and maintained by the Center for GIS under the Ministry
of Lands and Housing and is accessible to all government institutions as well as to the public. The World
Bank supported the setting up a GeoNode as data sharing platform. Furthermore, a Geospatial Working
Group was established to promote the geospatial sector in Seychelles and the integration of geospatial
technology for public resource management and decision making. The Operation successfully delivered
various workshops and trainings on GIS or the use drones, which encouraged the GoS to further invest in
these technologies.
The Centre for GIS continues to maintain its Web GIS platform that serves for sharing geospatial information
across ministries, agencies and the public. RI-2a tracked the annual updating of geospatial risk data sharing
platform. RI-2a is rated substantial.
On May 6, 2020, the Cabinet approved the Spatial Data Sharing Policy that provides the legal basis for and
facilitates the sharing of geospatial data in Seychelles.
By 2020, five ministries (Environment, Lands & Housing, Tourism, Education, Health) as targeted had
developed/revised their strategic development plans to include and account for risk-related information, risk
reducing measures and/or response strategies. These included:
(i) the preparation of the “Coastal Management Plan (CMP) (2019-2024)” by the Ministry of Agriculture,
Climate Change and Environment (MACCE) and endorsed by Cabinet on May 30, 2020. The CMP outlines
priority interventions in coastal infrastructure, ecosystem restoration and land planning to tackle erosion
issues and secure a resilient coastline. The total investment amount for the 5- year period is estimated at
US$ 15.8 million;
(ii) the review of the “2015 Victoria Master Plan” (or “Vision 2040”) and the “Physical Planning Bill 2017” in
the Ministry of Lands and Housing;
(iii) the mapping of key tourism infrastructure and in understanding its levels of exposure to hazards, by the
Tourism ministry, which led to recommendations for risk reduction under the new “Tourism Development Act
2019”;


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 10
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



    (iv) the promotion of “integration of risk and response information into school curricula” by the Ministry of
    Education and subsequent adoption in “Education Sector Medium-Term Strategic Plan 2013-2017”; and
    (v) the Ministry of Health finalized in 2018 the Joint External Evaluation (JEE) in coordination with the
    Secretariat of the World Health Organization (WHO). This JEE recommended measures to the Ministry’s
    strategic plans regarding the establishment of capacities to detect, assess, notify and respond to major
    public health threats and incidences.
    As targeted five ministries introduced risk information into their policies. This, however, took six years to
    accomplish. The ICR does not indicate if other key ministries such as the Ministry of Transport had also
    introduced DRM into their policies. Also, there is no evidence that the private sector included risk information
    in their projects. RI-2b expected to measure the number of Line Ministries, agencies and private sector
    included risk information in their development projects. RI-2a is rated substantial, but with moderate
    shortcomings.
    Overall, based on a weighted average, the Operation's efficacy is rated satisfactory. The operation
    contributed to strengthening the Governments DRM agenda and enhancing its capacity to efficiently respond
    to disasters in a substantial way but with some shortcomings, in particular in evidence on the progress
    in mainstreaming of risk information at the sectoral level and across private entities, after six years of the
    operation duration.


    Rating
   Substantial
  PHREVDELTBL

PHREVISEDTBL




  5. Outcome

  The relevance of Prior Actions and the relevance of the results indicators are rated satisfactory. The
  achievement of objective is rated satisfactory, resulting in an overall satisfactory outcome rating for the
  operation.


  a.      Outcome Rating
          Satisfactory


  6. Rationale for Risk to Development Outcome Rating

  The key risks to the programs outcome are institutional capacity and fiscal resources:
  Institutional Capacity Risk: Although the DPO strengthened institutional capacity in government agencies in
  DRM, further efforts are required to guarantee continuity in institutional capacity and an effective
  implementation of the developed strategies and plans


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 10
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



Fiscal Risk: With the adverse economic and financial impacts of COVID-19, securing adequate financial
resources for implementing measures laid out in the DRM framework and development plans poses a
significant risk. The ICR indicates (para 52) that the Government is committed DRM and is likely to continue
advancing the DRM agendas.


a. Risk to Development Outcome Rating
     ---

7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   ---


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  ---

b. Quality of supervision
   ---


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  ---

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
   Satisfactory

8. Assessment of Borrower Performance

a. Government Performance
    ---


  Government Performance Rating
   ---

b. Implementing Agency Performance
    ---


  Implementing Agency Performance Rating
  ---

  Overall Borrower Performance Rating


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 10
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



   ---



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
       ---


b. M&E Implementation
       ---


c. M&E Utilization
       ---


  M&E Quality Rating
  ---

10. Other Issues

a. Environmental and Social Effects
       ---




b. Fiduciary Compliance
 ---


c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
       ---


d. Other
  None.



11. Ratings


                                                                             Page 8 of 10
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                       IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory             Satisfactory                 ---
Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory                 ---
Relevance of Results
                                                        Satisfactory                 ---
Indicators
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial                  ---

Note
When insufficient information is provided by the Bank for IEG to arrive at a clear rating, IEG will downgrade the
relevant ratings as warranted beginning July 1, 2006.
The "Reason for Disagreement/Comments" column could cross-reference other sections of the ICR Review, as
appropriate.

12. Lessons

 The following lessons are adapted from the ICR:
A strong institutional champion is key to advancing cross-sectoral policy dialogue. The Department for
Disaster and Risk Management as the implementing agency played a central role in improving inter-agency
collaboration between national and subnational entities involved in Disaster Risk Management (DRM) by
establishing or reinforcing incident management procedures and communication. The Ministry of Finance,
Economic Planning & Trade, with its strong and central position also provided important impetus.
Given the cross-cutting nature of DRM, a strong technical assistance program can be effective in
building capacity in small island states. Due to their size and characteristics, small island states have limited
capacities (e.g., few individuals or entities need to cover a broader range of government activities and
responsibilities, limited resources for building local expertise, etc.) and the government often needs to fulfill both
local and national functions at the same time. In this operation, a strong TA program and close Bank
supervision proved to be an effective strategy to strengthen institutional capacities and DRM outcomes.
The CAT DDO is a multifaceted instrument that can be adapted efficiently and speedily to finance
instant liquidity in a crisis. In response to COVID-19 health emergency, the CAT DDO funds were the first
source of external financing accessible to Seychelles and provided a ‘lifeline’ to people and economy. CAT
DDO can include both natural disasters and health emergency.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                        Page 9 of 10
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SC-DPL with a Cat DDO(P148861)



The ICR is comprehensive, well written, and consistent with guidelines, but it could have been more concise. It
provides a detailed narrative of the program context and the achieved results and is generally evidence-based
and internally consistent.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 10
