     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0022626

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P118152                                    TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51710                                  31-Dec-2018                                        236,632,733.95

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Oct-2012                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          255,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           255,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       236,632,733.95                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 53),
   the Program Development Objective (PDO) was "to improve institutional performance for urban service
   delivery in Program Urban Local Government Authorities (ULGAs)."
   This review will assess the performance of this Program for Results (PforR) against this singular objective.
   The three key expected outcomes (PAD, paragraph 53) were:




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



     1.  18 ULGAs with enhanced institutional structures and better local governance defined in in terms of
     improved urban planning systems, increased own source revenue generation and collection (with a
     particular focus on property taxation), enhanced fiduciary systems management, improved service delivery
     systems and enhanced accountability and oversight mechanisms.
     2 . Newly constructed or repaired urban municipal infrastructure.
     3 . Enhanced central government Local Government Development Grant (LGDG) mechanism to support
     and deepen decentralization.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No


c. Components
   Components were classified according to three Results Areas:
   1. Strengthened Institutional and Delivery Performance by Urban Local Government Authorities
   (US$201 million at appraisal, US$194.2 million actual). This component would be supported by
   Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) 1, 2, and 3 (see Section 3, Relevance below). This component
   would finance the Urban Performance Grant (UPG) window of the LGDG system managed by the
   President's Office for Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG). After achieving
   minimum conditions and reaching target Annual Performance Assessment (APA) scores, target ULGAs
   would use UPGs to finance capacity building and infrastructure investments. Eligible infrastructure
   investments included roads, markets, abattoirs, solid waste management, and public spaces. High risk
   activities, such as those with negative impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the
   environment and/or affected people would be excluded. Eligible technical assistance would finance
   improvements in urban planning, own source revenue generation, fiduciary management, infrastructure
   implementation and operations and maintenance (O&M) and accountability and oversight mechanisms of
   local authorities (PAD, paragraph 38). The three DLIs would provide evidence for achieving the core
   outcomes of the PDO (PAD, paragraph 59). The UPG window of the LGDG was expected to run for six
   years, from FY12 to FY18 (PAD, paragraph 36). DLI 1 disbursed US$38.1 million, DLI 2 disbursed
   US$106 million, and DLI 3 disbursed US$50.1 million.
   2. Strengthened Urban Local Government Authority Public Sector Management
   Capacity (US$44 million at appraisal and actual). This component would be supported by DLIs 4 and 5 and
   would finance the PO-RALG in managing the LGDG in general and the UPG window in particular,
   including the core staff of the ULGAs (DLI 4). All ULGA staff were local government employees but PO-
   RALG was required to appoint the 10 core staff financed by the program. Each fully staffed ULGA would
   receive US$155,000 a year or US$14 million over five years (see DLI 4 under Section 3 Relevance below).
   DLI 4 disbursed US$14 million and DLI 5 disbursed US$30.0 million.



                                                                                               Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



  3. Overall Strengthening of the Local Government Development Grant mechanism (US$10 million at
  appraisal and actual) This component would be supported by DLI 6 and would finance a more robust
  Annual Performance Assessments (APAs) of the participating 18 ULGAs. This component would also
  finance the strengthening of the LGDG system informed by lessons from this PforR operation (PAD,
  paragraphs 52 and 99). This results area was dropped in October 2018 (ICR, paragraph 15, see also
  Dates below). The accompanying DLI 6 was also dropped (see Section 3 Relevance of DLIs below). DLI 6
  disbursed US$10 million.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: The original total program cost was US$255 million. The credit disbursed US$
  248.2 million (ICR, Data Sheet and Annex 3).
  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) fully financed this project under the
  PforR financing instrument.
  Borrower Contribution: No borrower contribution was planned at appraisal. There was no borrower
  contribution when the operation closed.
  Dates: The program was approved on October 23, 2012 and made effective on February 6, 2013. The
  Mid Term Review was conducted on May 4, 2016. The original closing date was December 31, 2018. The
  data sheet reflected only one of two level 2 restructurings reported in the main text (ICR, paragraph 20):

    • on October 2017 to extend the closing date by 18 months from December 31, 2018 to June 30, 2020
    due to delays in the disbursement of program funds from the Ministry of Finance and Planning Ministry
    of Finance and Planning (MoFP) to the ULGAs, which impacted the execution of planned construction
    activities and consultancies.
    • on June 4, 2020 to further extend the closing date by another 6 months to December 31, 2020 due to
    COVID-19 which adversely impacted construction works, public consultation processes, and shipping
    and delivery of streetlights and abattoir equipment.

  Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome is necessary. Restructuring decreased the program scope and
  ambition. The scope of the performance areas covered by the APA under DLI 2 was reduced. Two (of the
  six) DLIs and one (of three) Results Area were dropped and not replaced. Program resources were
  reallocated to the remaining Results Area and DLIs to signal the same program commitment, beneficiary
  coverage, and difficulty.

    • DLI 2 - Increase in revenue from property taxes formed 25 percent of the APA score to be achieved
    by ULGAs. When the government centralized property taxation, contrary to the decentralization agenda,
    the original target APA score had to be reduced from 90 to 67.5 percent.
    • Results Area 3 and DLI 6 were dropped. The government did not include incentives to make the
    LGDG a performance-based grant mechanism. The government used the grant mechanism to
    redistribute resources equitably rather than reward performance improvements.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  Alignment with Urban Development Strategy: The country experienced rapid urbanization. Urban
  population increased from 5.7 percent in 1967 to 24 percent by 2005 and anticipated to reach 38 percent by
  2030 (PAD, paragraph 5). However, institutional capacities did not keep pace with the increasing
  demand for services nor were investments adequate to match the growing pressures on
  existing infrastructure. In Tanzania's ambitious Development Vision 2025, the government aimed to be an
  industrialized middle income country with good governance and a strong competitive economy. To
  implement this vision, the Tanzania Second Five Year Development Plan (FY 16 to FY 20) and its Third
  Five Year Development Plan (FY 20 to FY 25) identified urbanization as a vehicle for economic
  transformation and human development. In 1998, the government committed to Decentralization by
  Devolution. By FY 2010, 25 percent of total public sector expenditures came from urban and rural local
  governments. In 2005, the government put in place an intergovernmental fiscal transfers mechanism that
  included the Local Government Development Grant (LGDG). The LGDG, first funded by the World Bank and
  other donor partners, with increasing government contributions (ICR, paragraph 6) proved continuing
  commitment to decentralization. LGDG funds were available to all 185 local governments through
  designated windows for capacity building and capital development. In response to the limited capital
  development resources for urbanizing local authorities in the LGDG, this PforR operation introduced a new
  UPG window to assist the target 18 of 26 ULGAs to meet their infrastructure needs and capacity
  constraints. The PforR instrument also allowed the use of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) as
  incentives to target the performance of central and local governments more effectively than in an
  investment operation.
  The program was relevant to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Tanzania for FY 18 - FY
  22. The PDO was relevant to Focus Area 1 - Enhance Productivity and Accelerate Equitable and
  Sustainable Growth and Focus Area 3 - (CPF, Figure 1 and paragraph 45). The program was noted as part
  of the World Bank operations that supported Objective 1.5 – Harness urbanization to promote economic
  growth and job creation under Focus Area 1. A network of well-functioning urban areas would be critical to
  support the industrialization agenda. Planned, serviced, and functioning urban areas were key to achieving
  structural transformation. This would result in more jobs in manufacturing and services. Focusing on
  strengthening institutional capacity for urban service delivery also contributed to achieving Objective 3.1.
  The program complemented the government's counterpart efforts at building an enabling environment
  for the local authorities to deliver infrastructure services by providing grants to finance capacity building for
  infrastructure development and enhanced institutional performance in 18 urban local government
  authorities. In addition, the program addressed specific good governance practices, including the Grievance
  Redress Mechanism that would bolster human capital and social inclusion. These supported Objective 3.1
  Strengthen public accountability and financial efficiency in delivering services and complemented the
  government's objective to undertake reforms to facilitate effective implementation, including facilitating
  government effectiveness and enhancing land administration. The APA process held the urban local



                                                                                                      Page 4 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



authorities accountable for carrying out their basic functions and improved financial management
processes.
World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience: The World Bank supported the country's
decentralization efforts using the LGDG mechanism beginning in 2005 under the US$98 million Local
Government Support Project (LGSP). Local government authorities improved their governance through
participatory planning, increasing their infrastructure investments, and improved budgeting (ICR, paragraph
6 and footnote 3). In 2010, the World Bank financed critical infrastructure in seven large urban local
government authorities under the Tanzania Strategic Cities Project. In 2015, the World Bank also financed
the Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Development Project to address the requirements of the capital city. In
2012, the Zanzibar Urban Services Project financed infrastructure investments and institutional
strengthening in four urban areas of the two Zanzibar islands (PAD, Annex 4, paragraph 12). This
PforR operation would fortify the reforms introduced by LGSP. Altogether, these World Bank
operations provide a solid framework for the institutional and financing interventions in support of Tanzania's
urban and decentralization policy.
Country Capacity and Adequacy for PforR Instrument: The PDO was outcome oriented, designed to
build on the results of the preceding Local Government Support Project. LGSP supported seven of the 26
urban local governments, the capital Dar es Salaam had its own project, and this PforR
operation assisted the remaining 18 urban local governments. The PO-RALG was managing the various
windows of the intergovernmental fiscal transfers or the LGDG. The program had a two pronged capacity
building enhancement approach: the first directed at urban local authorities to deliver infrastructure services
and the second, fortifying the central government's intergovernmental fiscal transfer system. The PforR
instrument used an existing incentive mechanism under LGDG framework and introduced factors that would
improve delivery of local services and accountability. This results-based financing would demonstrate how
performance assessments could provide target urban authorities with incentives to improve their
governance by adding factors such as effective systems for environmental and social
management, grievance, fiduciary, procurement, planning, and infrastructure investments. A PforR
instrument allowed the following: (i) introduced the UPG as part of the LGDG. This window would continue
even after this PforR operation; (ii) aligned the incentives at the central and local levels of
government through disbursement linked indicators aimed at government actions to optimize the
administration and use of urban grants; and (iii) improved and integrated government systems at the
national and local level. ULGSP was the World Bank’s first PforR operation in the urban portfolio, and the
first of any sector in Sub-Saharan Africa (ICR, paragraph 9).
In summary, the relevance of objective is rated Substantial. The PDO is aligned with the government's
strategy to use urbanization as an engine for its industrialization efforts to reach its Vision 2025, and also
aligned with the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework for Tanzania for FY 18- FY 22. However, the
PDO is stated in a simple manner and without clarity on the development results expected from 'improved
institutional performance for urban delivery'.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To improve institutional performance for urban service delivery in Program urban local government
     authorities.

    Rationale
    Theory of Change: The program provided financing and technical support to authorities at both the national
    and urban local government levels. At appraisal, the Results Framework (PAD, Annex 2) provided a valid
    causal link between the inputs and outputs to achieve the PDO. Financing Urban Performance Grants
    (UPGs) as a window for urban local governments served as inputs in this Theory of Change. Grants would
    finance technical assistance to build ULGA capacity and finance eligible capital infrastructure investments
    and equipment. Technical assistance Inputs were directed at central government to strengthen its capacity to
    manage the UPG. Outputs included infrastructure investments financed by UPGs and expressed in length of
    roads, number of markets, bus terminals, abattoirs, and solid waste collection points. These infrastructure
    projects were demand-driven, determined during implementation, following the annual participatory
    consultations and had no baselines or targets. In addition, the program would finance Annual Performance
    Assessments (APAs), PO-RALG advisers, and Zonal Response Teams to mentor on ULGA capacity.
    Three outcomes would indicate the achievement of the PDO. The first would be improved APA scores of
    local governments in areas the Program financed. The second would be completed infrastructure
    investments. The long term outcome would be singularly focused on improved delivery of infrastructure
    services by local governments. The third outcome would enhance central government LGDG mechanism to
    support and deepen decentralization.
    At closing, the Theory of Change provided a valid causal link between inputs and outputs consistent with
    those used at appraisal, except for four changes. These changes included (i) dropping the property tax
    collection performance as a disbursement factor. On July 1, 2016, local governments were no longer
    responsible for valuation or collection of these taxes after the government centralized this (see Section 3
    Relevance above for discussion of this change); (ii) two DLIs (DLIs 5 and 6) were dropped and reallocated.
    For DLI 5, the local capacity building plan did not target or prioritize local government infrastructure service
    delivery skills and was thus not aligned with the program objectives. For DLI 6, the assessment manuals did
    not provide a strong incentive for improving institutional performance. Funds were reallocated to DLIs 1-4
    and the conduct of a sixth APA to identify additional improvements in local institutional performance and
    urban infrastructure. The third outcome specified in the PAD was dropped when DLI 6 was dropped. In this
    respect, the ICR (paragraph 18) reports that a review of the 2010 and 2016 LGDG assessment manuals
    found that the LGDG allocations to LGAs did not use a stronger incentive mechanism for improved
    institutional performance, concluding that LGDG may have been more focused on a more equitable
    horizontal distribution of LGDG grant resources rather than enhanced and incremental institutional
    performance. There was also no incentive built in to reward exceeding APA scores (see PAD, footnote 22).
    Three intermediate outcomes or Results Areas (RAs) would indicate the achievement of the PDO, measured
    by respective DLIs (see Section 3 Relevance above).


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)




  • Under RA 1 three DLIs (1, 2, and 3) would measure how local government performance was
  strengthened. These indicators were (i) program minimum conditions in annual assessments were
  achieved; (ii) scores achieved in the APAs; (iii) local infrastructure targets in annual plans met.
  • Under RA 2 two DLIs (4 and 5) would measure how local public sector management was strengthened.
  These indicators were (i) number of local governments with core staff in place, and (ii) the implementing
  agency conducting its annual capacity building program for local governments.
  • Under RA 3, DLI 6 would measure how the LGDG has been strengthened by adopting performance
  measures informed by lessons from this program.

The TOC had the following assumptions: (i) grants would be disbursed to local governments in a timely
fashion; (ii) the grants would be sufficient incentives and within the absorptive capacity of the recipient local
government; and (iii) capacity building activities were effectively implemented. The assumption did not
include that capacity plans aligned with the PDOs, as evidenced by the reallocation of 2 of 6 DLIs during
implementation noted above.
OUTPUTS

  • 179.31 (target 220) km of roads constructed to bitumen standard with solar streetlights and roadside
  drains and 6.10 km of storm water drains constructed.
  • Constructed 4 (target 6) markets, 10 (target 12) bus stations, 2 (target 3) lorry parking stations, 3 bus
  terminals as targeted, and 5 abattoirs as targeted.
  • Under solid waste rehabilitation, procured 35 heavy trucks (37 waste collection trucks in paragraph 49),
  17 heavy equipment (payloaders), 290 skip baskets or trailers,3 dump sites rehabilitated , and completed
  1 public green space. As the TOC noted above, there were no targets or baselines for these demand-
  driven infrastructure projects determined during implementation (ICR, Annex 5 (b) Infrastructure Target
  Achievement)
  • Under solid waste management, in Kibaha, waste collection capacity increased from 360 tons/year to
  21,600 tons per year after the program. In Lindi, collection coverage expanded from just 18 to 70 percent
  of the municipality.
  • 17 General Planning Schemes were approved (target 18), the remaining 1 was pending approval by the
  Ministry of Land, Housing and Human Settlements (MLHHS) at closing.
  • Four (five were reported completed in ICR paragraph 46) markets were constructed in Iringa, Korogwe,
  Morogoro, and Njombe. Three markets were operational at closing.
  • At least 52,402 jobs were created during the construction of the markets.
  • PO-RALG hired an independent consultant to carry out 6 APAs, as targeted.


OUTCOMES
Under RA 1 - strengthened ULGA institutional and delivery performance, the following outcomes were
achieved under each DLI:




                                                                                                       Page 7 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



• DLI 1: in FY13, only Bariadi, Geita, and Tabora did not achieve minimum conditions, and in FYs 14 and
15, Bukoba did not achieve minimum conditions (ICR, paragraphs 36 and 87).
    • A Minimum Access Condition included obtaining Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
    (ESIAs) certificates before construction works. Environmental management officers were few, or were
    generally natural resource officers. National Environment Management Council (NEMC) issued ESIA
    certificates but they had to be submitted to the Division of Environment in the Vice President’s Office
    and approved and signed by the Minister. PO-RALG worked with NEMC to streamline the process so
    that a provisional approval letter was granted once they reviewed the ESIAs.
    • Revenue from property taxation was dropped as a minimum access condition when the central
    government nationalized property taxes.
• DLI 2: capacity of local authorities participating in this PforR operation improved as evidenced by APA
scores achieved by ULGAs that improved over time, ranging from 59. 5 (target 60) during the 2nd APA to
80.4 (original target score was 90 percent, reduced at restructuring to 67.5 percent because the property
tax was removed from the APA calculation (see Section (2)(b) DLI 2) above). APA scores averaged 80.4
percent because most ULGAs did not have systems to assess and manage environmental and social
impacts, quality assurance, grievance handing, and managing spatial data to support the development
and implementation of General Planning Schemes (GPS). At closing, all local authorities scored an
average of 86.14 percent in Value for Money (original target 86 percent). This was because:
    • ULGAs were not accustomed to having supervision consultants oversee works and had no quality
    assurance and quality control systems in place;
    • Scores in urban planning were affected by delays in the Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Human
    Settlements (MLHHSD) approval process of the 20-year Government Planning Schemes by as much
    as three (Iringa and Musoma) to ten years (Sumbawanga). PO-RALG had little leverage in addressing
    delays in publishing the legal notice of the ULGA boundary because this was handled
    outside MLHHSD; and
    • Budget allocation affected the ULGA scores. Funds budgeted by ULGAs were released by the
    Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP). The PAD envisaged that based on APA scores and after
    verification, ULGAs would be notified of tentative grants figures for budgeting purposes.
    However, MOFP gave ULGAs conflicting or inconsistent allocation figures. Since MOFP approved
    ULGA budgets, ULGAs complied with MOFP instruction and adjustments made later in the
    process. These discrepancies, and remedial actions, complicated budget preparations. The inefficient
    practice resulted in multiple versions of the budget, which complicated the performance assessment
    and quality review. In addition, to prevent delayed transfers by MOFP to ULGAs, the number of
    transfers was reduced from quarterly to semi-annually. Disbursements continued to be delayed
    throughout implementation (four to ten months) with repercussions in contracting for subprojects,
    causing lower-than-expected scores against DLI 3 (physical implementation of subprojects),
    and reduced disbursements to ULGAs in the following year. This led to the18-month extension of the
    closing date.
• DLI 3 - Completed infrastructure investments against plans had the following outcomes:



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



 •  Roads improved access to public transport and reduced travel times. In Kibaha, prior to the program,
 public transport owners avoided areas within the municipality due to poor road conditions. With the
 improved roads, these areas were now accessed by public transport services. In Moshi, public
 transport costs were reduced from TZS 600 to TZS 400 per trip. Higher designed roads
 accommodated pedestrian walkways, streetlights, road safety features, and roadside drains. Travel
 times decreased, in Singida from 45 to 10-20 minutes, in Sumbawanga from 30 to 10 minutes, and
 Iringa from 45 to 10 minutes. Roads with streetlights improved the business
 environment. Sumbawanga reported reduced crime. Moshi reported a new vibrancy in the community
 due to evening trading activities. In Bukoba, Bariadi and Moshi, bus terminals and other facilities were
 designed to accommodate people with disabilities (ICR, paragraph 59).
 • Roads constructed with roadside drains and standalone drains were expected to reduce flooding (no
 data) and improve the standard of living for beneficiary communities. In Mpanda 4.5 km of standalone
 drains is expected to decrease the impact of flooding for 2,552 households (that were previously
 affected by the floods). Local authorities also reported positive impacts on public health such as in
 Lindi reporting reduced incidence (no data) of waterborne diseases. Morogoro reported reduced (no
 data) disease carrying mosquitoes (ICR, paragraph 48).
 • Incomes were enhanced through small businesses along upgraded roads, markets, and bus
 terminals. However, residents were not adequately consulted on locating the Korogwe market in a
 newly planned area in an effort to stimulate development. Vendors continued to use the old market in
 the Central Business District.
 • The completed abattoirs in Geita, Lindi, Kibaha, Shinyanga and Songea were not operational at
 closing. COVID 19 protocols delayed shipment and installation of slaughtering equipment and cold
 room facilities. PO-RALG asked the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries to assist the urban local
 authorities in preparing operations and maintenance (O&M) plans for the completed abattoirs.
 • Urban residents interviewed (the ICR did not mention how many) noted the positive impact
 streetlights had on businesses that before had not been able to operate at night, particularly for low-
 income petty traders and food vendors. All ULGAs also reported benefits to motorcycle taxis
 (bodabodas), which have increased their income through more trips due to better quality roads but also
 have reduced maintenance costs for their vehicles (ICR paragraph 58). Bus terminals, lorry parking
 facilities, and commuter minibus (daladala) stands enhanced connectivity between urban and rural
 areas, enhanced the attractiveness of urban areas (no information on how this was measured), and
 contributed to increase in revenues from user fees.
 • Tree planting and landscaping along the rights of way of completed roads, markets, lorry parks and
 bus terminals and in Songea, a small park with a fountain, small snacks kiosk, and paved walkways all
 helped raise awareness of the importance of urban greening. PO-RALG and ULGA teams anticipated
 that these greening aspects would be mainstreamed in subsequent projects (ICR paragraph 62)..
 • Under solid waste management, was National Environmental Management Council issued a stop
 work order for the Moshi dump site rehabilitation and ordered to close. The Moshi authorities used
 their own funds to construct a modern sanitary landfill at Mtakuja village. This became operational
 in October 2020 with a schedule of annual fees for inspection and collection of waste from various


                                                                                             Page 9 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



       business. In other municipalities, such as Mpanda and Songea, authorities included sites for future
       landfills in their General Planning Schemes as part of an incremental approach to improving solid
       waste management. In addition, the waste bins in the bus terminals in Sumbawanga and Bariadi
       were part of the improved solid waste collection system.
       • Increase in values of lands adjacent to the infrastructure investments were reported. In Babati, land
       alongside constructed roads rose in value from 1,000 to 3,500 TSh per square meter. Similarly, in
       Musoma, land alongside constructed roads rose in value from 700 TSh to 1,800 TSh per square meter.
       In Iringa, land surrounding the roads, bus terminals and market. rose in value from 3,000 TSh to 5,000
       TSh per square meter.

Under RA 2 - strengthened public sector management capacity of ULGAs, the following outcomes were
achieved under DLIs 4 and 5:

  • DLI 4: All local authorities achieved full staff complement in FY16 and FY18. However, in FY17, 11
  ULGAs did not have the full staff complement in all core positions, 9 did not have council engineers, and 2
  did not have council directors. Each local authority had a full core staff in place by FY 8 and met DLI 4.
  High vacancies and turnover were prevalent before the Program. Staff transfers were common during
  implementation. Staff posts were filled so that there were focal points for all core council functions to be
  assessed under the APA. However, there was a high staff turnover in later years. In 2017, the government
  established the Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Authority (TARURA) under PO-RALG. Many municipal
  engineers were reassigned to TARURA., weakening local engineering departments. In 2019, the
  government established the Ministry of Land, Housing, and Human Settlements Development (MLHHSD).
  Departure of town planners and land officers further weakened local government capacity.
  • DLI 5: The budget for DLI 5 underestimated the level of effort needed to deploy the ZRT (ICR,
  paragraph 67). The ZRTs were deployed two years later than anticipated, were active for a short period
  (two years from 2015 – 2017), with only 4 of the 24 person months planned for each expert and only four
  team leaders deployed for 24 months each. The ZRTs did not assist local authorities at the critical
  procurement stage of the infrastructure investments (ICR, paragraphs 52 and 68) and affected contract
  management performance of the local authorities (see also Section 9 Other Issues below). This DLI was
  dropped at restructuring but PO-RALG was reported to provide technical assistance and capacity
  building to help the urban local authorities improve institutional performance for urban service delivery
  (ICR, paragraph 17).

Under RA 3 - overall strengthening of the Local Development Grant System. This RA was dropped at
restructuring, together with DLI 6.

  • DLI 6: No improvements were introduced in the performance assessment of the LGDG. At closing, the
  LGDG system focused more on equitable distribution of grant resources across the local authorities rather
  than providing incentives to improve performance. This indicator was dropped although reported as fully
  disbursed.


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)




             Rating
      Substantial
     PHREVDELTBL


PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                    Rate
                                                                         Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                    Available?
                                                                                                0
            Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                                Not Applicable
                                                                                                0
            ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                                Not Applicable

     * Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


     6. Outcome

     The overall relevance is rated Substantial. With the reduced ambition and scope arising from the centralization
     of the property taxes and the removal of Results Area 3 and DLI 6, the outcome of the project necessitated a
     split rating (see below for details). The efficacy under the original program scope is rated Substantial, with
     moderate shortcomings, and the revised efficacy is rated Substantial. The outcome is rated Moderately
     Satisfactory.


                                                                                                               Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



            Rating Dimension                 Original Objective                   Revised Outcome Target
                                                                                  After Restructuring
                                                                                  (December 2018)
            Relevance of Objectives          Substantial                          Substantial
            Relevance of DLIs                Substantial                          Substantial
            Overall Relevance                Substantial                          Substantial
            Overall Efficacy                 Substantial with Moderate            Substantial
                                             Shortcomings, in support of the
                                             decentralization agenda
                                             (centralized property taxes, unmet
                                             performance-based grant system)
            Overall Outcome Rating           Moderately Satisfactory              Satisfactory
            Outcome Rating Value             4                                    5
            Amount Disbursed (US$            196.75                               236.63-196.75=39.88
            million)
            Disbursement percentage (%)      83.15                                16.85
            Weighted Value                   3.3                                  0.8
            Total Weights                                                         4.1
            Overall Outcome Rating                                                Moderately Satisfactory




a.   Outcome Rating
     Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks in sustaining the development outcome associated with improved institutional performance of ULGAs
were related to maintaining a full staff complement and the capacity to manage construction of infrastructure
investments.
Institutional Performance Risk: PO-RALG managed the national Scheme of Service and appointed core local
positions of ULGAs. The program addressed lack of capacity due to unfilled vacant positions and high staff
turnover in ULGAs by including DLI 4 and assessing ULGA compliance each year. This annual protocol was an
incentive for PO-RALG to appoint the core staff in a timely manner. A full staff complement gave the local
authority sufficient human resources to deliver its functions, meet DLI 4, access urban performance grants, and
undertake infrastructure investments. All 18 ULGAs met this DLI until some local engineers, town planners, and
land officers transferred to the newly established Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Authority (TARURA) in
2017 and the Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Human Settlements Development (MLHHSD) in 2019. The local
authorities faced the risk of losing institutional memory and reduced capacities after program closing. PO-RALG
officers indicated that the improvements in urban governance under the program has enhanced professional

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



competence among staff, made resident more aware of their rights to demand services, and hold local
authorities to certain standards. For example, the use of the participatory consultative processes; known
compensation packages; and procedures for handling grievances were anticipated to continue after closing. In
addition, the follow on operation, the Tanzania Cities Transforming Infrastructure and Competitiveness Project
(TACTIC), will continue to work with the ULGAs and PO-RALG to identify incentives that would continue
to enhance the ULGAs institutional performance gains made under this operation (ICR, paragraph 60).
Infrastructure Sustainability Risk. Continuing low capacity for construction oversight pose a risk to
sustainability of infrastructure investments. The Bank team noted that weak construction supervision,
environmental and social management, and lack of occupational health and safety measures persisted after the
final assessment in FY18 (see also Section 9 Other Issues below). The Public Procurement Regulatory
Authority (PPRA) conducted Value for Money (VfM) audits as part of DLI 3 but did not capture the quality of
supporting feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs, social and environmental management instruments,
bidding procedures, or the quality of the construction supervision consultants to oversee construction works
(ICR, paragraph 112). To address this risk, future urban infrastructure investments, such as the follow-on
operation, TACTIC, would further strengthen critical service delivery systems such as urban planning,
environmental and social management, and contract management. For example, current urban plans, reviewed
every five years, also need to include how to enforce effective land use regulations and other strategic
environmental assessments. In this operation, Occupational Health and Safety Authority (OSHA) and
NEMC participated in capacity building and trained local authorities, contractors, and supervision consultants on
environmental, health, and safety matters and in implementing site-specific Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMPs). NEMC could expand its role in the timely monitoring and supervision of
environmental performance during implementation by providing quality assurance of Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for high-risk subprojects. ULGAs should also ask participating contractors to
register with OSHA its qualified health and safety staff prior to construction (ICR, paragraph 118).
Lack of sufficient resources to meet operations and maintenance (O&M) needs of completed
infrastructure pose a risk to delivering infrastructure services. Most infrastructure works were completed
after the final APA. O&M frameworks, plans, or manuals and budgets were not fully assessed after subprojects
were handed over to the ULGAs. The Bank mission of October 2020, ULGAs were enjoined to have O&M
frameworks and set aside adequate budgets. The financial sustainability of some facilities were deemed
doubtful: some markets and bus stands that were located outside of the central business districts or city
centers were less utilized than those in more central locations bringing into question site selection or design
considerations for decisions made; some abattoirs and solid waste management systems were found to have
unsound considerations to sustain operations. While the ULGAs faced a number of challenges and setbacks
that constrained timely implementation of subprojects, in general there was a commitment by local governments
to build and strengthen systems and ensure subprojects were completed. ULGSP’s follow on operation,
TACTIC, will continue to support the 18 ULGAs supported in this operation and scale up to include 27 other
ULGAs, for a total of 45 cities and towns (ICR, paragraph 107). TACTIC will identify incentives to encourage
continued and enhanced institutional performance (ICR, paragraph 115).
Macroeconomic Risk. The COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 indicate a bleak health, economic, and social
consequences worldwide and pose high risk to sustaining the outcome achieved by the program. Severe
impact on the economy is expected. There would be pressure on prioritizing the spending for health rather than
other sectors. Disruptions to employment and income earnings in urban areas may pose a risk to resource
mobilization and would affect maintenance needs mentioned above. The uncertain global and national

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



macroeconomic environment in the near to medium term pose high risks to sustaining outcomes achieved by
the program.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was the first PforR operation of the World Bank, in the sector, and in the region (ICR, paragraph
  9). The timing, sequencing, and operational logic was appropriate and used the existing Local Government
  Development Grant (LGDG) system. To enhance ULGA capacity, Urban Performance Grants (UPG) would
  also finance capacity building while implementing eligible infrastructure investments: PO-RALG advisers
  would deliver annual capacity building plans; and Zonal Response Teams (ZRTs) would mentor and assist
  ULGAs on specific issues. The Results Framework (PAD, Annex 2) was well designed with outcome
  indicators aligned with the DLIs. No baselines or target values for infrastructure investments or service
  delivery were made at appraisal. The investments were meant to be demand-driven and determined during
  the annual participatory planning process (ICR, paragraph 45). To avoid the performance plateau
  experienced under the preceding LGSP, more appropriate, increasing targets were set for the ULGAs APA
  scores. The DLI verification process was clear, credible, and technically sound, following procedures
  established by the LGDG. Meeting the minimum access conditions meant that ULGAs had adequate staff
  and functional systems to deliver the planned infrastructure investments. The Bank team would provide
  quality enhancement reviews to ensure that assessments were independent, transparent, and rigorous.
  Final APAs would reflect agreements reached with PO-RALG. A realistic plan to monitor implementation
  progress followed the timing and sequence for achieving the results area. Local government authorities
  were familiar with the data collection. Information was gathered through established processes and reports
  used by LGDG. Beneficiary stakeholders were involved in planning for infrastructure investments. Risks
  were identified. Mitigation measures were noted except in the area of new processes associated with
  procurement, construction management and low contractor capacity.
  The preceding LGSP laid the groundwork for the intergovernmental fiscal transfer system that added the
  UPG window to be accessed by the target ULGAs. Urban elements in the UPG recognized their unique
  competencies that needed strengthening, such as urban planning, revenue enhancement, fiduciary
  systems, implementation of infrastructure, operations and maintenance and oversight systems, including
  environmental and social systems (PAD, footnote 54 and ICR, paragraph 9). Legal frameworks
  were adequate but not effectively implemented. Risks were identified and mitigating measures outlined and
  included in DLIs 1, 2, and 3 to address gaps in Bank policy. However, weaknesses in procurement and
  contract management were not outlined in the Program Action Plan (PAD, Annex 8 and ICR, footnote 32
  and paragraph 69). Workshops were held to familiarize ULGAs with the assessment processes and
  facilitate early implementation (ICR, paragraph 63).
  Overall, the quality at entry is rated Satisfactory. Design captured lessons from the previous operation. The
  existing systems were assessed to be adequate frameworks with gaps noted to be mitigated by the
  measures included in the Disbursement Linked Indicators. The team sensitized the ULGAs to the
  requirements of the PforR instrument. A shortcoming in the exemption of construction contracts from the
  Value Added Tax (VAT) was addressed at implementation.

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  The Bank team conducted 15 supervision mission over seven years. Four Task Team leaders managed this
  operation with a technical team based in Dar es Salaam. This arrangement allowed for close coordination
  with the government and quick resolution of challenges as these arose. The team conducted quality
  assurance and enhancement reviews as planned. The APA methodology allowed for course correction. For
  example, adjustments when the government adopted policies changes outside the control of the ULGAs
  (see Section 3 Relevance of DLIs above) such as those related to budgeting (DLI 1), urban plans (DLI
  2) property taxation (DLI 2), VAT exemptions (DLI 3), capacity building plans (DLI 5) and LGDG system
  (DLI 6). The inadequate assessment of implementation risk arising from low ULGA capacity, lack of
  systems, and low contractor capacity were borne out during implementation (see also Section 9 Other
  Issues, Fiduciary Management below). The Mid Term Review was conducted as planned. Additional
  support in capacity building expertise, in Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and in procurement and contract
  management could have benefitted supervision (see Section 9 below and ICR, paragraph 105).
  Overall, while taking note of minor shortcomings that were within the Bank's team to control or resolve, such
  as additional technical support to address the issues surrounding capacity building, achieving DLI 5,
  procurement challenges, and M&E to strengthen indicators in the results framework, the quality of
  supervision is rated Satisfactory.
  Overall, the quality of Bank Performance is rated Satisfactory. As a first PforR operation, the preparations
  were adequate and followed the guidance. The limited DLIs allowed the operation to focus on both building
  ULG capacity and facilitating urban infrastructure investments. The shortcomings at supervision did not
  hamper the disbursement of funds to achieve the PDO.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The Results Framework (PAD, Annex 2) showed a valid link along a causal chain between inputs (financial and
  technical support) and disbursement-linked outputs (8 intermediate outcome indicators) leading to 2 outcomes
  (capacity and investments) attributable to the program interventions. The statement of the PDO was simple,
  and it was not specific on the intention of improved institutional performance for urban delivery. Two indicators

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



  covered the outcome at the apex institutional level but without performance indicators regarding infrastructure
  services delivered. This was a shortcoming in design and reflected in the lack of data in Section 4, Efficacy
  above.
  The PAD (paragraph 78) pointed that the Annual Performance Assessments, the Value for Money Audits of the
  infrastructure investments, the Mid Term Review (MTR), and impact assessments at closing would all form part
  of the M&E system. The audits conducted by the Tanzania Controller and Auditor General (CAG) and the
  Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA) for Value for Money (VfM) audits would track institutional and
  performance improvements. PO-RALG would use the annual assessment for FY 13 as a baseline of
  performance indicators (PAD, footnote 18) to be used in the APA. The methodology for impact
  evaluation included: (i) the use of high frequency financial management, procurement, and taxes data to assess
  the impact of performance based grants to local government management; (ii) link the intervention to
  development outcome through the use of triggers and intensity of the grants; and (iii) pairwise randomization of
  the 18 local government authorities to test alternative capacity building modalities or introduce non-monetary
  incentives to public servants to improve performance targets in own source revenue, urban planning, fiduciary,
  and accountability and infrastructure operations and maintenance (O&M) (PAD, paragraph 84). Strengthening
  M&E was part of the capacity building effort in this program.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PO-RALG implemented the M&E system as designed. Baseline data for the APA was carried out as
  designed. Data was collected and analyzed using the APA. The APA included Minimum Access Conditions
  and Performance Indicators. The verification protocol was effective to reach APA scores to determine
  allocations and disbursements. The DLI flow of funds were adequate although releases were delayed by the
  Ministry of Finance and Planning throughout implementation (ICR, paragraph 72). PO-RALG provided the
  Bank with documents to support DLIs 4, 5, and 6 (ICR, paragraph 83). No impact evaluation was conducted
  as planned.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PO-RALG and the Bank used the APAs and other reports to assess progress toward achieving the
  PDO. Reports associated with issues in meeting minimum access conditions were coordinated with agencies
  to unblock implementation bottlenecks. Data identified ULGAs that may require additional capacity support
  on technical or other issues to meet minimum conditions, such as Bariadi, Geita, and Tabora in FY13, and
  Bukoba in FYs 14 and 15. Course corrections used the M&E system but was not effectively used to address
  low capacity issues in procurement and poor contract management (ICR, paragraphs 69-74, 76, 91, 98, 105,
  and 116).
  Overall, M&E is rated Substantial. The M&E system added specifics that applied to the UPG window of the
  LGDG and its data informed the operation. The system was implemented as designed and provided
  sufficient data to assess the achievement of the PDO. Causal links in the results chain were tested by the
  M&E reporting system. The moderate weakness shown in the area of meeting the requirements of DLIs 5
  and 6 and the decision to drop these were nevertheless informed by the M&E system.


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  Environmental and Social Safeguards: At appraisal, the program was assigned OP/BP 9.00, Program for
  Results Financing (PAD, paragraph 120).The Bank team conducted an Environmental and Social Systems
  Assessment (ESSA) to identify gaps between elements of this policy and government systems to plan and
  implement environmental and social management measures. The ESSA noted that while the legal and
  regulatory framework was largely adequate, and impacts were generally managed, in practice,
  environmental and social management (ESM) issues were not mainstreamed into urban planning or project
  cycles of ULGAs. Most local governments were not involved in the ESM process (PAD, paragraph 122).
  Resettlement and compensations gaps between the Tanzanian and PforR requirements were also
  noted. The government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Manual (ESSM). Sub-project
  categories with significant negative impacts on the environment and people were to be excluded. The
  following measures were also included:(i) a methodology for effective local level ESM; (ii) technical and
  operational guidance on ESM compliance capacity for addressing gaps between Tanzanian laws and
  OP/BP 9.00; and (iii) performance indicators to address resource constraints and a comprehensive capacity
  building program (PAD, paragraph 124). For example, minimum access conditions and performance
  indicators under accountability and oversight systems included that each local government adopt ESM and
  grievance redress mechanisms (GRM). DLI 4 required meeting core staffing needs for ESM, with
  established, active committees to handle resettlement and grievances.
  The Bank team noted some lapses by local governments such as: (i) meeting site-specific health and
  safety standards; (ii) allocating sufficient time and costs for safeguards experts in construction management
  teams; (iii) an instance of environmental contamination; (iv) quarry reinstatement, and (v) weak contractor
  supervision (ICR, paragraph 91). Some land-related complaints were later resolved. Local governments
  excluded sub-projects that involved relocating more than 20 households or those that may require
  relocation, even as these sub-projects may benefit the community. Local governments applied the locally
  translated GRM across all activities, regardless of funding source. This is a positive signal for sustaining the
  GRM practices introduced by the program (ICR, paragraph 92, footnote 38).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: Under the PforR financing instrument, the program relied on the country's financial
  management system for budgeting, accounting, internal and external control, reporting and procurement. The
  APA assessed fiduciary compliance as part of Minimum Access Conditions DLIs 4-6 and Performance Indicator
  8. According to the ICR, there were no major compliance issues noted (ICR, paragraph 95). All 18 local

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



  governments received unqualified opinions of their FY 17 audits. However, in FY 18 and FY 19, two years after
  the final APA, four Municipal Councils - Songea, Iringa, Korogwe, and Singida - received qualified opinions. The
  Municipal Council of Tabora received an adverse opinion due to inaccuracies in its FY19 year-end financial
  statement.
  Procurement: At closing, there were no legal compliance issues reported (ICR, paragraph 98). Each
  participating local government established a Council Tender Board to manage procurement and contract
  management. The Public Procurement Regulatory Authority conducted Value for Money (VfM) audits and noted
  the following challenges local governments faced: (i) substandard engineering designs, (ii) deficient bidding
  documents; (iii) cost variations during implementation; (iv) inappropriate procurement planning and tendering
  processes; and (v) weak contract supervision. The 2017 level 2 restructuring extended the closing date by 18
  months due to delays in disbursements from the Ministry of Finance and Planning to the local governments,
  which hampered planned procurement. The 2020 level 2 restructuring extended the closing by another 6
  months because of the impact of COVID 19 on construction works, public consultation processes, and delivery
  of streetlights and abattoir equipment (ICR, paragraph 20).
  Other issues led to procurement and construction delays. One was caused by the unforeseen changes in
  securing Value Added Tax (VAT) exemption certificates for construction contracts that affected contractor cash
  flow and delayed implementation. Another was poor contractor performance because works packages were not
  coordinated. A single contractor could be awarded a larger volume of contracts than it could manage
  satisfactorily due to limited capacity, lack of equipment, staff, or working capital, to carry out multiple operations
  in parallel (ICR, paragraph 70). Another was the delayed hiring of APA consultant to carry out the
  later assessments, delaying subsequent assessment and disbursement (ICR, paragraph 71).



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---


d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                        IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    A split rating was applied as
                                                                                    the program scope and
                                                                                    ambition reduced. Based on
                                                         Moderately
Outcome                        Satisfactory                                         the moderate shortcomings in
                                                         Satisfactory
                                                                                    the original efficacy (83%
                                                                                    disbursement), the overall
                                                                                    outcome is MS.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory              Satisfactory               ---

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)



Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial               ---
Quality of ICR                                          Substantial               ---

12. Lessons

The operation faced challenges that led to six lessons and recommendations in the ICR (paragraphs 114-119).
Three of these are presented below with slight modifications:

  • A strong government policy support would benefit the use of a PforR instrument to
  strengthen existing government systems. In this program, government commitment to
  decentralization and urbanization was evident during appraisal. Lessons from the preceding operation were
  incorporated into the LGDG to use a formula-based, transparent, and predictable system of financial flows to
  local governments. However, government policy nationalized what used to be local property taxation, a
  move away from decentralization and enhancing local resource mobilization. Delays in disbursements from
  the Ministry of Finance to ULGAs were also a key bottleneck to ULGSP implementation.

  • Performance based infrastructure grants may encourage urban authorities to improve their
  performance. In this program, the new UPG window in the LGDG expanded available resources for larger
  infrastructure investment needs of ULGAs. The scoring mechanism for access to UPGs required
  achieving minimum conditions designed to strengthen ULGA systems. Incentive structures for improved
  performance were added to the annual performance assessments including progressive targets and
  additional competencies in urban functions performed by ULGAs such as urban planning, handling of
  grievances, procurement, and environmental and social management. The participating ULGAs showed their
  commitment to strengthened systems by completing their infrastructure sub-projects. The follow on
  operation, the Tanzania Cities Transforming Infrastructure and Competitiveness (TACTIC) would include
  incentives to enhance institutional performance and contribute to financial and social sustainability.

  • Performance measures may be improved to contribute to the sustainability of infrastructure
  investments. In this operation, ULGAs implemented eligible infrastructure investments financed by the
  UPGs, a new window under the LGDG system. ULGA performance included budgeting for O&M to address
  sustainability. Other performance measures may also have been useful to bolster sustainability of these
  infrastructure investments. One may specify indicators along critical junctures in the investment spectrum -
  from pre- to post-investment phases - that contribute to sustaining these investments. For example, in
  planning for the infrastructure, more rigorous feasibility assessment may include financial viability, selecting
  appropriate sites, introducing design standards, or potential for private sector participation. Procurement and
  construction supervision could include quality assurance aspects to complement sustainability features of the
  investments. Close attention to sustainability may mean capacity interventions at preparation beyond
  familiarization with the assessment process. Introducing prototypical terms of reference for studies, checklists
  for design standards, and tapping the quality assurance mechanism in place for some national agencies
  (e.g., NEMC, OSHA) work toward sustaining local investments.


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Urban Local Govt Strengthening (ULGSP (P118152)




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was internally consistent and followed OPCS guidelines. The report detailed well the implementation
challenges faced by the operation. The annexes clarified how the transparency of the assessment process
supported capacity building (Annex 6) and how performance measures led to outcomes (Annex 7). Lessons
were based on the operational challenges and suggested future operations may benefit from improving
performance measures to address the sustainability of infrastructure investments.
A clear shortcoming for the ICR was in lack of analysis of the diminished use for DLIs 5 and 6, and Results
Area 3 to achieve the PDO. It does not use a split rating methodology with the reduced program scope and
ambition. The data sheet reported only one of two level 2 restructurings. The ICR mentions that the
restructuring was processed in October 2018 (page 33) but it is not clear when DLIs 5 and
6 were dropped. The June 20, 2020 Restructuring Paper cited 3 Level 2 Restructurings: 1st approved in
October 2017 (Restructuring Paper not in the Operations Portal); 2nd approved in September 2018
(Restructuring Paper not in the Operations Portal); and 3rd approved in June 2020. Other minor shortcomings
include: the Program Action Plan (ICR, Annex 1 C) noted that impact evaluation was presented on May 31,
2019 but improvements in delivering infrastructure services noted a footnoted report entitled "Impacts of
Implemented Subprojects Under ULGSP, February 2021." The ICR's main text is at 29 pages, exceeded the
recommended length of 15 pages.
On balance, the ICR's Quality is rated substantial, but only marginally so.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
     Substantial




                                                                                               Page 20 of 20
