     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022172

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P126372                                   BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Brazil                                    Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-81680                                30-Apr-2018                                         112,177,487.44

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-May-2012                               31-Dec-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          130,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           130,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       112,284,626.67                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Claude M.L. Leroy-         Judyth L. Twigg              Joy Maria Behrens               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Themeze




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6), the project's objectives were "to expand coverage of early child
   education (ECE), create conditions more conducive to learning in fundamental education (grades 1-9), and
   improve municipal public management, all within the Municipality of Recife's territory."

   At a 2017 restructuring, the objectives were revised to: "expand coverage of improved ECE, reduce age-
   grade distortion of students enrolled in the Borrower's accelerated learning program, maintain lower dropout


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



   rates in full-time schools relative to the municipality average, and improve municipal public management, all
   within the Borrower's territory."

   The objectives to expand coverage of ECE and improve municipal public management did not change.
   However, the middle part of the objective was made more specific, as reducing age-grade distortion in
   accelerated learning programs and lowering drop-out rates in full-time schools are a specific sub-set of
   creating conditions more conducive to learning. As this represents an adjustment of the project's ambition, a
   split rating will be performed for the second original objective. At the time of the 2017 restructuring, US$59.11
   million, or 52.6% of total Bank funds, had been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  06-Apr-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project contained two components:

   1. Expand coverage of improved early child education and create conditions conducive to learning
   in fundamental education (appraisal: US$120 million; 2017 restructuring: US$120 million; actual:
   US$103.69 million). This results-based component was structured around Eligible Expenditure Programs
   and Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) in the areas of early child education and fundamental education.

   2. Technical assistance on strengthening institutions for more efficient and effective public
   management (appraisal: US$30 million; 2017 restructuring: US$10 million; actual: US$7.58 million). This
   component was to provide targeted support in the form of equipment and studies in the following areas:
   education evaluation and administration, tax administration, public debt management, efficiency of public
   expenditures, municipal planning, results-based management, project management, and urban mobility
   management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a $130 million Specific Investment Loan to finance a municipal
   government program whose total cost was estimated at US$921.6 million. The government of Recife was to
   finance the remaining amount, US$791.6 million. Actual Bank costs were US$112.3 million. US$17.7 million
   of the loan was cancelled. The ICR did not provide information on total actual costs or on the government's
   actual contribution.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



   The project was approved on May 29, 2012 and became effective on November 13, 2012. A mid-term
   review was conducted on October 27, 2014. On April 6, 2017, a level 1 restructuring revised the objectives,
   outcome indicators, project activities, and DLIs to align them with the government's new priorities for
   fundamental education (grades 1-9). The new priorities focused more narrowly on reduction of age-grade
   distortion in lower fundamental education (grades 1-5) and dropout rates in full-time school in higher grades
   (6-9).

   Three additional restructurings were approved:

         On May 25, 2017, to cancel activities related to procurement and implementation of a new payroll
          system.
         On April 1, 2018, to extend the project's life by twelve months to April 2019, revise eligible
          expenditures, introduce an expenditure review of Recife's school network, and revise output targets.
         On April 15, 2019, to further extent the project's life to December 2019, revise eligible expenditures,
          and revise output targets.

   The project closed on December 31, 2019.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were relevant to Recife's economic and social challenges, to its municipal strategy of
introducing a new way of governing focused on efficient and effective service delivery, and to ongoing
priorities at the municipal, state, and national levels for improving education sector outcomes. At
appraisal, the municipality lagged behind both the broader Recife Metropolitan Region and the country in
ECE coverage due mainly to an insufficient number of ECE centers, as well as infrastructure conditions at
existing centers that were not sufficiently satisfactory to qualify for federal funds for expansion. The quality
of fundamental education was also weak, with the municipality underperforming other state capitals on
results of 2005 through 2009 national standardized assessment tests. A key feature of Recife's low
performance was a high rate of age-grade distortion (43% of Recife's students in grades 6-9 were overage),
which is strongly associated with low learning performance and high dropout rates. The effective functioning
of the education system (and other public services) was directly linked to improving the efficiency of the
municipal public sector, improving public sector management capacity (especially the secretariat of
education), managing municipal debt, improving control over payroll and public financial management and
procurement, and strengthening planning, budgeting, and monitoring and evaluation. As the state capital,
Recife needed a flexible workforce resulting from a quality education -- beginning from an effective
foundation in ECE -- and an efficient public management system to provide that education.

The objectives were fully relevant to the Bank's Country Partnership Strategy for Brazil at appraisal
(FY2012-2015), which contained pillars for improving the quality of public services for low-income
households and expanding their provision through public and private channels, and for promoting regional
economic development through improved policies and strategic infrastructure investments. At closing, the
objectives continued to be aligned with the current Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY18-23), which
focuses on three broad areas: fiscal consolidation and government effectiveness; private sector investment


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



               and productivity growth; and inclusive and sustainable development. The CPF contains a specific objective
               to increase effectiveness of service delivery in education. As pointed out in the CPF, the Bank's current
               portfolio is predominantly subnational, with targets set mostly at the state level, and largely oriented at
               boosting access to basic services.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Expand coverage of early childhood education

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change underpinning this objective held that building, equipping, and improving ECE facilities,
                             piloting the implementation of a multisectoral early childhood development program, and professional
                             development of ECE staff would create more spaces in higher-quality ECE programs, enabling expanded
                             coverage. The project did not address demand-side issues, but given enrollment pressures on existing
                             facilities prior to the project, the emphasis on the supply side was fully justified. (Note: DLIs 1-7 and 9-12 were
                             dropped at the first restructuring and are therefore not reported in this ICRR.)



                             Outputs

                             757 ECE centers were rehabilitated, exceeding the target of 645 centers (DLI13), and eight new ones were
                             build and equipped, exceeding the target of six (DLI14).

                             61.02% of teachers in rehabilitated ECE centers regularly participated in competency-based in-service
                             training, exceeding the original target of 55% and the revised target of 60%.

                             The planned multisectoral early childhood development pilot was not implemented due to a change in political
                             priorities and lack of buy-in from sectors other than education.



                             Outcomes



                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



By the end of the project, 7,985 children had enrolled in rehabilitated or newly-built ECE centers, surpassing
the original (6,000) and revised (7,500) targets. The project team later added that ECE enrollment increased
from 41.7% in 2013 to 44.9% in 2019 (no target was set for this measure of coverage).

93.1% of parents of children in the newly-built ECEs evaluated them positively, exceeding the target of 80%.



The target for number of enrolled children was reached, and although no target for the objective of increased
coverage was set, there was improvement of several percentage points that is reasonably attributable to
project-financed interventions. Achievement of this objective is therefore rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Create conditions more conducive to learning in fundamental education

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that improvements addressing several key problem areas would
improve learning conditions in fundamental education: high age-grade distortion rates, high rates of illiteracy
in the early years of primary school, low teacher quality and performance, and a short school day that limited
students' opportunities to advance academically. Project-supported interventions to extend the school day,
monitor and support school attendance by vulnerable students, provide accelerated learning opportunities for
students with learning delays, and provide in-service teacher training were intended, by addressing these key
constraints, to create conditions more conducive to learning.



Outputs

The project supported an Extension of the School Day program that added additional hours of instruction in
mathematics and Portuguese for students scoring in the bottom 40% of state learning evaluations. 2,273
students were enrolled in this program in 2015, but after its initial implementation it was found to be overly
complex. It was replaced by support for a Full-Time School (FTS) model in which the school day expanded
from four hours in municipal schools to eight hours in primary education institutions (grades 2-5) and seven
hours in higher fundamental education (grades 6-9). The number of grade 6-9 students enrolled in FTS
increased from 1,800 in 2015 to 3,056 in 2019, almost reaching the target of 3,200 (DLI16).

The project initially supported the government's existing Bolsa Escola program, which was designed to
improve learning outcomes for the poorest children by conditioning cash transfers to families on regular
school attendance, but this program stopped accepting new enrollees early in the project implementation
period.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



The project supported two existing programs aimed at reducing age-grade distortions, reducing dropout rates,
and increasing early literacy: the Se Liga program, targeted at children who were at least two years above the
target age for their grade level and were functionally illiterate, and the Acelera Brasil program for students
who were older than their grade level and were functionally literate. The number of students enrolled in these
programs reached 8,485 by project closure for grades 2-5 (surpassing the target of 7,000)(DLI15), and 3,391
for grades 6-9 (surpassing the target of 2,000) (no baselines were provided).

In partnership with the Institute for Quality Teaching, the project supported teacher training through a
combination of out-of-classroom training and teacher observation in order to help teachers implement
effective teaching skills in the classroom and improve time on task. This training was being implemented in
eight schools when the project was launched, and the project scaled it up so that, by 2017, all teachers were
to receive two days per month of in-service training. The percentage of principals and teachers from FTS
(grades 6-9) participating in competency-based teacher training increased from 55% in 2016 to 65.6% in
2019, not reaching the target of 75% (DLI17).

207 schools received support for implementation and monitoring of School Management Plans, exceeding the
original target of 120 and the revised target of 140 (DLI8). Ten FTS (grades 6-9) received systematic follow-
up on these plans (DLI18), but the ICR did not provide information on the content and impact of this support.
Other project-supported improvements in municipal education management included the administration of
learning assessment tests in 2018 and 2019 and dissemination of the 2018 results (DLI19), and the
completion of an impact evaluation of the FTS initiative.



Outcomes

The percentage of students enrolled in accelerated learning programs (Se Liga and Acelera Brasil) in grades
2-5 who progressed two grades or more by the end of the school year was 55.4% in 2013, and though it
improved somewhat during 2014 and 2015, it was 54.7% in 2019, below the baseline, not reaching the target
of 60%. No information was provided for grades 6-9. The ICR noted that the reduction may have been a
measurement issue, as some of the monitors who were responsible for independent verification of student
progress terminated their employment when they were asked to triple the number of classes they were
covering (ICR, p. 15). However, an impact evaluation of students in grade 5 who participated in Se Liga and
Acelera Brasil found that there was a 15% increase in their progression rates compared to grade 5 students
who were eligible but did not participate in either program. Similarly positive results were observed for
students in grades 3 and 4. The evaluation also showed that the positive effects of the programs began to
decline after three or four years of participation, "implying that these students require continued special
attention" (ICR, p. 15). Overall, age-grade distortions increased over the project's lifetime, from 22.8% in 2011
to 24.6% in 2019.

Dropout rates overall decreased from 2% to less than one percent, and for grades 6-9 decreased from around
five percent to one percent. Importantly, the percentage point difference in dropout rates between municipal
schools offering FTS and the municipal average declined from 1.7% to -0.5%, achieving the target of -0.5%.
An impact evaluation of the FTS program found that its impact on proficiency in mathematics and Portuguese
was not noticeable, but that it had a positive impact on flows, with a strong impact on increasing the
probability of passing a grade and decreasing the probability of repetition; no exact data were provided in the
ICR (p. 16).


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



A planned evaluation of teacher training and the quality of teaching was dropped. However, the impact
evaluation of the FTS initiative found that teachers in FTS, most of whom participated in competency-based
training, were more likely to spend more of their time at one school only, had more time to allocate to after-
class support for students, and reported reduced absences among students at their schools (ICR, p. 16).
Again, no exact data were provided in the ICR.

The Index of Basic Education, calculated every two years for the fifth and ninth grades, increased from 4.1 in
2011 to 5.2 in 2019 for fifth grade, and from 2.9 in 2011 to 4.7 in 2019 for ninth grade. This index, however,
covers many aspects of education access, quality, and efficiency that were not addressed specifically by the
project.



Based on the impact evaluation's findings of improved progression rates for students in grades 3-5 who
participated in project-supported accelerated learning programs, the demonstrated impact of the FTS
program on dropout rates, and the positive impact of the FTS program on several aspects of teacher
behavior, achievement of the objective to create conditions more conducive to learning in fundamental
education is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Reduce age-grade distortion of students enrolled in the Borrower's accelerated learning program and
maintain lower dropout rates in full-time schools relative to the municipality average

Revised Rationale
The theory of change, outputs, and outcomes for the revised objective was the same as for the original
objective. The revision made the expected outcomes more specific. As noted earlier, the impact evaluation
showed that students enrolled in the project-supported accelerated learning programs progressed through
grades 3-5 at a rate demonstrably higher than students who were not in those programs. Similarly, drop-out
rates for students enrolled in project-supported full-time schools were markedly lower than those for students
in regular municipal schools. Achievement of the revised objective is therefore rated Substantial.




Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



Improve municipal public management

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that technical assistance to improve tax administration, enhance
public debt management, increase the efficiency of public expenditures, and promote results-based
management would improve overall municipal public management, ultimately providing increased
administrative capacity and fiscal space to support municipal education.



Outputs

Of the project's planned areas of activity related to tax administration -- increasing the Urban Land and
Property tax (IPTU) base and collection, developing and installing a new revenue administration system,
improving voluntary tax compliance through the improvement of the municipal Secretariat of Finance's
(SEFIN's) web-based tax collection system, enhancing tax debt claims management, and modernizing SEFIN
overall -- only the activities related to the IPTU were actually implemented, and even these were scaled down
from what was originally envisioned. All real estate properties were geo-referenced through aerial
photography, identifying 44,375 properties whose records were different from the information registered in the
municipal IPTU database.

Planned activities on public debt management -- an in-depth diagnostic, installation of a new debt
management system, and a training program for SEFIN staff working on debt management -- were dropped,
as the government adopted an alternative debt management system.

Similarly, planned activities on increasing efficiency of public expenditures -- installation of a new payroll and
human resource management system, development of a procurement system to enhance contract
management, and support for compliance with federal legislation on accounting standards -- were not
implemented. However, the ICR reported that support was provided for modernization of the Municipal
Information Technology Company and for information technology enhancements to the Public Expense
Observatory (ODP, an agency responsible for internal controls).

On improving results-based management, the project financed the creation of a unit for monitoring strategic
projects within the Special Secretariat of Management and Planning, but no information was provided on
whether that led, as planned, to identification of strategic priorities, development of indicators for
implementation of those priorities, or linkage of those indicators to the municipal budget.



Outcomes

The IPTU tax base in a selected area covering about 10% of the municipality's territory expanded by 87%,
exceeding the target of 80%. However, this represented less territorial coverage than was originally planned,
and no information was provided on actual revenue collection.

ODP conducted five special audits at the request of different federal and municipal agencies, on top of those
it carries out routinely to identify inconsistencies on the municipal payroll. As a result, R$70 million was



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



                            returned to the municipal budget, and 19 municipal employees with double employment or other inappropriate
                            employment conditions were identified.



                            Most planned activities related to this objective were not implemented, and achieved outcomes were modest.
                            No evidence was provided that improved public management at the municipal level provided additional
                            administrative capacity or resources for municipal education, which was the rationale for including this
                            objective in the project. Achievement of the objective is therefore rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy under both the original and revised objectives is rated Substantial, but with moderate shortcomings.
                            Support for full-time schooling, accelerated learning programs for students at risk of drop-out, and teacher
                            training created conditions more conducive to learning, and performance on indicators for age-grade
                            distortion and dropout rates was better for project-supported schools than for non-supported schools.
                            However, there were modest (at best) outcomes on improved municipal public management.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The analysis conducted at appraisal did not compare estimated project costs against expected benefits, but
   instead conducted a fiscal/debt sustainability analysis. At the first restructuring (2017), a comprehensive
   economic and financial analysis was prepared. The analysis estimated that the project would yield a present
   value of net benefits of US$4.9 million (in its more conservative scenario) and produce an estimated economic
   rate of return (ERR) of 6.5%, using a discount rate of 5%. The ICR replicated that analysis using actual
   results, focusing on the construction and rehabilitation of ECE centers and reductions in dropout rates and age-
   grade distortion, and their impact on future employability and wages of targeted students. It found an ERR of
   17.7% and NPV of US$25.8 million.

   There were signifcant shortcomings in implementation efficiency. The project experienced early disbursement
   delays until the 2017 restructuring, at which time the project adjusted to the government's revised education
   development program. Protracted delays in processing that restructuring were due to issues in securing
   approvals from the federal authorities, constraints that were largely beyond the control of the Bank and the

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



municipal government. Disbursements under the first component were also affected by the macro-fiscal crisis in
2015-2016, which affected project implementation by reducing eligible expenditures. The technical assistance
component was affected by challenges in preparing and approving terms of reference and bidding processes,
such that there was very little disbursement through 2015, and more than three-quarters of disbursements took
place in the last two years of implementation. The ICR noted that procurement processes were impacted by low
technical capacity among implementing institutions and lack of experience with international competitive bidding.
In the end, part of the Bank loan was cancelled. The ICR (pp. 23-25) also noted inefficiencies resulting from
simultaneous changes in municipal government and the Bank's Task Team leadership in 2013, lack of continuity
and institutional memory in the municipal administration, a lack of coherence between the project's two
components that increased as the project progressed, and a major lack of compliance with the Bank's
procurement procedures (see Section 10a). The ICR also noted that the project team was distracted by
discussions of a planned US$200 million development policy loan (end 2013-early 2014) and then preparation of
a US$220 Program for Results operation (end 2016-early 2017), both of which were to include strong public
sector management elements; both were ultimately dropped.

Given issues with implementation efficiency, project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    100.00
 Appraisal                                                 6.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              17.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The objectives were highly relevant to country context and to Bank strategy. The education and municipal public
management objectives were logically coherent with one another in principle. Two of the project's three
objectives (including both the original and revised second objective) were substantially achieved, but the third
objective was modestly achieved. Efficiency was modest due to significant implementation inefficiencies. These
ratings point to moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement,
producing an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Many of the activities supported by the project are grounded in national or municipal legislation. Maintenance
of infrastructure is the responsibility of individual schools, and funds earmarked for this purpose are being
transferred to schools and ECE centers on a quarterly basis. The policies and programs underpinning project
outcomes were supported by the Secretary of Education throughout the project's lifetime, and the newly-
elected mayor following municipal elections in 2020 is from the same political party as his predecessor.
However, there is still political risk resulting from the turnover in the mayor's office, exacerbated by major
risks stemming from Brazil's ongoing macro-fiscal crisis and the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Brazil's
macro-fiscal constraints affect the government at all levels, with reduced budgets available to respond to
increased demand for free education services from households facing economic hardship.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed with a strong education program building on education reforms (age-grade
  distortion reduction programs and full-time schools) that had been successfully implemented in
  Pernambuco State (of which Recife is the capital) (Pernambuco Education SWAp, FY 2009) or in other
  Brazilian subnational jurisdictions. Some elements of these reforms had already been piloted in Recife
  (extended school day, in collaboration with the Federal University of Pernambuco, in 2007-2008). The
  education program was innovative and provided for extensive learning through program monitoring and
  evaluation. Risks and mitigation measures, as well as project implementation structures and plans, were
  clearly identified. However, the public sector management component, while conceptually integrated with
  the education support program, included some planned activities that were not well connected to the rest
  of the project. It also focused on cross-sectoral administrative reforms and capacity building without
  addressing significant and well-identified public finance weaknesses; as such, it was not adequately
  designed to achieve the implicit objective of creating fiscal space for public investment in education.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project implementation of the education component was well supported by the task team, and progress
 was adequately monitored. Supervision missions occurred regularly, and Implementation Status and
 Results Reports were filed bi-annually, as required. However, high turnover in the supervision team of the
 public sector management component, as well as the distraction generated by the parallel preparation of a
 development policy operation (2013-2014) and then a Program-for-Results operation (2016-2017),
 contributed to limited results in this area, even though neither of the two other operations were ultimately
 approved. Overall, the project team was compliance-oriented rather than outcomes-oriented, reactive


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



 rather than proactive in terms of identifying arising risks to development outcomes and solutions. The first
 restructuring was done late (one year before the initial closing date, without extending that date).
 Disbursement was slow until the project's last two years. The ICR explained that implementation
 shortcomings also stemmed from changes in federal government approval processes and changes in
 administrative leadership at the municipality level.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Output and outcome indicators were clearly defined and measurable. Baseline data were available, and
 M&E arrangements were aligned with existing government systems. Overall project M&E was to be
 coordinated by the Secretary of Planning based on information received from the project's implementing
 agencies. Each of the education programs was to be evaluated at mid-course to provide insights on design,
 recommendations on ongoing implementation arrangements, and results.



b. M&E Implementation
  There were multiple adjustments to output and outcome targets and DLIs as the project revised its
  objectives and dropped most of the planned activities from the public management component. Project
  reports provided up-to-date monitoring information twice yearly. Two impact evaluations were conducted
  in the education area, on the accelerated learning and full-time school programs, through they were
  completed too late to inform project implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  Monitoring data were used mostly for substantiating disbursements and reporting to the Bank.
  Although creation of a results-based management system in the public sector was initially planned under
  the second component, there was little evidence presented in the ICR that monitoring data and findings
  were communicated to various stakeholders or used in the management of education sector programs.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Assessment category B and triggered OP/BP 4.10,
   Environmental Assessment because of planned rehabilitation activities. An assessment was conducted, and
   an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared, disseminated, and disclosed.
   Institutional arrangements for supervision and oversight of environmental compliance were established. The
   first restructuring triggered new safeguards policies on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) to account for the potential direct
   impact of construction of ECE centers and potential indirect impact of two planned urban development
   studies. The project's ESMF was reviewed and complemented to account for the revised activities, publicly
   consulted, disseminated, and published. The municipal government also reviewed and updated a
   Resettlement Policy Framework and disclosed it as required. According to the ICR, there was compliance
   with all safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM): The project was implemented using the municipality's existing public FM
   systems. The Secretariat of Planning had overall responsibility for FM and fiduciary matters. The project's
   external audit was conducted by the Pernambuco State Court of Accounts, and reports were clean. The
   project generally maintained adequate FM arrangements (planning, budgeting, accounting, internal control,
   funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing) throughout implementation. FM performance was adequate,
   but with occasional delays in submitting interim unaudited financial reports and external audit reports.
   Interim financial reports were considered acceptable. Fiduciary risk was rated High throughout the project's
   lifetime, but no fiduciary issues were reported.

   Procurement: The SEFIN was responsible for all procurement actions under the project, relying on a
   procurement specialist recruited by the Project Implementation Unit (the Special Secretariat of
   Management and Planning). A procurement assessment carried out prior to project approval concluded
   that the SEFIN team had a well-functioning procurement staff with experience in procuring goods and
   services, but no experience with processes to hire consulting services, and no familiarity or experience
   with Bank procurement procedures. Throughout implementation, there were delays in approvals and
   contract awards by the municipality, contributing to overall implementation delays and reduced amounts of
   eligible expenditures. By closing, approximately US$20 million in expenditures became ineligible for Bank
   financing due to lack of compliance with agreed procurement procedures. The ICR did not provide clear
   information to explain persistent significant challenges in compliance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



d. Other
    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 30-31) provided several insightful lessons, two of which are restated here:

Changes in government administration after project approval can have significant impacts on
project implementation. Project design should take the possibility of such changes into account
and prepare implementation support plans to address proactively any resulting changes in priorities
and/or the Borrower's implementation support team.

Multisectoral projects can be effective in addressing issues common across government
agencies in a coherent manner, but they are complex to implement and require careful
linkages across the various sectors involved. In this case, the linkages between education and
public sector management were strong conceptually, given the impact of public sector management
on education management and education's importance in Recife's overall public budget. In practice,
however, the institutional arrangements governing the originally planned activities proved too
complex, and many planned activities under the public sector management component were
dropped.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a comprehensive, outcome-oriented overview of the project, with a narrative that supported
the ratings. It broadly followed guidelines. Its lessons were insightful and should prove useful for other
education sector projects. However, there were moderate shortcomings. There were some data gaps in the
ICR's presentation of results and efficiency analysis. Later consultations with the project team were required to
fill in some of these gaps. The guidelines for a split rating were not followed correctly, as the efficacy

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BR-Recife Swap - Educ & Public Mgmt. (P126372)



assessment was performed according to implementation periods rather than against original versus revised
objectives over the project's entire lifetime.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 15 of 15
