     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0022657

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132665                                    IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-55780                                  31-Dec-2020                                       116,600,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-May-2015                                31-Dec-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             250,000,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                              116,600,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                          115,948,253.99                                           0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Judyth L. Twigg              Eduardo Fernandez             IEGHC (Unit 2)
                                                          Maldonado



2. Project Objectives and Components

a. Objectives
   According to the Program Document (page 12) and the Financing Agreement (page 5), the
   program development objective was as follows:

     •   To improve the effectiveness of elementary school teachers in Bihar.

   This operation was financed through two Bank instruments: a Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument and
   an Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument.

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



   Key outcome targets were revised at the first restructuring in May 2019 (number of teachers benefitting and
   number of additional qualified teachers) and at the third restructuring in June 2020 (percentage of teacher
   positions filled); therefore, the split rating is applied to the following three time periods of the project: approval
   to May 2019; May 2019 - June 2020; and June 2020 to closing.


b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-May-2019

c. Components
   The PforR instrument supported five Results Areas, and the IPF instrument supported a technical
   assistance component.
   Results Area 1: Developing high quality teacher education institutions for improved program delivery. This
   area focused on strengthening institutional capacity to deliver both pre-service teacher education and
   continuing professional development with an explicit focus on improving pedagogy. The Program was to
   harness the potential of information communication technology (ICT) to provide ongoing teacher support,
   establish a common platform for teacher working groups, and deploy tools for evaluation and assessment,
   lesson planning, and teaching. These activities were to be implemented at all levels, from the State Council
   for Educational Research and Training (SCERT) down to the Cluster Resource Centers and Block
   Resource Centers at the sub-district level.
   Results Area 2: Certification of unqualified elementary school teachers and their continuous professional
   development, including pre-service teacher education, and Continuous Professional Development (CPD)
   and Leadership Training. For pre-service teacher education, the government of Bihar established a large-
   scale certification program (Diploma in Elementary Education) that was to be delivered through open and
   distance learning, to certify approximately 65,000 newly recruited teachers who were unqualified. Two key
   activities of the Program were: (i) the establishment of high-quality learning resources; and (ii) the
   implementation of a robust, pre-emptive support strategy geared towards maximizing improved classroom
   practice. For continuous professional development, the Resource Centers would provide on-site support for
   enhanced academic leadership and school management. The Program was to support teachers and
   Resource Center coordinators with opportunities for upgrading knowledge, research opportunities, and
   subject-specific resources.
   Results Area 3: Developing an effective teacher management system with a robust monitoring and
   evaluation mechanism. One of the main focuses of the government's program was to develop an effective
   teacher management system with a rigorous mechanism to monitor and evaluate: (i) school report cards;
   (ii) institutional effectiveness; and (iii) teacher performance. School report cards would facilitate monitoring
   the implementation of education interventions through periodic visits to schools using monitoring checklists
   for data collection, which would then be posted in schools to monitor the functioning of schools and teacher
   performance. The existing Teacher Education Management Information System (TEMIS) was to be

                                                                                                          Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  upgraded to eventually serve as a teacher-focused human resource management information system
  platform. A Teacher Education Institutional Development Index assessment tool was also to be further
  developed to assess the readiness and effectiveness of teacher education institutions to deliver quality
  teacher education programs and monitor accountability, including a quantified and weighted checklist of
  indicators. The Program was also to support the development of a set of teacher standards and
  competencies to establish base-, mid- and end-line databases for teacher performance in three key
  domains: (i) subject knowledge; (ii) teacher practices; and (iii) time-on-task. These would be used to inform
  preservice and in-service professional development programs.
  Results Area 4: Improving accountability mechanisms at the school level. The Program was to
  support training and capacity building of School Management Committees (SMCs) to help them move
  beyond simply monitoring civil works to social audit and monitoring of teacher presence, and eventually
  lead to improved school performance through more effective school management. The SMCs were also
  gradually being trained to monitor academic and quality aspects of education. Third-party surveys were
  to be carried out to better understand the functioning of SMCs and to help strengthen monitoring
  mechanisms at the school level.
  Results Area 5: Improved financial and governance mechanisms. The Program was to include efforts to
  enhance the accountability and governance frameworks of state implementing agencies such as
  the SCERT and the Bihar State Education Infrastructure Development Corporation (BSEIDC). The
  Program aimed to strengthen BSEIDC’s operational, corporate, and fiduciary systems for construction and
  longer-term maintenance of education sector infrastructure assets, as well as its adoption of corporate
  governance mechanisms for more robust and transparent functioning overall.




d. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program cost

    •The original program cost was appraised at US$ 357.0 million. This was later revised to US$ 166.6
    million, of which US$ 165.9 million was disbursed.

  Financing

    • The program was originally financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 250.0 million. This was later revised to
    US$ 116.6 million, of which US$ 115.9 million was disbursed. The reduction in financing was due to
    government policy changes (i.e. deadline for training unqualified teachers, shift to online distance
    learning, systemic intervention to improve teacher performance) and implementation delays, which
    impacted the feasibility of achieving targets.
    • The PforR instrument financed US$225.0 million of the IDA Credit, while an accompanying IPF
    instrument financed the remaining US$ 25.0 million.
    • US$ 22.05 million was cancelled from the IPF component due to delays in hiring the technical agency,
    dropping of several studies due to COVID restrictions, changing government priorities, and the use of
    existing agencies for delivery of some tasks.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)




   Borrower contribution

     • The Government of Bihar was originally expected to contribute US$ 107.0 million. This was later
     revised to US$ 50.0 million, which disbursed in its entirety.

   Dates

     • May 2019: The project was restructured such that the results framework was revised due to
     government policy changes as well as implementation delays. US$ 90.4 million was cancelled from the
     Credit.
     • June 2020: The project was restructured on an interim basis, to allow the government additional time
     to prepare the full restructuring proposal/request. US$ 33.6 million was cancelled from the Credit. The
     project closing date was extended from June 2020 to July 2020.
     • July 2020: The project was restructured such that the results framework was revised, due to
     implementation delays and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. US$ 6.75 million was cancelled from the
     Credit. The project closing date was extended from July 2020 to December 2020.




3. Relevance of Objectives

  Rationale
  The country of India overall has experienced significant economic growth and poverty reduction;
  however, in the state of Bihar, over half of the population of 100 million remain poor. In human development
  indicators, only 60% of the population is literate, with significant gender disparity. The education sector
  in Bihar is characterized by inadequate pedagogical resources, low attendance rates, and a high
  pupil:teacher ratio, all of which are significant contributing factors to low learning outcomes. While some of
  these challenges are starting to be addressed by the government of India's national program (Sarva Shiksa
  Program) to improve education inputs including infrastructure, teaching workforce, and learning
  materials, a rapid expansion in the number of elementary school teachers has not been accompanied
  by adequate investment in the quality of teacher training and support programs. These programs
  are marked by low academic content, ineffectual teaching practices, high levels of absenteeism, and
  outdated and weak monitoring and governance arrangements (Program Document, page 3). This project
  supported the government of Bihar's Mission Manav Vikas program to improve the quality of elementary
  education in Bihar, more specifically the portion of the Manav Vikas program that aims at improving teacher
  effectiveness.
  The Bank's Country Partnership Framework (FY18-22) includes improving the quality of education in
  schools as a key objective within the investment in human capital focus area, with the percentage of
  teachers receiving in-service training as a supplemental indicator. The choice of the Pfor R instrument,



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
            IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



       which linked disbursements to specific project results, was viewed as a key shift in the Borrower's focus
       from education inputs to outputs/outcomes (i.e. teacher performance).



       Rating
       High

   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

PHEFFICACYTBL


    Objective 1
    Objective
     To improve the effectiveness of elementary school teachers in Bihar (ORIGINAL OUTCOME TARGETS)

    Rationale
    While the overall objective was to improve effectiveness of elementary school teachers, key
    outcomes/specific objectives for the Pfor R component (Program Document, page 13) were identified as
    follows:

        •   Improved teacher subject knowledge, pedagogy, behavior, and classroom processes;
        •   Increased time on teaching-learning tasks in the classroom;
        •   Improved teacher attendance.

    The intended outcome of improved teacher subject knowledge, pedagogy, and behavior/classroom
    management relied upon teacher training/support (pre- and in-service) provided by teacher educator
    institutes (TEIs). The project supported the government's program to upgrade teacher education facilities,
    add ICT capabilities, revise teacher training curricula, upgrade qualifications of current unqualified teachers,
    recruit and train new teachers, provide continuous professional development for current teachers, and
    manage the teacher system.
    The intended outcome to increase time on task was likely to be achieved by the teacher training outputs
    reported above, as well as additional activities to increase teacher supervision. As noted in the Program
    Document (page 6), the project approach was notable for supporting "better governance and teacher
    accountability as key factors impacting overall teacher performance" rather than just providing teacher
    education and training.
    The intended outcome to improve teacher attendance was likely to be achieved by increasing capacity of
    local SMCs to monitor teacher attendance and increasing school supervision visits.
    The Bank Credit financed approximately two-thirds of the government program, and thus attribution of
    outcomes to Bank support was strong.

    Outputs




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  • Upgrading of infrastructure (physical and ICT) for 150 TEIs, including upgraded buildings, solar panels
  for energy, ICT labs, furniture, and teaching equipment (target: 400; first revised target: 190; second
  revised target: 150). The scope of this activity was significantly reduced due to delays in certifying
  achievement of the related DLI (and thus disbursements) until BSEIDC had established minimum
  standards for the improvement of TEIs, as well as the impact of COVID-19 which constrained labor and
  supply of construction materials.
  • Development of accountability and performance benchmarks for teacher education institutions.
  • Updating of diploma training curricula and strategy for continuous professional development (which
  included (i) strategies for building capacities of the State Council and TEIs; (ii) tools and processes for
  teacher performance monitoring and mentoring; (iii) feedback systems from users of modules and tools;
  and (iv) ICT platforms for teachers’ professional development, teacher performance monitoring, and
  student assessment).
  • Training of 145,000 SMC members from almost 25,000 schools (and development of training module on
  roles and responsibilities of SMCs) to strengthen capacity to monitor school functioning and teacher
  attendance. There were delays in this activity due to initial procurement challenges, but teacher
  attendance monitoring via a new mobile-based app was continued by local education officers in the
  meantime.
  • Development of a School Scorecard mobile app that was used to track teacher attendance through
  school supervision visits conducted by decentralized education units. School support visits were
  conducted in at least 50% of elementary schools.
  • Development of the TEMIS, albeit reduced in scope from its original design. The government’s efforts to
  procure TEMIS software to monitor and evaluate teachers’ performance was delayed continually during
  implementation, and software with reduced scope was subsequently developed to serve only the basic
  needs of a functional information system while allowing for further development in the future.
  • Plans to develop and implement a policy framework for providing incentives to improve teacher
  performance were dropped. Instead, a systemic intervention for improving teacher performance and
  capacity was introduced.
  • A planned ICT system for the teacher certification program was not completed as planned due to a shift
  in government strategy from a diploma in elementary education to a national Institute of Open Schooling
  platform certification.
  • Adoption of several measures to strengthen BSEIDC's corporate governance, including: (i) the adoption
  of a corporate governance framework; (ii) development of procurement and financial manuals; and (iii)
  establishment of an online grievance redressal management system.


Outcomes
Improved teacher subject knowledge and pedagogy

  • 24,335 unqualified teachers participated in the original form of training to receive the diploma. 11,315
  teachers participated in the new form of training, for a total of 35,650. This fell far short of the original


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  target to train 90,000 teachers. The government shifted its strategy to prioritize training of untrained
  teachers in the school system and thus halted acceptance of new pre-service teacher applicants.
  • 21,000 teachers participated in continuous professional development activities for in-service teacher
  training, in three modules: (i) Art Integrated Learning; (ii) Sports in Learning; and (iii) School Readiness. In
  addition, SCERT developed a total of eight training modules and digitized them to launch an ICT-enabled
  continuous professional development program.
  • 369,000 teachers benefited from project activities (continuous professional development, updated
  diploma curriculum, upgraded TEI infrastructure, improved teacher accountability), from a baseline
  originally approximated as 400,000 total teachers in the system. This fell short of the original target of
  reaching 475,000 teachers.
  • 54.67% of teacher positions in TEIs were filled by project closing, an increase from the baseline of 35%
  but falling short of the original target of 75%. The process for conducting the qualifying exam for filling
  1,060 teacher educator vacancies was delayed until August 2018. According to the project team, the
  recruitment process (conducted by the Bihar Public Service Commission, which was not a project
  implementing agency) was a highly politically sensitive process and faced delays in part due to legal
  matters (multiple court cases brought forth by aggrieved parties).
  • The institutional development index scores for teacher education institutions increased from 0.34 for
  SCERT, 0.34 for district level TEIs, and 0.37 for BRCs at baseline, to 0.66 for SCERT, 0.71 for district
  level TEIs, and 0.74 for BRCs at end-line, respectively. As the maximum possible score was 1.00, these
  figures reflect a doubling in scores received by project closing.
  • The following improvements were reported in teacher effectiveness scores (baseline survey in 2015;
  endline survey in 2020): (i) whereas half of the respondents did not possess professional qualifications at
  baseline, 93% reported some kind of qualification at the end-line; (ii) almost 70% of the 1,925 teachers
  participating in the end-line survey reported receiving training in the past year compared to only 37% at
  baseline; (iii) 28% of participants reported participating in five to ten days of training in comparison to 10%
  at baseline; (iv) an increased number of teachers claimed awareness about recommended pedagogy
  practices such as usage of teaching-learning materials and organizing children in groups; and (v) a larger
  number of teachers reported engaging in lesson preparation, assessment and extracurricular activities, in
  addition to classroom instruction. In addition, the end-line survey of teachers’ performance reflected
  improved capacities in language and mathematics skills. Language skills increased from 44.6% at
  baseline to 58.5% at end-line and mathematical skills increased from 58.1% at baseline to 64.0% at end-
  line. Classroom observations revealed that 90% of primary and 95% of upper primary classes were held in
  a proper classroom setting, the share of monograde classrooms increased over implementation, and
  facilities such as adequate space, provision of chairs, blackboards, and displays of teaching and learning
  materials improved as well.


Increased time on task




                                                                                                      Page 7 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



   • Teachers surveyed in the baseline and endline assessments self-reported that "teaching" was their main
   task over other related tasks such as preparing lessons, preparing meals, filling registers, and providing
   extracurricular activities. However, the percentage of teachers who reported as such remained the same:
   96.3% at baseline and also at endline. In addition, while the planned assessment methodology (at the
   appraisal stage) was video documentation of teacher time on task (and qualitative analysis of the videos),
   the actual methodology used was teacher self-reporting, which is a measure with weak validity.



 Improved teacher attendance

   • Teacher attendance increased from 81% in primary schools and 78% in upper primary schools in
   2015, to 89% percent in primary schools and 88% in upper primary schools in 2020. These achieved the
   target of a 5% increase for both levels.




 Rating
 Modest
PHREVDELTBL
 PHINNERREVISEDTBL
 Objective 1 Revision 1
 Revised Objective
 To improve the effectiveness of elementary school teachers in Bihar (FIRST REVISED OUTCOME
 TARGETS)

 Revised Rationale
 Outputs
 See outputs reported above.

 Outcomes

   • 24,335 unqualified teachers participated in the original training and 11,315 teachers participated in the
   new training, for a total of 35,650. This achieved the revised target of 37,000.
   • 369,000 teachers benefited from project activities (continuous professional development, updated
   diploma curriculum, upgraded TEI infrastructure, improved teacher accountability), from a baseline
   originally approximated as 400,000 total teachers in the system. This fell slightly short of the revised target
   to reach 400,000 teachers.




                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)




             Revised Rating
             Substantial
             PHINNERREVISEDTBL
             Objective 1 Revision 2
             Revised Objective
             To improve the effectiveness of elementary school teachers in Bihar (SECOND REVISED OUTCOME
             TARGETS)

             Revised Rationale
             Outputs
             See outputs reported above.

             Outcomes

                   •54.67% of teacher positions in TEIs were filled by project closing, an increase from the baseline of 35%.
                   This achieved the revised target of 50%.




             Revised Rating
             Substantial

PHOVRLEFFRATTBL




Rationale




Overall Efficacy Rating
---

     5. Efficiency

                  ---



     Efficiency Rating
     ---


     a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
       and the re-estimated value at evaluation:



                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



                                    Rate
                                                         Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                    Available?
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


6. Outcome

Project under original targets - Moderately Unsatisfactory
Relevance of the objectives and DLIs is rated Substantial. Efficacy is rated Modest, as there was evidence of
improved TEI capacity, improved teacher performance (though the evidence primarily refers to increased subject
knowledge and less so to improved pedagogy and classroom management, although those were assumed to be
covered in teacher training courses), and increased teacher attendance, but there were significant shortcomings
in achieving the number of teachers trained and the proportion of teacher educator positions filled, as well as
a lack of evidence on increased time on task.

Project under first revised outcome targets - Moderately Satisfactory
Relevance of the objectives and DLIs is rated Substantial. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as there was evidence
of improved TEI capacity, improved teacher performance (though the evidence primarily refers to increased
subject knowledge and less so to improved pedagogy and classroom management, although those
were assumed to be covered in teacher training courses), and increased teacher attendance, although there
remained shortcomings in the proportion of teacher educator vacancies filled and a lack of evidence on
increased time on task.

Project under second revised outcome targets - Moderately Satisfactory
Relevance of the objectives and DLIs is rated Substantial. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as there was evidence
of improved TEI capacity, improved teacher performance (though the evidence primarily refers to increased
subject knowledge and less so to improved pedagogy and classroom management, although those
were assumed to be covered in teacher training courses), and increased teacher attendance, although there
remained a lack of evidence on increased time on task.

The overall outcome rating for a restructured project is determined by weighting the proportion of the Credit that
disbursed before and after each restructuring. The Credit disbursed as follows:

  • US$ 105.13 million of the total amount of US$ 116.6 million, or 90.2%, disbursed from project approval to
  May 2019.
  • US$ 1.6 million of the total amount of US$ 116.6 million, or 1.4%, disbursed from May 2019 to July 2020.
  • US$ 9.87 million of the total amount of US$ 116.6 million, or 8.5%, disbursed from July 2020 to project
  closing.

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)




Therefore, the ratings are weighted and summed as follows:
MU (3 x .902 = 2.706) + MS (4 x .014 = 0.056) + MS (4 x .085 = 0.34) = 3.102 (rounds down to 3.0). This
indicates an overall weighted outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory based on both the weighted
calculation and significant shortcomings in achieving the objective to improve teacher effectiveness.

a.    Outcome Rating
      Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Sustainability of outcomes will be heavily dependent on the effective functioning of the teacher education
institutions and on the accountability mechanisms developed at the local levels, both of which appear to need
more time and capacity support to become more fully established. The government of Bihar has recently
implemented an Operations and Maintenance policy for TEI infrastructure, which includes providing additional
financial resources to all TEIs for continued operations. The TEMIS as a monitoring system for accountability
has yet to be fully developed. Also, while there is another Bank project in place to support the federal
government's efforts to strengthen institutional capacity of the elementary sector management structures, the
state of Bihar is not one of the direct recipients of the financing.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
     The project design and choice of instrument was based on a well defined, clearly developed government
     program for improving teacher quality, making use of existing government systems and procedures. It was
     also aligned with the central government-funded program for elementary education, supporting activities
     not already being funded by the central program. The result-based financing approach was appropriate to
     support the shift in focus from education inputs to outcomes, while the IPF instrument provided critical
     technical assistance support given limited in-country capacity with such a new approach. The risk
     assessment thus appropriately identified the risk level as substantial, given existing institutional capacity
     levels and lack of prior experience with Bank-financed projects in the education sector in the state of
     Bihar. The results framework, DLIs, and M&E design were overall sound, with a strong focus on developing
     monitoring systems for the education sector, although there were some shortcomings in the M&E and
     DLI indicators.
     Readiness for implementation also had shortcomings, particularly in terms of staffing of critical positions
     and fleshing out of guidelines (the ICR (page 23) noted that under a traditional IPF operation, these
     elements would likely have been required to be in place prior to project launch), including the following: the
     Program Director was only assigned in early 2017; (ii) the project management unit was not fully staffed
     until mid-2020; (iii) the Independent Verification Agency was only contracted in mid-2017; (iv) a
     Procurement Manual and Standard Bidding Documents were prepared but never finalized and adopted; (v)

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  a consulting firm to supervise works was only contracted in early 2017; (vi) operational guidelines
  containing program codes were only published and issued in early 2017; and (vii) the Program’s Financial
  Management Manual was only approved by BSEIDC’s Board in late 2019. These all contributed to
  significant implementation delays and subsequent cancellations and project restructurings.


  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

b. Quality of supervision
  There were significant internal and external circumstances that negatively affected project progress and
  achievements. There were major shifts in government priorities at both the federal and state
  levels, including: (I) the federal government mandated that all states certify all unqualified teachers by a
  certain deadline; (ii) the federal government agency that was responsible for approving TEIs that were
  eligible to offer diplomas approved fewer institutions than expected; and (iii) the federal government
  launched a separate teacher training program. The government of Bihar also made some policy changes,
  such as a shift away from developing a teacher performance incentive system, and a shift in responsibility
  for recruiting teacher educators to the Bihar Public Service Commission. According to the project team,
  overall these were positive policy shifts for which the Bank team engaged in active policy dialogue with the
  state government to make adjustments to the project design and results framework. The COVID-19
  pandemic had a negative impact, as the government of Bihar closed several TEIs for extended periods and
  converted some into quarantine centers, and delays in the supply of construction materials affected the
  pace of upgrading the facilities. The Bank team responded to these significant challenges by restructuring
  the project design and results framework, including a significantly reduced project scope. Supervision
  ratings were candid, reflecting these challenges. Fiduciary performance was initially rated in the
  unsatisfactory range but improved over the course of the project period (Implementation Supervision Report
  rating of Moderately Satisfactory by March 2020); the project team noted that issues resurfaced at the final
  stage of project implementation but these were primarily due to large scale repositioning of top state
  management, despite proactive supervision by the Bank team.


  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
  The M&E design centered on the setting up of monitoring systems (such as the TEMIS and school report cards)
  that would not only strengthen the Borrower's capacity to monitor outcomes in the elementary education sector,


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  but also to monitor progress for this project in particular. Several of the planned activities would also serve
  evaluative purposes, such as the TEI survey, teacher performance standards, and school report cards. The
  results framework clearly linked project areas of support to outcomes, and there was clear alignment between
  the results framework and DLIs, although there were some shortcomings in the selection of indicators. For
  example, there was no clear measure for the intended outcome to increase time on task; the primary measure
  for improved TEI capacity relied on a survey for which there would be only a baseline and endline survey (thus
  mid-term progress could not be clearly discerned); and the ICR (page 26) noted that there was lack of
  clarification around definitions of what precisely constituted "completion" and "minimum standards" for the TEI
  facilities.



b. M&E Implementation
  The monitoring systems were implemented as planned, albeit with some delays and reduction in scope, and
  used for regular monitoring and data collection. However, the independent verification agency for DLIs was
  not contracted until mid-2018, leading to delayed verification of DLI compliance. Also, several targets required
  significant revision due to changing circumstances and government priorities.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (page 26) reported that the monitoring data and reports were used routinely by the Bank
  team during implementation support reviews to discuss results and progress (including compliance with the
  Performance Action Plan) and identify corrective measures. The data also contributed to decisions to revise
  the results framework and DLIs. However, the ICR also noted that decisions to revise the results framework
  were partially driven by the Bank team's observation that implementing agencies were not actually using the
  results framework data to monitor efforts and guide activities. Despite some shortcomings in the M&E
  framework (e.g., inconsistencies among targets for some indicators and DLIs), it met its purpose for routine
  monitoring and evaluation and to substantiate disbursements.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
  The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project, triggering the safeguard policy on
  Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). OP 9.0 also required that an Environmental and Social Systems
  Assessment be carried out, in order to review the capacity of existing government systems to plan and
  implement any measures needed to mitigate environmental and/or social impacts. The following actions
  were identified as a result of the Assessment: (i) criteria to exclude certain interventions from the Program


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  that may impact ecologically sensitive/important/notified wetlands and protected monuments; (ii) a
  Performance Action Plan that included strengthening existing systems for improved environmental/social
  management, primarily through adoption of a manual on the environmental management system for the
  Program and internal and third party monitoring of performance; and (iii) capacity building to address
  environmental issues for monitoring and due diligence. Additional measures were taken for the IPF
  component of the operation with regards to capacity building support for deployment of renewable energy
  technology. The ICR (page 27-28) reported that environmental measures were routinely monitored during
  implementation support missions. There was one case of partial encroachment by house-dwellers onto
  campus property, leading to Bank recommendations on how to address incidents going
  forward. Construction was overall satisfactory, with the Bank providing recommendations for improving
  facilities and the construction monitoring process.
  The safeguard policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) was also triggered. The above Assessment
  identified the following actions: (i) adoption of program documentation for social management; (ii)
  preparation on awareness of grievance procedures and dissemination of this information; and (iii) capacity
  building to address social issues for monitoring and due diligence. The ICR did not report on
  whether compliance with safeguard measures was satisfactory, although the project team subsequently
  confirmed that there were no problems.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  During preparation the Bank team carried out an Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment to determine
  whether existing systems would provide reasonable assurance that program expenditures would be used
  appropriately to achieve intended purposes. The project design specifically included a Results Area on these
  issues (improved financial and governance mechanisms) to enhance the accountability and governance
  framework of implementing agencies. The Performance Action Plan included several actions that were
  expected to strengthen fiduciary management, such as budget management, vigilance, procurement, and
  financial management.
  Financial management (FM): The ICR (page 28-29) reported that there were several challenges with respect to
  FM performance, such that the FM rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in mid-2018 and to
  Unsatisfactory in mid-2019. Issues included: (i) not following agreed funds flow procedures, whereby Program
  funding would be operated through the Treasury as opposed to parking funds in bank accounts; (ii) delays in
  completion of audits; (iii) the State auditor considering significant Program expenditures inadmissible; (iv) not
  reconciling Program expenditures with the accounts compiled by the State Accountant General; and (v) not
  including expenditures of District Institutes in the financial statements to be audited; (vi) delays by SCERT in
  submitting Utilization Certificates for funds used (leading to delays in piloting the new CPD modules and rolling
  out training to SMC members using the new SMC mobile app); and in respect to BSEIDC: (i) repeated delays in
  contracting auditors, including internal auditors, (ii) delayed submission of audited financial statements and
  interim unaudited financial reports; and (iii) delayed finalizing of the FM Manual. The FM rating was upgraded to
  Moderately Satisfactory in early 2020 as some issues were addressed, including completion of audits,
  appointment of internal auditors, and improved adherence to the Program’s FM arrangements.


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  Procurement: The ICR (page 28) reported procurement issues that negatively impacted both IPF and Results
  Area 5 activities. For example, there were significant delays in hiring a firm for ICT-related procurement and
  management, contracting for enterprise resource planning in BSEIDC, and procuring consultancies for School
  Leadership Management Training and support for SMCs. For the IPF activities, the contracting process was
  lengthy with many delays even after service providers had been identified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The project outcome is rated
                                                                                 Moderately Unsatisfactory for
                                                                                 the period between project
                                                                                 approval to first restructuring
                                                                                 (90.2% of Credit disbursed),
                              Moderately              Moderately
Outcome                                                                          while the rating was
                              Satisfactory            Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Moderately Satisfactory for the
                                                                                 period after the first and
                                                                                 second restructurings;
                                                                                 therefore, the weighted rating
                                                                                 is Moderately Unsatisfactory.
                                                                                 There were shortcomings in
                                                      Moderately                 Quality at Entry (M&E design
Bank Performance              Satisfactory
                                                      Satisfactory               and in readiness for
                                                                                 implementation).
Quality of M&E                Substantial             Substantial                ---
Quality of ICR                                        Substantial                ---

12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 31-33) and adapted by IEG:




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        IN: Bihar Teacher Education ICT (P132665)



  • Under the PforR instrument, the Action Plan agreed upon with the government can identify actions (with
  expected completion dates) that are deemed necessary for achieving project outcomes, but should not be a
  substitute for project readiness. In the case of this project, although the Action Plan items were relevant and
  accurate, they were in fact measures that were necessary for a successful project launch and initial
  implementation period; instead, despite early expected completion dates, they were not fulfilled until two
  years into the project period. Along similar lines, the Borrower's procurement requirements were satisfied
  under the PforR component, but the IPF component required compliance with more complex Bank
  procurement procedures, and these were met with significant delays.
  • Incremental technological innovations to push small reforms in a large-scale education system can have a
  higher likelihood of success compared to more disruptive technological changes. In the case of this project,
  developing simple apps (for example, monitoring teacher attendance) and online systems (for example,
  applications for teacher training courses) enabled incremental behavior changes and actions that contributed
  to project outcomes.




13. Assessment Recommended?

No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the evidence and analysis was adequate for assessing the project performance. These
contributed to the ICR's clear focus on results. At the same time, the ICR highlighted important implementation
shortcomings that affected achievement of outcomes. Lessons are well-drawn from project experience,
particularly valuable for informing future PforR operations. The ICR is overall consistent with guidelines,
although the calculation of the weighted outcome rating (the ICR calculated the weighting by excluding the
"rolling advance" of US$50 million from the first phase of the project period) did not follow guidelines to weight
the rating according to disbursements, not expenditures.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
