     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022653

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P117293                                     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                        Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80250,IBRD-84680                       31-Oct-2016                                          98,799,862.39

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Apr-2011                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            54,500,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             98,799,862.39                                                0.00

 Actual                                         98,799,862.39                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Fernando Manibog            Vibecke Dixon                 Ramachandra Jammi               IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) is "to improve the efficiency, continuity and reliability of water supply
   and sanitation services in the Northern Service Area of Lima." (Schedule 1, page 5 of the Loan Agreement
   dated July 22, 2011)

   For the purposes of this ICR Reviews, the achievement of these two PDOs will be assessed:



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



   PDO 1: To improve the efficiency, continuity and reliability of water supply services in the Northern Service
   Area of Lima

   PDO 2: To improve the efficiency, continuity and reliability of sanitation services in the Northern Service Area
   of Lima

   The terms efficiency, continuity, and reliability were defined in terms of specific PDO indicators, as explained
   in the Efficacy section below. The PDOs would be achieved by rehabilitating water and sewerage networks in
   the NSAL and improving SEDAPAL’s efficiency, in two phases. Phase One, i.e., the original Project, was
   approved in 2011 and concentrated in the NSAL, while Phase Two, for which Additional Financing was
   approved in 2015, expanded the original geographic area covering an adjacent underserviced area in the
   northern Lima-Callao metropolitan area.

   The PDO was not amended during the restructuring for the Additional Financing, while PDO outcome
   indicators were revised. A split rating will not be carried out because the revised indicators have a greater
   level of ambition than the original ones.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, pages 6-7), the project was designed for SEDAPAL to
   follow a two-tier strategy. The first stage was to focus on reducing the WSS system’s physical losses in
   order to increase water availability, while the second stage consisted of improving operational and
   commercial management by reducing commercial losses and optimizing technical operations.

   On this basis, the project was comprised of the following three components (cost figures from the ICR's
   Annex 3, Table A3.1):

   Component 1. Rehabilitation of water and sewerage networks in Northern Service Area of Lima
   (US$51.3 million at appraisal; US$105.3 million with Additional Financing; US$95 million actual)

   This component included the rehabilitation of the water and sewerage networks in First Northern Service
   area of Lima. To reduce losses and improve the management of the rehabilitated network, the component
   also intended to: (i) rehabilitate water reservoirs to expand storage capacity and stabilize pressure; (ii)
   replace household connections and install of new domestic water meters; and (iii) enable sectorization by
   installing bulk water meters and valves. It was intended that the physical investments would be
   complemented by social interventions such as gender-tailored initiatives to manage consumption (e.g.,

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



  training in how to use in-house water-saving equipment) thereby facilitating the transition to a full-pressure,
  continuous and metered service.

  Component 2. Improving SEDAPAL’s Efficiency (US$1.9 million at appraisal; US$0.9 million actual)

  This component included consultant services and studies to equip SEDAPAL’s management with decision-
  making tools for improving efficiency. The specific activities would cover four areas: (a) GIS implementation,
  including a cadastre evaluation to select priority zones and identify the process for updating, and associated
  training; (b) standardization and consolidation of SCADA information technology, including support for
  preparing a SCADA Master and Investment Plan to ensure the compatibility of current and future SCADA
  strategies; (c) preparation of a strategy to meet user demand for water and sanitation service, by evaluating
  exogenous and endogenous factors that determine demand for WSS services, and the priority actions to
  meet that demand efficiently; and (d) assessment of options to develop a new organizational model,
  including a strategic vision for SEDAPAL‟s management to incorporate new technologies, align human
  resources management with modern practices, identify options for sustainable financing of capital
  investments, and rearrange institutional structure along functional lines.

  Component 3. SEDAPAL Project Management (US$2.3 million at appraisal; US$2.9 million actual)

  This component was to finance the additional staff needed for project management, the Monitoring and
  Evaluation System, and the financial audits as well as physical and procurement reviews. The component
  would also finance individual consultants to (i) strengthen SEDAPAL team’s capacity on communication,
  procurement, financial management, and (ii) provide training for strategic planning based on the selection of
  technical options that would enable SEDAPAL to fully comply with its Investment Plans for 2009-2013 and
  beyond. This component will also support SEDAPAL’s efforts to mainstream good practices and lessons
  learned.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total estimated project cost was US$137.9 million, of which US$54.5 million was at the
  original approval date, US$55 million was from Additional Financing, and the rest from counterpart financing
  (see Borrower contribution below). Component 1 for the rehabilitation of the NSAL water supply and
  sanitation infrastructure accounted for US$95 million or 88 percent of the total actual disbursement of
  US$107.8 million.

  Financing. The World Bank financed two loans, as originally approved and through Additional Financing, in
  the amounts indicated above. Of the total actual US$107.8 million disbursed, US$98.8 (or 92 percent) was
  financed by the two Bank loans, while US$9 million (or 8 percent) was financed by SEDAPAL. The funds of
  the original credit (IBRD -8025) were fully disbursed and 80.5 percent of the AF (IBRD-8468) funds were
  disbursed.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



   Borrower Contribution. SEDAPAL's counterpart funding commitment was originally US$10.4 million, which
   was increased to US$28.4 million at the project's restructuring. The actual funding was US$9 million, or 30
   percent of the original amount.

   Dates. The project was approved on April 7, 2011 and became effective eight months later on December 7,
   2011. Three years later, a mid-term review was conducted on January 13, 2015, after which Additional
   Financing was approved (see below). The original closing date was October 31, 2016. With extensions,
   the actual closing date was four years and two months later on December 31, 2020.

   Additional Financing (AF) was approved by the Bank’s Board on January 25, 2015. The loan amount was
   US$ 55.0 million, which intended to expand the geographic scope and to scale-up civil works, in support of
   SEDAPAL’s US$ 187 million second phase of the Lima Norte Program, which included remaining zones
   that had not been covered in the original loan. JICA and KfW also financed SEDAPAL’s second phase in
   separate areas of intervention. The ICR indicated that the AF was expected to benefit 239,350 additional
   people within the NSAL in the districts of Comas and the adjacent underserviced districts of Carabayllo and
   Los Olivos.

   The project was restructured three times, for the purposes described below:

   October 27, 2016: The first restructuring extended the closing date by 22 months from October 31, 2016
   until August 31, 2018 to allow completion of consultancy activities to improve SEDAPAL’s capacity and
   efficiency under Component 2.

   December 19, 2019: The second restructuring extended the AF closing date by six months from December
   31, 2019 to June 30, 2020 to complete the delayed WSS infrastructure works under Component 1, adjust
   the implementation schedule accordingly, and modify the disbursement estimates.

   June 30, 2020: The third restructuring again extended the AF closing date by six months from June 30,
   2020 to December 31, 2020 to complete works that were stopped when GOP declared a COVID-19
   emergency, and to update the implementation schedule accordingly.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Background. In 2011 when the project was appraised, Peru was one of the best performing
economies in Latin America. The stimulus plan of the Government of Peru (GOP) after the 2007-2008
global economic crisis focused on increasing public spending on infrastructure, which increased private
investments and domestic demand, and led to an 8.8 percent growth rate in 2010. Peru’s economic growth
was achieved with significant poverty reduction, with the percentage of the population living in poverty
decreasing from 48.6 percent in 2005 to 31.3 percent in 2010. Extreme poverty also fell from 17.1 percent
to 9.8 percent during that period. Despite this growth and poverty reduction, Peru still faced the challenge
of inclusive growth: poverty levels remained higher in rural areas, especially in the Andean region, while
urban areas like Lima showed the most inequality.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



Sector Background. Poverty was linked to lack of infrastructure access. Another major issue was the
quality of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services. Prior to appraisal, between 1990 to 2010, the country
experienced low service standards due to poor operation and maintenance (O&M), outdated infrastructure,
and insufficient sector financing. In Lima, intermittent water supply, frequent pipe breaks, and water leaks
frequently occurred. Repeated blockages and broken pipes also plagued the sewerage network due to poor
building standards and materials. These issues were especially evident in Lima’s northern peri-urban
area—the Northern Service Area of Lima (NSAL), which is the project area—where non-revenue water
(NRW) levels reached over 50 percent, and only 37 percent of its population received 24 hours of service a
day. (ICR, paragraph 4, page 1)

With World Bank support, GOP began WSS sector reforms in the 1990s, which resulted in an institutional
framework that clarified the roles and responsibilities for policy setting and regulation. The reforms also
decentralized all WSS provision to sanitation service providers, municipalities and/or water user boards,
with the exception of Lima’s Water and Sewerage Service utility (Servicio de Agua Potable y Alcantarillado
de Lima, or SEDAPAL). Four years prior to appraisal, SEDAPAL was able to double its annual number of
water and sewerage connections and implemented ambitious programs for the rehabilitation of water and
sewerage networks to reduce physical losses. These programs, which were supported by the Bank,
focused on the Southern and Central areas of Lima.

In terms of the project’s origins, the need to rehabilitate the NSAL’s aged WSS network became clear when
SEDAPAL made plans to increase the capacity for delivering drinking water supply in Lima, since the
increased pressure could entail risks of pipe breaks and leaks that would be difficult to manage. Moreover,
SEDAPAL’s rapid growth and lack of an information and communication technology strategy resulted in an
ad hoc approach that risked the sustainability of all of SEDAPAL’s operations. Consequently, SEDAPAL
sought the World Bank’s support to implement the first phase of the Lima Norte Program, in parallel with the
support of the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the German Cooperation
(Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau – KfW) for the same overall objective but separate intervention areas under
the program.

Current Relevance. The PDOs’ current relevance to Peru’s development priorities Bank strategies is
substantial. The PDOs directly support the government’s strategic goal of creating and promoting
opportunities for social investment through improvements in access to WSS services by low-income urban
dwellers, as enunciated in GOP’s 2016-2021 National Development Plan. By reducing non-revenue water
(NRW), the project would increase the volume of water available, thus allowing SEDAPAL to add low-
income households to its service area. The PDOs are also aligned with the government’s 2017 National
WSS Policy and Plan, which aims at “increasing the levels of efficiency of service provision with high
indicators on quality, continuity and coverage.” Finally, the PDOs support SEDAPAL’s 2017 to 2021
strategic plan, wherein one of the strategic objectives is to achieve universal WSS coverage and continuous
(24 hour-a-day) WSS services. With respect to Bank strategies, the PDOs directly support the World Bank
Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY17 – FY21 for Peru, specifically as its “Objective 5:
Improve WSS services in key urban areas” under “Pillar 2: Services for Citizens across the Territory.” To
achieve this objective, the CPF highlights the importance of strengthening the efficiency of utilities. More
specifically, the CPF states that “improving the operational efficiency of the utilities is a critical step to both
increase access to water and sanitation in urban areas, and enhance the sustainability of these gains.”

Prior Bank Involvement. The World Bank has had a long history of supporting the development of
Peru's WSS sector. The specific support relevant to this assessment is the rehabilitation programs
for Lima's networks. Prior to appraisal, in 2008, SEDAPAL developed the first phase of a program for US$

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



               211 million to optimize the WSS networks in the NSAL that included: (i) expanding the water treatment and
               main distribution systems; (ii) improving demand-side management by reducing physical and commercial
               losses and controlling demand through installation of customer meters, progressive tariff structures, and
               promotion of in-house water saving devices; and (iii) increasing wastewater treatment capacity in
               partnership with the private sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the efficiency, continuity and reliability of water supply services in the Northern Service Area of
                             Lima (NSAL)

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change.

                             The ICR prepared a theory of change (TOC) as the PAD did not develop one. The ICR's TOC was well
                             articulated and fully adequate as the overall framework for monitoring the achievement of the PDOs.
                             Rehabilitation and installation activities were expected to directly result in improvements in the technical and
                             operational performance of the targeted water and sewerage networks. Management plans and studies
                             (notably the integration of the SCADA system and GIS) were expected to result in improvements in
                             SEDAPAL's management efficiency. Finally, engineering consultancy services were expected to enhance
                             SEDAPAL's project management efficiency. These inputs and outputs, taken together, were causally linked
                             to the achievement of stronger institutional capacity outcomes as well as enhanced management,
                             operational, and commercial performance that signals the achievement of PDO outcomes--as measured by
                             indicators of improved efficiency, continuity and reliability of water supply and sanitation services in the
                             NSAL. The main critical assumptions and risks are all valid, i.e., the need for timely decisions, competent
                             contractors, customer support and adoption of water-saving practices, and staff retention throughout project
                             implementation.

                             Outputs

                             The project’s main activities and outputs to achieve PDO 1 were focused on reducing water losses and
                             improving operational and commercial management of the WSS systems. To these ends, the main activities
                             and outputs that were completed under the project were the following:

                                        Installation of 40 km of trunk water mains (The ICR did not provide baseline or target figures.)
                                        Rehabilitation of 245.3 km of aging and fragile secondary water pipes (original target 250 km;
                                         restructured target 384 km) - 64 percent, partially achieved

                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)




      Rehabilitation of 64,878 household water connections (original target 35,000 connections; restructured
         target 69,444 connections) - 93.4 percent, almost fully achieved
        Installation of 18,788 customer meters (The ICR did not provide baseline or target figures.)
        Establishment of 26 new district-metered areas (DMA)
        Installation of the required water valves to control pressure levels and flow meters
        Digitalization of the WSS networks rehabilitated under the Lima Norte I program in SEDAPAL’s GIS,
         and registration of commercial and technical cadasters in the GIS

Outcomes

      The project has achieved substantial efficacy in improving the efficiency, continuity, and reliability of
         water services (the PDO) for 64,878 households in the NSAL, near the target of 69,444 households.
      NRW-levels were reduced from 40 to 25 percent in the project areas, thus meeting the service
         efficiency PDO outcome target of 25 percent. SEDAPAL’s NRW levels are competitive with Latin
         America’s largest, top-performing water utilities.
        Customer metering and reading levels—essential for commercial loss reductions—increased from 69
         to 95 percent.
        Service continuity increased from 16.09 to 23.9 hours a day, achieving the PDO-level target of 24
         hours. Service reliability—as measured by the annual incidence of pipe breakages per km of water
         supply—decreased from 0.21 to 0.1. The service reliability outcome is 46.7 percent of the revised
         PDO-level target (0.07); however, the indicator target was overly ambitious, as discussed in the
         Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) section.
        SEDAPAL was able to update and build a complete record of all its infrastructure, thus enabling it to
         identify and respond quick to leaks and risks of critical failures, as a direct result of the digitalization of
         the WSS networks..
        The registration of commercial and technical cadasters in GIS has enabled SEDAPAL to improve its
         commercial management and reduce commercial water losses through accelerating its identification
         and response to illegal connections, issues reported by clients and service suspensions.
        In turn, the foregoing outcomes have resulted in the reduction of commercial and physical water
         losses, thus directly leading to improvements in the efficiency and reliable continuity of SEDAPAL’s
         services in the NSAL. The non-revenue water level was reduced from 40 percent in 2011 to the
         targeted level of 25 percent by project closing.
        Changes in construction processes throughout SEDAPAL have resulted in improvements in overall
         system sustainability, as observed in two specific examples. The use of the more adaptable High-
         Density Polyethylene (HDPE) piping under the project—instead of the polyvinyl chloride (PVC) piping
         used prior to the project—has resulted in significantly fewer connection pieces, which has reduced
         water losses and mitigated the costs and time requirements of O&M activities. Also, the use of
         trenchless pipe rehabilitation under the project—which SEDAPAL now commonly practices—has led
         to reduced installation time, costs, and social and environmental impacts, while increasing resistance
         to seismic activity.

These improvements have allowed SEDAPAL to provide higher quality service to the households within the
Project’s area of intervention. Although not aimed to increase new access, the project reduced water losses
and thus increased the supply of water for distribution, which allowed SEDAPAL to extend water services to
other areas while avoiding supply and continuity issues.


                                                                                                          Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the efficiency, continuity and reliability of sanitation services in the Northern Service Area of Lima
(NSAL)

Rationale
fSince the contiguous investments were implemented by the same agency (SEDAPAL) in the same project
areas, the theory of change for the second objective is the same as the one presented in the first objective
above.

Outputs

The project’s main activities for achieving PDO2 were geared towards reducing the annual incidence of
sewerage blockages per km of sewerage network in the project areas To this end, the main outputs included
the following:

      Rehabilitation of 271 km of the sewerage network, exceeding the target of 246 km
      Rehabilitation of 35,187 household sewerage connections (the ICR did not provide a target figures).
       The pipes installed via the Project have a wider diameter than those utilized pre-Project, reducing the
       probability of blockages and increasing the conveyance capacity of the sewerage network.
      Dissemination of information on proper use of the sanitation system to 242,140 beneficiaries, far
       exceeding the Project target of reaching 45,000 beneficiaries.
      Completion of analytical work to integrate the operational processes of the Lima and Callao
       wastewater treatment plant with SEDAPAL’s backbone network, as targeted.



Outcomes

      The Project had already surpassed the target of 2.34 blockages per km fprior to the COVID-19
       pandemic, with reported reductions from 8.75 blockages per km to between 1.81 and 1.56. These
       represented annual cost-savings of about US$ 1.0 million. This indicator worsened to 2.76 due to the
       COVID-19 pandemic, which disrupted operations and maintenance (O&M) during the last six months
       of implementation. The ICR reports that SEDAPAL is recovering its standard O&M levels, hence pre-
       pandemic sewerage blockage levels are likely.
      The sanitation investments have also minimized the risk of overflow and ponding of sewage,
       infiltration and inflows of wastewater into groundwater sources, and odor nuisances. (The ICR did not
       provide quantitative measurements on the extent to which overflow and ponding were decreased, but
       such results would be expected from sanitation infrastructure.)
      The integration of the Lima and Callao wastewater treatment plant to SEDAPAL’s network enhanced
       SEDAPAL’s capacity to efficiently operate and manage its sanitation services.

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)




                                  The commercial and operational activities described under the PDO1 analysis also directly benefited
                                    management of the sanitation network. For example, the registration of the households in the GIS built
                                    SEDAPAL’s capacity to efficiently respond to disruptions in sewerage as well as water services and to
                                    address customer complaints.

                            In sum, the project’s efficacy in reducing sewerage blockages was substantial. The reduction in blockages by
                            60 percent (from 773 blockages in 2015 to 321 by project closing) resulted in a more efficient, continuous,
                            reliable sanitation service, as well as improvements in the overall hydraulic capacity of the network.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's efficacy in achieving the first and second objectives (for the water and sanitation subsectors,
                            respectively) was both substantial. Technical interventions and institutional capacity-strengthening
                            improvements, which permeated the whole of SEDAPAL, led to the achievement of these two outcomes. At
                            closing, the total number of beneficiaries was 442,292, which exceeded the target of 438,000.

                            The institutional strengthening under the project is expected to enhance the sustainability of the outcomes
                            discussed above under PDO 1 and PDO 2. Consultancies and studies were implemented to help SEDAPAL
                            in optimizing its processes, operations, and overall organizational efficiency for the medium to long term. The
                            studies supported: (i) SEDAPAL’s rollout of a unified GIS; (ii) standardization and consolidation
                            of SEDAPAL’s many SCADA information systems, and data centralization in one Data Center hub; (iii)
                            design of SEDAPAL’s new backbone network; (iv) implementation of a new commercial system; and (v)
                            design of a new organizational and remuneration structure. The ICR reports that SEDAPAL has started
                            implementing the recommendations from the studies, with a view to facilitating access to systematized and
                            integrated information. According to the ICR (paragraph 31, page 11), these activities would “assist
                            SEDAPAL’s management in making efficient, evidence-based decisions, improving O&M, and bringing
                            innovation and resilience to SEDAPAL’s processes and facilities.” The expected direct benefits are reduced
                            operating costs (OPEX), increased revenues, and enhanced ability to consolidate and expand service
                            delivery



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



Economic Analysis. The ICR conducted a benefit-cost analysis, which the PAD also carried out. The ICR’s
methodology is valid and consistent with the PAD. As in the appraisal, the ICR’s cost and benefit flows covered
the same lifetime period of 30 years and used the same discount rate of 10 percent. Financial costs were
transformed into economic costs using a conversion factor of 0.83 (the same one used at appraisal) was used to
transform financial into economic costs, thereby adjusting for market distortions such as taxes and subsidies.
Benefits were measured in terms of cost savings to SEDAPAL from replacement of pipes, and cost savings to
households resulting from service improvements. More specifically, cost savings for customers accrue when
coping costs paid without the Project are eliminated and replaced by tariffs charged by SEDAPAL. SEDAPAL
yields cost savings when it experiences lower maintenance costs to the network. The detailed assumptions and
analyses are presented in Annex 4, Efficiency Analysis, of the ICR (pages 39-45). On this basis, the project's
economic internal rate of return was calculated at 21 percent, compared to the 20 percent estimated in the PAD
at appraisal.

Financial Analysis. At appraisal, the focus of the financial analysis was to assess if SEDAPAL would be able to
fully meet its financial obligations, including those arising from the project. While it was expected to do so at that
time, it was later shown during the restructuring for the Additional Financing that SEDAPAL needed to increase
its tariffs; otherwise, its revenues would not be adequate to meet its financial obligations and its overall financial
position would be at risk.

At project completion, the ICR re-examined SEDAPAL’s financial performance in comparison to what had been
expected. The results indicated that SEDAPAL’s financial performance had improved and exceeded
expectations. Tariffs had increased in real terms, thus enabling SEDAPAL to cover its operating costs and meet
its debt obligations. SEDAPAL’s net margin increased from 13 percent in 2013 to 19 percent in 2019. By that
year, revenues fully covered operating expenses while leaving a margin of 28 percent to finance new
investments. Moreover, the capital structure of 60 percent liabilities and 40 percent equity were found
acceptable.

SEDAPAL’s management has been consistently committed to achieving efficiency gains, as shown by its
programs that complemented project activities. SEDAPAL’s customer metering increased from 69 percent in
2010 to 95 percent in 2019; metered and billed volume reached 92 percent in 2020; non-revenue water
decreased from 38 percent in 2010 to 26.5 percent in 2019. Its cost recovery rate increased from 122 percent to
139 percent.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency. The project’s implementation suffered delays, since the project
activities were undertaken during a period of political upheaval in Peru followed by the COVID-19
pandemic. Major changes in government (in response to corruption scandals), resulted in more complex
bureaucratic review and clearance processes among public agencies. There were also significant staff changes
within SEDAPAL and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). This high turnover rate delayed the implementation
of high-level studies under Component 2. Moreover, as new managers took their position, they redirected
SEDAPAL’s priorities, thus delaying project implementation. Activities under Component 1 faced many
implementation challenges related to (i) the procurement of supervision services for Lima Norte II civil works and
(ii) the overall slowdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The closing date of Lima Norte I had to be extended
for 22 months and that of Lima Norte II for 1 year. At closing, the Project had completed all the planned
infrastructure and most of the strategic studies. Despite the different political and technical challenges, Overall,
the PIU demonstrated sufficient capacity to implement the project efficiently, despite the many political and
technical challenges.




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



In sum, while there were implementation delays, the positive EIRR and the sound financial position of SEDAPAL
lead to a Substantial rating for project efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     97.00
 Appraisal                                                 20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     98.00
 ICR Estimate                                              21.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project objective is rated substantial. Efficacy is rated substantial. Efficiency is also rated
substantial. On the basis of these sub-ratings, the overall project outcome rating is satisfactory. By project
completion, SEDAPAL was able to achieve the PDO of improving the continuity, efficiency and reliability of WSS
services for 442,292 direct beneficiaries. According to the ICR (paragraph 66, page 18), SEDAPAL remains
strongly committed to improving its commercial and operational efficiency by continuing to reduce NRW levels,
expand household metering, increase billing and collection, implement increases in tariffs, and invest in
rehabilitation. These actions have resulted in company-wide gains, such as the increases in (i) the cost recovery
rate from 122 percent (2010) to 139 percent (2018); and (ii) the operating margin from 18 percent (2010) to 28
percent (2019. However, this strengthening of SEDAPAL’s capacity and financial sustainability are at
substantial risk because of the COVID pandemic, as discussed under Risks to Development Outcome below.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

In recent years, the sustainability of the project's works and investments seemed likely, given the sustained
improvements in SEDAPAL's financial position. However, the COVID pandemic has placed this
sustainability at substantial risk, given its direct consequences on SEDAPAL's finances brought about by the
following measures introduced by GOP in April 2020:

      water bills were deferred
                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



        service suspensions were forbidden
        tariff adjustments were frozen
        payment waivers were given to vulnerable groups
        the alternative use of investment funds for the COVID response was authorized

The Bank assessed the impacts of these measures on Peru’s water utilities by comparing pre-COVID (2019)
and COVID-19 (2020) data. SEDAPAL reported the following negative impacts and risks:

      operating expenses increased by 6.7 percent since water access and service levels had to be
       maintained
      bill collection decreased by 20 percent, which reduces funds to cover operating costs
      profitability was reduced, thus decreasing financial liquidity for O&M and future investments
      future capacity to provide WSS services in Lima that meet efficiency and quality standards has been
       put at risk

To mitigate these impacts and risks, GOP transferred US$55 million to SEDAPAL to cover the costs of using
tankers to provide free drinking water to vulnerable populations that have no water access. GOP also
prioritized WSS projects, which are labor-intensive, in its economic reactivation program. SEDAPAL has also
been reviewing and re-prioritizing its investment plans to achieve further operational and commercial
efficiency gains.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design was adequate as a relatively straightforward WSS infrastructure project that had
  already benefited from many years of previous Bank financial support in the sector. The design was also
  closely aligned with SEDAPAL’s priorities, while specific activities and processes took into account the
  lessons learned from previous Bank projects in the Peruvian WSS sector. The ICR (paragraph 63, page
  17) reports that: “The Project was structured in line with the capacity of the client and included “value
  added” activities under Component 2 that drew upon the Bank’s global experience and access to sector
  experts.” This review finds that the project’s theory of change and results framework were adequate for
  tracking and measuring implementation progress. However, the risk of bureaucratic slowness was
  underestimated. A coordination mechanism was also lacking to harmonize safeguards, procurement,
  reporting and other administrative details among the three parallel co-financiers (Bank, JICA, and KfW).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



 The ICR (paragraph 64, page 18) reports that: “The Task Team provided close, hands-on supervision and
 demonstrated flexibility and creativity in order to support SEDAPAL in achieving the Project’s objectives.”
 As an example, the ICR indicates that the Bank held bimonthly technical missions when the Inspection
 Committee became responsible for supervision. Another concrete example is when the Bank project team
 authorized the use of project funds to conduct a technical study and find solutions for the damaged primary
 trunk that conveyed water from Huachipa Water Treatment Plant to the project’s targeted
 sectors. Although beyond the project’s scope, the Bank project team provided the additional and tailored
 assistance to SEDAPAL and other sector institutions (e.g., SUNASS) in the areas of utility performance,
 tariff structure, commercial management and results-based contracts. Significant supervision
 shortcomings included the delays in strengthening the Borrower’s M&E and the setting of an over-
 ambitious target for reducing water pipe breakages during the Additional Financing.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s outcome indicators were appropriate but were not comprehensive due to lack of clarity on
 how sanitation and institutional outcomes would be measured. The key indicators for measuring
 achievement of the PDO (to improve efficiency, continuity, and reliability) in the project area were:

       OI 1: Volume of water saved (m3/year)
       OI 2: Number of daily hours of water services (hours/day)
       OI 3: Annual incidence of water pipe breakages per km of water supply network (breaks/km/year)
       OI 4: Annual incidence of sewerage blockages per km of sewerage network in the
        (blockages/km/year)
       O5: Number of learning events on strategic planning and management

 OI 1 measures efficiency; OI 2 measures continuity; and OI 3 and OI 4 measure reliability.

 The project also included intermediate results indicators for each of the components to measure factors
 that contribute to PDO achievement. The Special Projects Team (EPE) was responsible for monitoring
 implementation progress and producing semi-annual reports while various SEDAPAL management teams
 were charged with collecting data on specific indicators.

 There were some shortcomings, however. The PAD did not define efficiency, reliability, and continuity for
 sanitation services. It was unclear how the PDO related to sanitation would be measured just by a single
 indicator, i.e., “Annual incidence of sewerage blockages per km of sewerage network in the Project area.”
 Likewise, there was no outcome indicator to assess the achievement of measures under (under
 Component 2) to improve SEDAPAL’s commercial and operational efficiency of the utility. The definition of

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



 how “reaching stakeholders with information” would be measured was also unclear. The indicator target for
 service reliability, i.e., the annual incidence of pipe breakages per km of water supply, was overly
 ambitious. According to the ICR (para 25, page 8) ”the average level of pipe breakages per km of water
 supply in SEDAPAL is 0.18, and the level of pipe breakages in top-tier utilities like Chile’s Andean WSS
 Company (Aguas Andinas S.A.) is 0.16, and Uruguay’s WSS Utility (Obras Sanitarias del Estado) is 0.51.”



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E performance was rated satisfactory during the initial years of implementation. In 2017, however, the
  M&E rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory because of inconsistent measurement of
  indicators and the absence of formal Project status reports. These shortcomings resulted from changes in
  EPE’s management, unclear reporting responsibilities, and the lack of an established M&E system within
  EPE. The Bank task team provided M&E training, which included an EPE member. Consequently, most
  of these issues were resolved when that EPE member started the regular and systematic monitoring and
  collection of data from the various management units. To support the Inspection Committee, the Bank
  team monitored implementation progress through bimonthly missions. By project closing, the collection of
  M&E data was systematic and methodologically sound, and EPE was reporting adequately on all project
  indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  EPE and the Task Team utilized M&E data to inform project supervision and implementation, as
  reflected in the aide memoires, Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and project
  restructuring documents. The Bank Team utilized M&E data to establish indicator targets for the
  Additional Financing (AF), which were generally made more ambitious in light of the good progress
  during implementation and the expanded project scope that the AF allowed. One shortcoming, however,
  was that the water pipe breakages target was erroneously set at an unrealistic level, as indicated above
  under M&E Design. Although this was recognized as an error, the Bank team and EPE did not modify
  the indicator during implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The three Bank safeguard policies that this Category B project triggered include Environmental Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) .
   The project’s activities included standard, medium-scale infrastructure works with potential short-term
   environmental risks and impacts that relatively straightforward measures can prevent or mitigate. Chance
   finds during excavation works were also deemed possible. A mix of mitigation measures were developed
   within the framework of an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The EIA assessed institutional
   capacity and necessary actions to strengthen environmental procedures. An Environmental Management

                                                                                                Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



  Plan (EMP) was also developed that included best practices for construction intended to minimize impacts
  of civil works. Waste management, conservation, and pollution prevention programs were also put in place.
  The EIA and its Addendum have been posted on the Bank’s website since December 21, 2010. According
  to the ICR (paragraph 59, page 16): “Overall implementation of OP 4.01 and OP 4.11 was rated as
  satisfactory throughout execution.”

  Given that some people could be temporarily relocated and economically affected during the
  implementation of work, a Resettlement Framework was developed and disclosed on the Bank’s website on
  December 1, 2010. SEDAPAL adopted an official policy on land acquisition and involuntary resettlement
  that was geared specifically toward managing street vendors. Two Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM)
  were put in place: (i) a Feedback GRM that followed SEDAPAL’s protocol and policies; and (ii) a Social
  Management Strategic Plan (SMSP) to improve the social supervision before, during, and after completion
  of the works. The ICR (paragraph 60, page 17) reports that: “Overall, the social safeguard performance
  rating of the Project was Satisfactory throughout implementation following the World Bank social safeguards
  policies.”




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. During initial implementation, there were delays in automating and modernizing
  SEDAPAL’s financial system, which was being shifted from Excel-based accounting to a more formal
  accounting software. The bi-annual Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IFR) were acceptable and
  adequate for financial monitoring, although they were submitted to the Bank with minor delays. The audit
  reports generally included unmodified (clean) opinions and were acceptable to the Bank. The ICR
  (paragraph 61, page 17) reports that: “The Financial Management (FM) performance was rated Moderately
  Satisfactory for the majority of implementation.”

  Procurement. SEDAPAL showed its steady procurement capacity throughout project implementation.
  Procurement processes and actions generally complied with the Bank’s guidelines and procedures. One
  issue was the setting of uniform minimum qualifying standards for the bidding documents for the Lima
  Norte II works to be financed by the Bank, JICA and KfW, which resulted in significant delays during the
  contracting process. Independent Procurement Reviews and Procurement Post Reviews were carried out,
  which confirmed the adequacy of procurement arrangements. The reviews did not bring out any major
  issues. Nonetheless, the Bank made the following recommendations, which SEDAPAL implemented, to
  further enhance procurement performance: (i) the updating of procurement information in the Systematic
  Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP); and (ii) the enhancement of the filing systems for
  procurement records. To further build capacity, the Bank also conducted several training
  workshops focused on the application of the Bank’s Procurement Guidelines, bid evaluation, STEP, and
  the International Federation of Consulting Engineers’ contracts. The ICR (paragraph 62, page 17)
  indicates that: “Project procurement performance was rated as Satisfactory for the majority of
  implementation.”




                                                                                               Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pages 19-20) provides several lessons that were drawn from the project's implementation
experience. The main lessons are presented below, with some paraphrasing from IEG. To the first
lesson, IEG would add that the theory of change also needs to be agreed and adhered to by the
parallel co-financiers.

Projects that involve parallel financing require comprehensive planning and close
coordination among the financiers to achieve efficient and effective implementation. The
Bank, JICA and KfW built upon best practices and knowledge, thus enabling a wider development
impact. SEDAPAL, however, had to manage differing policies and procedures among the donors
and faced the challenge of synchronizing their various implementation timelines since the
investments were interdependent, most notably with the supervision contract. Among other
measures, close communication with stakeholders helped overcome the potential coordination
roadblock. Similar future projects need to establish from the outset streamlined procedures and a
coordination mechanism among the cofinanciers. Moreover, the parallel projects need to be
designed and planned such that each intervention area has its own set of works, contracting
arrangements and independent financing sources.

Water infrastructure projects can be implemented following internationally accepted
environmental and social (E&S) standards. Complex WSS projects require comprehensive E&S
schemes. The project implementing agency should disseminate world-class practices and
approaches for E&S management to all stakeholders, including those under parallel-financed
projects and beneficiaries. The Project streamlined the social approaches and environmental health
and safety (EHS) guidelines that enhanced social supervision during implementation. Future similar
projects could benefit by: (i) closely aligning project technical design and environmental and social
instruments, thereby facilitating the proper budgeting of E&S activities; (ii) adopting smart
technologies and platforms to optimize data collection; and (iii) developing a strategic plan to

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



systematize the institution-wide tracking and monitoring of compliance with social management
objectives and activities.

Competitive approaches based on delivery of results can significantly boost operational
efficacy, efficiency, and organizational know-how. Under the project, SEDAPAL designed and
implemented results-based contracts that led to a significant reduction of commercial losses. Rather
than hire just one firm, SEDAPAL hired several top-tier, international firms to carry out commercial
activities in different areas of Lima. This led firms to compete, which heightened efforts to achieve
positive results. The firms also brought global expertise on commercial practices for SEDAPAL to
observe and incorporate in its own operations. This competitive approach was key to the successful
reduction of commercial losses.

Bank-client partnerships can emerge from long-term engagement. The World Bank began
working with SEDAPAL on WSS rehabilitation projects in the early nineties. Those three decades of
engagement have led to a relationship of trust and partnership, stemming from: (i) the positive
results of past projects and analytic/advisory work; (ii) smooth and consistent communication
between the Bank and SEDAPAL teams; and (iii) a shared sense of commitment and responsibility
for achieving growth. A key lesson for building a partnership is to avoid presenting just the best
solution from the outset; instead, a range of solutions and case studies should be provided while
allowing the client to select the option that best fits its on-the-ground realities. This relationship has
permitted the Bank to maximize its contributions as a knowledge bank while adding value through
infrastructure investments.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was very well prepared and clearly written. It focused on providing quantitative evidence, while
adhering closely to the theory of change developed by the ICR team (one was not prepared at appraisal). The
theory of change was well developed and credible in (i) showing the causal links from inputs to outcomes and
(ii) attributing outcomes to project's activities. The ICR focused on evaluative findings, and provided in a
succinct manner only the necessary background information. It was also candid in bringing out the project's
shortcomings. The report also generally complied with the OPCS guidelines on ICR preparation.

Meanwhile, with regards to IEG’s comment that “ .. implementation delays would mitigate against
assigning "high" performance especially when the implementing agency has already received previous
technical assistance …...”, our country counterparts (who also reviewed the ICRR)

One shortcoming is that the ICR's High rating for relevance of objectives and High rating for efficiency do not
seem warranted. Substantial ratings for both seem more appropriate. While the PDOs are certainly important
for Peru, the project is part of a long series of Bank-supported WSS projects over the past decades, building
upon knowledge already developed in the sector and a long partnership with the implementing agency, Also,
the EIRR for the project is within the range seen for these these types of projects. Moreover, implementation

                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Optimization of Lima Wat & Sewerage (P117293)



delays would mitigate against assigning "high" performance especially when the implementing agency has
already received previous technical assistance and institutional strengthening support for previous Bank
projects. In acknowledging this limitation, the observation is made noting that in this type of project,
unforeseeable events, caused by external factors, arise and may delay the implementation of project activities.
In this particular case, in order to overcome the challenges related to the lack of supervision at the beginning of
the works, an Inspection Committee for the Lima Norte II works was set up, which allowed the works to start
without difficulty and this ultimately contributed to the project goals. Also notable, the ICR did not follow the
OPCS guidelines for assigning outcome ratings, because its ratings of High for relevance of objectives,
Substantial for efficacy, and High for efficiency, would have led to an overall outcome rating of Highly
Satisfactory. This rating, however, would not seem justified given that two PDO indicators were nearly but not
fully achieved, the project encountered delays, and some institutional shortcomings and challenges remain.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 18
