     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022685

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P155256                                    Pacific Resilience Program

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Vanuatu                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56900                                  30-Nov-2020                                           1,500,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2015                                30-Nov-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            1,500,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             1,454,584.57                                               0.00

 Actual                                         1,500,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Stephen Hutton               Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated September 4, 2015
   (Schedule 1, page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page xxviii):

   " To strengthen the financial protection of the Republic of Vanuatu".

   This project was the first phase of the Pacific Resilience Program (PREP), a multi-phase "Series of
   Projects". The Phase 1 countries are the Republic of Vanuatu (ROV), Samoa, Tonga, the Republic of

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



   Marshall Islands, the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS), and the Secretariat of the Pacific
   Community. The PREP phase 1 included four components: (i) Strengthening early warning and
   preparedness; (ii) Risk reduction and resilient investments; (iii) Disaster risk financing; and (iv) Project
   management. The six projects included within the PREP phase 1 were formulated around these four
   components, although the participating countries were not required to include investments in each
   component.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The ROV participated in a single component of the PREM program.

   Component 3. Disaster Risk Financing. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.6 million. This amount
   was disbursed.

   This component aimed to support ROV's insurance premia for disaster risk financing, thereby enabling the
   country's continued participation in the regional catastrophe insurance scheme against tropical cyclones
   and earthquakes. This work would build on the previous Pacific Catastrophic Risk Insurance pilot, which
   provided technical assistance on public financial management of natural disasters to Pacific Island
   Countries (PICs), and parametric catastrophe risk insurance pool of the participating PICs. ther



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$$1.6 million. The actual cost was as estimated.

   Financing. The project was financed by an IDA Credit of US$1.50 million (including a national IDA
   allocation of US$0.5 million and a regional IDA allocation of U$1.0 million). This amount was disbursed. The
   ICR (page 29) notes that there were fluctuations between the Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) and the US$,
   and the difference of SDR 32,045 (approximately US$45,415) undisbursed funds were cancelled.

   Recipient Contribution. The recipient contribution was estimated at US$0.15 million. According to the
   clarifications provided by the team, the recipient contribution was as planned.

   Dates. The project was approved on June 19, 2015, became effective on September 25, 2015, and closed
   as scheduled on November 30, 2020.

   Other changes. The main changes made through a Level 2 project restructuring on October 5, 2017, are
   as follows:




                                                                                                        Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



         An adjustment in implementation, procurement and financial arrangement was made on October 5,
          2017, so that funds and contracting for the insurance would operate through the newly created
          Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company rather than through the World Bank Treasury.
         The financial management arrangements removed the reference to the existing arrangement, and
          clear responsibilities were specified for the ROV with regard to making the contractual payments and
          ensuring proper recording, reporting and audit of the transactions.
         The procurement arrangements were changed, enabling the direct contracting of PCIRC on an
          exceptional basis.
         The Financing Agreement was amended to include a covenant that required ROV to enter into an
          insurance contract with PCRIC or other catastrophe risk insurance provider to obtain insurance
          coverage of disaster and climate-related events.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. The ROV is a small, remote Pacific Island country, located in the "Pacific Ring of Fire"
and at the center of the Pacific "Cyclone belt". This location results in a relatively high frequency of volcanic
eruptions, cyclones, earthquakes, storm surges, river flooding and landslides. For example, severe tropical
cyclone Pam struck on 22 islands of the ROV on March 13, 2015. Damages and losses in the wake of this
cyclone totaled US$449 million, which was equivalent to 64% of the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). According to the ranking of countries of Commonwealth Vulnerability Index, ROV is one of the
world's most vulnerable countries, due to its exposure to geophysical and hydro-meteorological hazards
and its limited capacity to prepare for and respond to risks. Catastrophe risk modelling indicated than on a
long term average, ROV was expected to incur on average, US$48 million per year in losses due to
earthquakes and tropical cyclones, and in the next 50 years ROV had a 50% chance of experiencing a loss
over US$330 million and a 10% chance of loss over US$540 million. Therefore, the need for strengthening
financial protection was important in the country context.

Government and Regional strategy. The PDO was consistent with ROV's Disaster Risk Reduction and
Disaster Management National Action Plan (2006-2016) at appraisal. The PDO is relevant to the ROV's
Climate change and Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy for 2016-2030. This strategy underscored the need
for developing financial protection strategies that could improve the institutional capacity and awareness on
financial disaster risk management and strengthen ROV's capacity to respond to disasters.

Bank strategy. The PDO was consistent with the World Bank Engagement Note for Disaster and Climate
Resilient Development Programming in the Pacific Islands (August 2014), and the Policy and Practice Note
(PPN) "Acting Today for Tomorrow" (2012). The engagement note and the PPN highlighted the need for
developing financial protection strategies that could improve the institutional capacity and awareness on
financial disaster risk management in Pacific Islands. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank's Regional
Partnership Framework for the Nine Pacific countries for 2017-2023. The focus area three of the framework
articulated the need for protecting incomes and livelihoods through strengthening resilience to natural
disasters and climate change.




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



               Prior Bank experience. The Bank financed the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot Program
               (PCRAFI) program in 2013. The objective of this program was to ascertain the viability of market-based
               sovereign catastrophe risk transfer instruments to reduce the financial vulnerability to natural disasters of
               four pacific island countries, including the ROV. This was to be achieved by providing finance to the
               participating countries to purchase catastrophe risk coverage against tropical cyclones and earthquakes.
               This pilot funded insurance premia totaling US$0.85 million for the ROV over three years for coverage from
               January 2013 to October 2015. This project continued insurance coverage of ROV under the pilot program,
               rather than introducing a brand new initiative.

               The objective might have been better framed to strengthen financial protection from hazards, which could
               have more clearly delimited the scope of the project. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is assessed as
               substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the financial protection of the ROV.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change.

                             The project strategy was to improve financial disaster risk management of the ROV, through transferring risk
                             from the ROV to international markets. The theory of change envisioned that financing part of the ROV's
                             premia for disaster risk financing would enable ROV to continue participating in a regional catastrophe risk
                             insurance program, and thereby transfer its risk from natural disasters to international markets. Under the
                             insurance coverage, the ROV would receive payment within a month of the occurrence of the cyclone or
                             earthquake. By participating in a regional insurance program, ROV had access to an insurance instrument
                             that did not otherwise exist, and with lower insurance premia than a simulated price for individual insurance
                             from the market. These outcomes were to aid in strengthening the financial protection of the ROV from
                             disasters caused in part by human exposure and vulnerability.

                             Though it is difficult to be definitive within the scope of this validation, the available insurance instrument may
                             not have been a strong fit to the ROV's risk profile. The instrument was developed to suit the Pacific Islands
                             region as a whole. It concentrated on tropical cyclones and earthquakes, because these were the main
                             disaster risks for the region, and also because they are more insurable risks, with a long history of data and
                             advanced modelling that allowed for reasonable estimation of risks. The ROV had not requested coverage for
                             volcanic eruptions at the time of appraisal, and the Government could not access funds from this instrument
                             in the wake of the significant volcanic eruptions in Ambae in November 2017. With the availability of a

                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 12
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



                            broader suite of instruments that included protection against a wider range of natural hazards to which the
                            ROV is exposed (such as volcanic eruptions or health emergencies such as COVID - 19), the government
                            elected to utilize a range of tools to support their post-disaster financial resilience and withdraw from the
                            regional insurance pool at the close of this project.

                            Outputs.

                            The project paid for cyclone and earthquake risks as expected. The ROV's insurance premium rate under the
                            project was 50 percent cheaper on average compared to the simulated market price the ROV would have had
                            to pay if it had sought insurance individually outside the program (The price was simulated as no market
                            insurance existed and pricing would have depended on negotiations with an insurer).

                            Outcomes.

                            ROV received financial protection from cyclones and earthquakes during the project projection. As
                            no covered (insurance) event (such as due to tropical cyclone or earthquakes) occurred
                            during implementation, the ROV did not receive a payout during the project period. However, the ROV did
                            receive a payout under the pilot project within seven days in the wake of tropical cyclone Pam in 2015. The
                            other participating country Tonga received payout within 10 days of the tropical cyclone in 2014, and within
                            seven days in the wake of cyclone Gita in 2018: this suggests that the financial protection was genuine, and
                            the insurance would have paid out had a covered event occurred.

                            However, the government's decision to discontinue purchase of catastrophe insurance means that this
                            financial protection will not be sustained. The government chose to seek financial protection from other IDA
                            funds through other instruments, including through two Contingent Emergency Response Component
                            (CERC) in Investment Project Financing projects, and through a Development Policy Financing Operation
                            with a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO) that would provide immediate liquidity to address
                            shocks related to natural disasters and/or health-related events, that became available to IDA countries on
                            July 1, 2017. This decision was not unreasonable given that the government felt hat the catastrophe
                            insurance instrument was not a good fit to their risk profile.

                            According to the clarifications provided by the team, the project dialogue helped the government to refine its
                            approach to financial protection and consideration of instruments to manage residual risk,
                            thereby strengthened its capacity to respond to and recover from disasters. The ICR also notes that project
                            facilitated knowledge exchange within the region. However, the ICR provides no evidence to back this
                            assertion.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



  The project outcomes were achieved in a narrow sense within the project lifetime, but the cancellation of the
  insurance contract means that the project has limited impact. This constitutes a moderate shortcoming.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency.

A traditional economic analysis (which concentrates on expected values and implicitly assumes risk neutrality)
does not well capture well the efficiency of a project on insurance, financial protection, and risk transfer.

The PAD (page 16) for the PREP project did not include an economic analysis for this project. This analysis
covered only components one and two of the Pacific Resilience Program. Component three, which this project
financed, was not included. Due to the lack of an ex ante economic analysis the ICR (page 14) did not conduct
an ex post analysis - but an ex ante analysis of insurance would not have been meaningful (else it would
incorrectly conclude that any insurance contract that did pay out was a poor return).

In 2018, the expected return from disaster risk insurance from the regional pool over a five-year coverage period
was estimated. The analysis showed that the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) ranged from 133% if only
one severe disaster occurred during this period (16% probability based on catastrophe risk models), to 226% or
more if at least one extreme disaster occurred (given a 10% probability). In the case that no disaster was to take
place (a 59% probability) there was to be no payout. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
estimated at 23%. An average Net Present Value (NPV) of US$0.1 million (ranging from US$ negative 2.3
million if no disaster occurred, to US$9.4 million if one extreme disaster took place) was calculated using a
discount rate of 10%, indicating that this project was at least marginally worthwhile on strict expected value
terms, which does not capture the benefits from risk transfer.

Administrative and Operational efficiency.

The project did not encounter any implementation delays, with the single annual transactions carried out by the
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MFED).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                               23.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO was substantial, given its alignment with the Bank's most recent Regional Partnership
Framework for the Nine Pacific countries, including ROV for 2017-2023. Efficacy was substantial, but with
moderate shortcomings as the financial protection provided by the insurance contract may not have been a
strong fit to ROV's disaster risk profile, and as the protection was not continued following the
government's cessation of the insurance contract. Efficiency was assessed as substantial. Taking these ratings
into account, the overall outcome is assessed as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The financial protection under this project will not be sustained, as the government chose not to continue
with the regional insurance mechanism. However, the governments remains committed to other forms of
disaster risk management, as demonstrated by the fact that the Bank is currently financing two Contingent
Emergency Response Component Investment Project Financing Operations and one Development Policy
Financing Operation with a Catastrophe-Drawdown Option (CAT-DDO) that would provide immediate
liquidity in the event of a natural disaster or health related events. In addition. the ROV continues to be
Council Member of the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Company (PCRIC). This position allows the ROV
to advocate for development of post-disaster financing instruments that are a better fit for the ROU.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design took into account the lessons from the Caribbean Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility
  (CCRIF), the world's first multi-country risk pool and insurance program. Lessons incorporated at design
  included: (i) recognizing that the catastrophe risk insurance cannot cover all disaster losses, this
  project combined catastrophe risk insurance with other financial solutions, as part of a wide package for
  financial protection; (ii) this project offered an integrated financial protection strategy beyond parametric
  insurance; (iii) To ensure clear project oversight and/or coordination and to avoid fragmentation,
  the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MFED) was in charge of project implementation;


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



  and (iv) Given the weak implementation capacity in ROV, the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS)
  was to provide technical and fiduciary support (PAD, page 82).

  The multi-country engagement under a regional program allowed for the simultaneous preparation of
  projects for each participating country. This facilitated efficient dialogue across the region and allowed for
  the relatively swift concurrent processing of all projects under the umbrella program without significant
  project delays (ICR, paragraph 42). The first disbursement occurred less than three weeks after project
  effectiveness. This indicated that the critical measures were already in place before the project was
  approved. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were minor shortcomings in monitoring and evaluation (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paragraph 61) notes that the activities required minimal supervision as the project financed only
 activity, involving the direct selection of an eligible insurer and annual payment of insurance premia. The
 project implementation support was efficient with total staff costs (approximately US$13,600) over the
 project implementation period, commensurate to the simplicity of project design and activities. The
 supervision team comprised relevant technical experts in disaster risk management and financial protection
 and a small team of fiduciary and safeguards specialists. The ICR (paragraph 61) notes that the turnover of
 three Task Team Leaders (TTLs) did not impact implementation negatively, and there was high proactivity
 to follow up and resolve implementation issues. This was demonstrated through the 2017 project
 restructuring, which was processed and approved within a month of receiving the request letter from the
 government.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objective was clearly specified, and the theory of change was adequate. The ICR (paragraph
 52) noted that a conventional M&E approach (input-output-outcome) was not entirely appropriate for
 disaster resilience projects such as this one, because "results" cannot be seen in the absence of a
 catastrophe event. The selected indicators measured whether the participating Pacific Island countries

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



 have received payment within a month of the occurrence of the insured event and if the premiums are
 lower than coverage bought individually in the market.

 However, the project's M&E did not include a qualitative assessment and indicators on several other
 aspects such as: (i) measuring the government's gradual increase in annual contribution; and (ii)
 measuring capacity strengthening.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Finance and Economic Management (MOFEM) and the Pacific Catastrophe Risk
  Insurance Company (PCRIC) monitored the insurance payments of the participating countries and the
  insurance premia.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (page 19), the project monitored whether insurance payouts were made to
  participating countries under the regional catastrophe risk insurance scheme following significant
  disaster events. The amount and time to payout were used to help assess the performance of the
  regional risk pool and to inform continual refinement of insurance products and coverage.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The first phase of the PREP was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World
   Bank safeguard policies. Seven safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environment Assessment
   (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forest (OP/BP 4.36); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09);
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10); and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly-
   disclosed for Samoa, Tonga, Fiji. However, no safeguard policies were triggered for ROV, as the project
   supported only insurance, and no potential negative effects were expected. Hence no program level ESMF
   was prepared for the ROV. The ICR (paragraph 55) notes that the project's social and environmental
   impacts were positive, as it helped to manage residual risk and strengthen the government's capacity to
   respond to and recover from disasters.




b. Fiduciary Compliance



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



   Financial management. The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that the financial management for the project was
   rated as satisfactory throughout implementation until November 2018. when the rating was downgraded
   due to an outstanding audit. At the time of project closing, all audits from 2017 to closing date remained
   outstanding and the financial management was rated as moderately unsatisfactory. The Ministry of
   Finance and Economic Management (MFEM) were advised that they could combine the outstanding audits
   to one audit covering 2017-2020, since there was one transaction in 2017 for the payment of insurance
   premia, which was the last project payment. However, at the time of the preparation of the ICR, the audit
   had not been submitted. The ICR also notes that in May 2021 MFEM was notified that failure to submit the
   outstanding audit would result in the project being closed in non-compliance with the terms of the
   Financing Agreement. The MFEM were also notified in writing that while the audit remains outstanding, the
   Bank will not proceed with new operations, additional financing, or project extensions for any projects for
   which the MFEM is the implementing agency. According to the information provided by the team, the final
   audit was not submitted to date.

   Procurement management. The ICR (paragraph 59) notes that for majority of the project's duration,
   procurement risk was rated low and procurement performance was rated as satisfactory. During
   September 2015 (effectiveness) and until October 2017, no procurement was done by MFEM which was in
   line with the project implementation arrangements. On November 2017, MFEM procured the insurance
   services from PCRIC via Direct Contracting, in line with the arrangements outlined with the Level 2
   restructuring of October 2017.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Efficacy was substantial but with
                                                                               moderate shortcomings leading
                                                                               to the overall moderately
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               satisfactory rating, given
                                                                               substantial relevance and
                                                                               efficiency.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                 Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)



The ICR drew several lessons based on the project experience, including:

1. Use of IDA resources can help countries test and access new insurance instruments. In
this project, the Republic of Vanuatu (ROV) was able to obtain insurance for disasters associated
with tropical cyclones and earthquakes at a lower premium, due to the countries participating in an
insurance pool, rather than obtaining insurance individually. In addition, the ROV was able to share
its experience with and learn from other countries in a similar situation resulting in re-evaluating the
suitability of available catastrophe insurance products.

2. It is important to monitor and evaluate the extent to which a country improves its
understanding of post-disaster risk financing products to better measure efficacy. Projects
supporting regional catastrophe risk insurance schemes could be not measured against their to
payout for insured events; however they could measure the success of capacity-building activities or
an increase in percentage of counterpart funding of the insurance premia.

3. Over time, there is need for Pacific Island Countries to develop their own, institutionalized
financial protection measures that do not rely from donors. Further engagement by the Bank is
required in this area, and the Bank should continue to explore options for parametric insurance for
governments which include reduced premia, and/or provide coverage for a broad range of disaster
events.

IEG finds that:

A traditional economic analysis is not very effective for assessing the efficiency of
instruments that offer financial protection. The Bank could investigate alternative metrics for
demonstrating project efficiency.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The project provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also the ICR is internally
consistent and concise and provided useful lessons. The theory of change provided in the ICR is adequate. The
ICR is concise and the main body of the text adheres to the recommended length.

The ICR would have benefitted from making clear judgements about whether there was a design failure in
terms of supporting an instrument that was not a good fit to ROV's risk context or not.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 12
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Pacific Resilience Program (P155256)




                                                                    Page 12 of 12
