     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0022688

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P144183                                   Sustainable Landscape Management Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mauritania                                Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0663                                  31-Jan-2021                                            4,801,753.11

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Aug-2015                               31-Jan-2021

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            4,810,000.00                                     4,810,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             4,810,000.00                                     4,801,753.11

 Actual                                         4,809,190.08                                     4,801,753.11




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa               J. W. van Holst               Christopher David Nelson       IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to strengthen sustainable landscape management in
   targeted productive ecosystems in Mauritania" (PAD, para 16). The formulation of the PDO in the Grant
   Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) was identical to that in the PAD, except for that it addressed Mauritania as
   "the Recipient’s territory."




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



   According to the PAD (para 17), “sustainable landscape management” was defined as the use of land and
   water resources, considering both the needs of production and service functions of the ecosystem within the
   larger landscape.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Sustainable Landscape Management Knowledge, Governance and Partnerships
   (Estimate: US$1.31 million GEF grant; Actual: US$0.93 million GEF grant, 71 percent of the estimate)
   intended to achieve expected outcomes of strengthened Sustainable Landscape Management (SLM)
   knowledge base among public and private stakeholders from local to national level and improved
   governance system and partnerships for the development of the gum Arabic sector (PAD, para 22) through
   the following three sub-components.

   Sub-component 1.1: Building Sustainable Landscape Management Capacity, Governing Tools and
   Knowledge Sharing intended to support institution al and capacity strengthening of national and local
   governmental agencies to mainstream SLM into the regeneration of degraded gum Arabic ecosystems. The
   sub-component also provided training to the communities involved in gum Arabic production, supported the
   Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD) in formulating governance tools, financed
   awareness-raising activities on social and environmental requirements, supported regional exchanges
   between targeted local SLM associations, held workshops and outreach activities, and developed
   knowledge-sharing products to reach a larger audience and make the knowledge accessible.

   Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Monitoring of Ecosystem Services intended to support the MEDD and
   local partners to monitor changes in production of Gum Arabic and other non-timber forest products and
   fodder, and changes in biodiversity conservation, water and soil conservation, and vegetation and soil
   carbon storage capacity using a participatory approach. To achieve this, this sub-component established a
   monitoring system to evaluate the impact of the SLM practices on vegetation cover implemented under sub-
   component 2.1, supported an in-depth assessment of the geographic distribution of gum Arabic producing
   ecosystems and the potential for future up-scaling of regeneration practices in terms of water availability,
   and supported the local authorities in the three participating remote regions to procure materials,
   equipment, and vehicles that were necessary for the operationalization of the M&E system and the
   monitoring of project activities.

   Sub-component 1.3: Enabling Development of a Sustainable Gum Arabic Value Chain initiated the
   promotion for the development of a sustainable Gum Arabic value chain by evaluating the current situation
   and making policy and regulatory recommendations for improvement.

   Component 2: Sustainable Landscape Management Practice (Estimate: US$3.26 million GEF grant;
   Actual: US$3.39 million GEF grant, 104 percent of the estimate) intended to achieve expected outcomes of
   strengthened management of gum Arabic producing landscapes and enhanced integration of SLM


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



  considerations in local development planning in the regions of Trarza, Brakna and Gorgol (PAD, para 27)
  through the following two sub-components.

  Sub-component 2.1: Investing in Sustainable Landscape Management provided sub-grants to targeted
  communes to finance SLM investments in the selected 60 sites along two categories of sub-projects: (i)
  Participatory SLM investments which supported the regeneration of degraded gum Arabic producing
  ecosystems; and (ii) Investments which responded to immediate local needs and enhanced sound
  environmental management of land and water resources; activities under this category were funded in
  conjunction with the first category investments.

  Sub-component 2.2: Integrating Sustainable Landscape Management Practices in Local Development
  Planning supported the integration of project objectives and activities into local communal plans for mutual
  reinforcement, in collaboration with the Local Government Development Project (P127543, FY2013-19) and
  the Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (P147674, FY2015-21). Sub-regional local development
  plans integrating SLM, each one concerning a number of communes in one of the regions Trarza, Brakna
  and Gorgol, were to be developed while building on previous efforts where possible.

  Component 3: Project Management (Estimate: US$0.24 million GEF grant, Actual: US$0.48 million GEF
  grant, 200 percent of the estimate) intended to provide project support by financing: (i) a project
  management and administration training workshop, including procurement; (ii) a project launch workshop;
  (iii) the hiring of an M&E consultant and a technical advisor for capacity enhancement within the responsible
  agency; (iv) hiring of an external auditing firm to carry out annual external audits; and (v) operating costs
  associated with project management at the central and local levels, such as preparation of annual work
  plans, procurement plans and budgets, coordination of activities, preparation of progress and financial
  reports, procurement and financial management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal, the project was estimated to cost US$24.01 million (PAD, Table 11, page 38).
  At project closing, the actual cost was US$23.93 million (ICR, Table 5, page 47).

  Financing: At appraisal, the project was planned to be financed by US$4.81 million grant from the Global
  Environment Facility (GEF), US$1.35 million in-kind contribution from the Government, US$11.22 million
  parallel financing from Local Government Support Project (P127543), and US$6.63 million parallel financing
  from Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (P147674) (PAD, para 33). At project closing, the project
  was financed by US$4.80 million grant from the GEF, US$0.13 million direct contribution from the
  Government, and total of US$19.00 million baseline (parallel) financing from seven projects by the World
  Bank, the European Union, the African Development Bank, and the International Fund for Agricultural
  Development (ICR, Table 5, page 47).

  Dates: The project was approved on August 4, 2015, and became effective on December 17, 2015. The
  Mid-Term Review was published on February 6, 2019. The project was closed on January 31, 2021, which
  was the original closing date.

  No restructuring was made during the project.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. Mauritania is mostly a desert country, with a population of about 3.5 million and prior to
this project’s appraisal had a GDP per capita of about US$1,270 in 2013 (PAD, para 1). More than two-
fifths of the population lived below the national poverty line. Both extreme levels of poverty and highest
number of people living in poverty (70 percent) were found in rural areas. Discoveries of minerals caused a
rapid growth of the mining and extractive industry to surpass the livestock industry in terms of industry
ratios against GDP (accounting for 38 percent and 20 percent of GDP in 2013, respectively) (PAD, para 1).
As growth was driven more by the mining industry, an inclusive pattern of growth that had been observed in
the country was reversed (CPS FY2014-2016, para iii). The country’s natural resource wealth, estimated to
account for 30 percent of the total national wealth stock, has a potential to be translated into inclusive
growth with appropriate reforms (CPS FY2014-2016, para 5).

Sector Context. Mauritania is one of the Sahelian countries most severely affected by the periods of
drought that have been occurring since 1968. The Government aims to incorporate desertification control
and sustainable natural resources management into an overall sustainable development process through a
range of planning and management tools and various donor-supported projects aimed at ensuring
sustainable conservation and development of natural resources. However, most initiatives have failed to
meet expectations due to weak implementation, management, and monitoring and evaluation capabilities.
Gum Arabic production is known to help fight desertification due to its adaptability to arid environments, as
well as its soil enriching and soil and water retention impact. Mauritania was the second largest exporter of
gum Arabic with an average annual production of 5,700 tons between 1968 and 1972, which significantly
decreased later in the 1970s as a result of droughts and over exploitation to an approximate annual
production of 500 tons (PAD, para 6). The gum production sector faced local constraints such weak socio-
economic status of communities leading to unsustainable harvesting and storage practices. National
constraints included disorganized marketing channels, absence of a suitable marketing financing structure,
and lack of research capacity to develop locally suitable production technologies, improper data
management, and low-quality extraction techniques (PAD, para 8).

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective was in line with the third Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP-3) for 2011-2015, which aimed to integrate the non-renewable and the
renewable resources production sectors by promoting sustainable use of ecosystems’ production and
services functions, enhancing mitigation and adaptability to climate change, and developing financing
mechanisms for green investments. At project closing, the project objective aligned with the Strategy for
Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity for 2016‐2030, which prioritized transforming its
extractive‐driven and state‐dominated development model into one that would leverage its natural
endowments and promote private sector‐led diversification and sustainable job creation. The project
objective was also consistent with the 2020 President Priority Program which identified Reforestation and
Green Job Creation as one of the 6 priority areas of the Government’s recovery plan to the COVID 19 crisis
(ICR, para 26).

Relevance to Bank Assistance Strategies. At appraisal, the project objective aligned with Pillar 1: “Growth
and Diversification” in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2014-2016, which aimed at increasing
productivity and expanding the productive base of the economy as well as helping to unleash the potential
of the agriculture sector. The project was included in the operational activities of the CPS under Outcome 7:

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



               “Resilience to climate change integrated in Mauritania’s overall development agenda.” Moreover, the
               project was under the GEF/World Bank Sahel and West Africa Program (SAWAP) which was the Bank’s
               main support to Africa’s Great Green Wall for the Sahara and the Sahel Initiative that aimed to address land
               degradation and desertification, boost food security, and support communities to adapt to climate change.
               At project closing, the project objective aligned with Focus Area 1: “Promote Economic Transition for
               Diversified and Resilient Growth” under the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2018-2023. In
               particular, the project objective was expected to directly contribute to an achievement of Objective 1.2:
               “Increase agriculture and livestock production in the face of climate change” and CPF Objective Indicator 2:
               Land area under sustainable land management practices.

               Previous Sector Experience. The World Bank supported the Government to finalize a Green Growth Policy
               Note in June 2014, which aimed to guide a transition toward a more inclusive and green economic growth.
               An assessment of strategies and policies related to the natural resource base demonstrated that
               sustainable economic growth would very much depend on development of income-generating activities
               which rely on renewable resources. Lessons on adopting the community-based approach in the country
               context were extracted from the Mauritania Community Based Watershed Management Project (PACV,
               P087670, FY2006-2013) and reflected in the SLM investment activities under Component 2.

               Summary. The project objective was generally aligned with the country and sector contexts and the
               strategies of the Government and the Bank to promote inclusive and green economic growth. While
               three PDO indicators were defined in the PAD, only one ("average vegetation cover in intervention areas")
               measured outcomes. It was arguably an adequate criterion for assessing the extent to which the project
               had strengthened sustainable landscape management in targeted productive ecosystems. Overall, the
               relevance of the objective is rated substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen sustainable landscape management in targeted productive ecosystems in Mauritania

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: Key constraints to sustainable landscape development in Mauritania included harsh
                             climatic conditions, weak environmental governance, weak socio-economic status of communities leading to
                             unsustainable crop harvesting and storage practices, disorganized marketing channels for gum Arabic along
                             with the absence of a suitable marketing financing structure and lack of research and personal capacity to
                             develop locally suitable production technologies (ICR, page 9). The project’s theory of change (TOC)
                             envisioned that project activities such as building Sustainable Landscape Management (SLM) capacity
                             through relevant tools, knowledge sharing and sustainable crop management, strengthening monitoring of

                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



ecosystem services, and enabling the development of sustainable gum Arabic value chains would result in
outputs such as knowledge sharing through training workshops on SLM practices, sectoral guidelines for
Environmental Impact Assessments and standardized environmental and social safeguards related to SLM
practices developed, and an ecological monitoring system of gum Arabic ecosystems. Expected outcomes
included strengthened SLM knowledge among public and private stakeholders, improved land use
management, less land degradation and desertification in gum Arabic landscapes, increased carbon
sequestration, poverty alleviation in rural areas through enhanced livelihood security, higher incomes
and food security (ICR, page 9).

Critical assumptions for the success of the TOC were: (1) communities/CDAs willing to pursue SLM practices
implemented by the project, and (2) government and private sector involvement to apply project
recommendations and lessons learned.

Outputs: (based on the ICR, Annex 1 and paragraphs as noted)

      Stakeholders benefiting from knowledge building provided by the project were 773 people, exceeding
         the target of 600 people (129 percent of the target). Stakeholders included: national and local
         authorities, regional NGO representatives, CDA representatives, gum Arabic producers and traders.
         Knowledge building activities included workshops, training sessions, and exchange visits. As more
         than 50 percent of CDA members were illiterate (ICR, para 102), the introduction of exchange visits
         was appreciated as it allowed beneficiaries to exchange their experiences with those in similar
         conditions. On the other hand, no indicator was established to measure the extent to which knowledge
         building activities contributed to behavioral changes among beneficiaries.
        An ecological monitoring system of the gum Arabic ecosystem was designed and institutionalized,
         meeting the target. The ecological monitoring system of the gum Arabic ecosystem developed under
         the project was integrated into the existing system in the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
         Development (MEDD). The ecosystem monitoring system with Geographic Information System,
         remote sensing, and ground control sites became operational by the end of the project and was used
         to inform the achievements of PDO outcome indicators in the Results Framework.
        A hundred and four (104) participatory Sustainable Land Management (SLM) investment activities
         were implemented, exceeding the target of 60 activities (140 percent of the target).
        Eighty-five (85) local investment activities such as income-generating activities were implemented, not
         meeting the target of 100 activities (85 percent of the target). Delays in creating and officially
         registering the CDAs caused community-level investments to start in 2018 (i.e., three years after
         appraisal) and in some cases even later in 2020 (i.e., one year before project closing) (ICR, para 53).
        Two local development plans integrating landscape management approach were developed, not
         meeting the target of 6 plans (33 percent of the target). Two communal development plans were
         completed for the communes of El Khatt (Trarza) and Choggar (Brakna). The target was not met
         partly due to the COVID-19 pandemic which strongly affected the implementations of activities in the
         last year of the project. No indicator was established to measure whether and how successfully the
         developed plans were implemented locally.
        Direct project beneficiaries were 164,050 people, exceeding the target of 160,000 people. The ratio of
         female beneficiaries was 52.7 percent, increasing from the baseline of 20 percent and meeting
         the target of 52 percent. This indicator was defined as an outcome indicator; however, the indicator
         measured only output-level results, that were, the number of people who benefitted from knowledge
         building and knowledge sharing products and SLM investment activities. This PDO indicator did not
         measure changes that occurred in the socio-economic status of the direct beneficiaries or their

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



       unsustainable harvesting and storage practices, which were identified as key constraints to
       development in the ICR (page 9).
      SLM practices were adopted in a land area of 3,000 hectares (ha) due to the project, meeting the
       target of 3,000 ha. The project supported SLM investments in 60 pilot sites that were 50 ha
       each. Every pilot site was fenced to ensure that only SLM investments were made inside the fenced
       area. Other SLM practices were then implemented within the fenced sites, such as gum Arabic tree
       planting, stone bunds, and Zai pits. Although the project reported the results of this indicator as an
       outcome, the indicator measured only output-level results, namely the area where the sub-projects of
       SLM investment activities were implemented. The PDO indicator did not measure changes achieved
       in the fenced areas as a result of the SLM practices. Since gum Arabic trees are not bled for gum
       production until five years and hence produce no income until that age, the ICR noted that "Each of
       the 60 targeted (pilot) sites benefited from at least one demand-based investment to contribute to
       communities' livelihoods in the short term and thereby ensure their ensure their engagement
       and sustain SLM practices in the long-term." Some 20 of the investments included water supply
       systems for vegetable gardens which could also be used for watering planted gum Arabic seedlings
       (paras 30 and 33). .

In addition to the outputs in the Results Framework, the ICR reported on the following achieved outputs. None
of them had formal targets.

      Strategic studies (listed in the ICR, para 40) on the gum Arabic sector were conducted, to provide
         recommendations for the development of a sustainable gum Arabic value chain.
      A guidance document on SLM was developed by the project and used as a reference in training and
         workshops on (i) Environmental Impact Assessments and (ii) SLM techniques.
        Four knowledge exchanges were organized over the period of the project on demonstration of SLM
         best practices, benefiting 100 CDA members.
        Thirty-five sites were reforested with 320,000 gum Arabic seedlings planted. The success rate for
         reforestation was 30 percent (strongly dependent on water availability).
        Twenty sites were planted with herbaceous species with a success rate of 50 percent.
        Twenty sites benefited from water and soil conservation techniques as listed in the ICR, para 30.
        Small scale water capture structures such as stone bunds and Zai pits built to help tree rooting.
        Ten sites focused on testing various bleeding practices on gum Arabic trees to boost gum production.
         Gum production increased from an average of 120 gram per tree to an average of 270 gram per tree.
        The 2020 President Priority Program was developed, which targeted the scaling-up of reforestation
         efforts, with up to 1,500 ha/year to be reforested, using some of the project sites as examples to copy
         and scale-up the efforts (response to IEG from the TTL/ICR team).
        The Government's National Reforestation Strategy 2021-2030 was developed, being informed by
         strategic studies on the gum Arabic sector to provide recommendations for the development of a
         sustainable gum Arabic value chain and lessons-learned from the project (ICR, para 39).

Outcomes:

There were three PDO indicators for the project: (i) a land area where SLM practices were adopted as a
result of the project; (ii) an average vegetation cover in intervention areas; and (iii) direct project beneficiaries.
The PDO indicator (i) and (iii) were described above under outputs.



                                                                                                        Page 7 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)




                                  Average vegetation cover in intervention areas was 32 percent at the project’s close, exceeding the
                                   target of 20 percent (160 percent of the target). This sound increase resulted from the combination of
                                   fencing the intervention areas for protection from herd animals owned by pastoralists, introducing
                                   water and soil conservation techniques to address land degradation, and utilizing increased rainfalls in
                                   September 2020. The increase in fodder grass coverage of degraded areas would reduce potential
                                   conflicts around land use among CDA members during dry seasons. In addition, experimentation with
                                   bleeding practices on mature gum Arabic trees more than doubled the yields of gum Arabic per tree in
                                   10 pilot sites (ICR, para 30)

                            The tree canopy coverage in the intervened area was measured in 2020 by the new ecological monitoring
                            system of the gum Arabic ecosystem, which was integrated in the MEDD’s existing system. This
                            supplemented the vegetation cover data measured by the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index,
                            an indication of greenness with most of the signal coming from grass and herbaceous cover. The project also
                            used a drone footage (photogrammetry) to measure the percentage of tree cover in six sites at project
                            closing. For example, herbaceous species and trees covered 51 percent and 8 percent of the Patukone site in
                            2020, respectively (ICR, page 72, Figure 4). However, the lack of baseline data on tree canopy coverages in
                            the target sites did not allow the project to draw conclusions in terms of ecological impacts of the project on
                            tree cover change.

                            Summary. The average vegetation cover in the degraded intervention areas was increased to 32 percent,
                            showing a solid outcome. The SLM knowledge building in local and central stakeholders, the governance
                            system and partnership for the gum Arabic sector, and local SLM activities for gum Arabic productions were
                            enhanced. On the other hand, insufficient evidence was available regarding changes in the gum Arabic
                            productive ecosystem and its value chain, as well as integration and implementation of SLM activities and
                            budgets in local development planning in the target areas. Overall, the efficacy with which Objective 1 was
                            achieved is rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As described in the summary paragraph above, the overall efficacy with which Objective 1 was achieved is
                            rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



 5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis: At appraisal, a Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) was conducted for the Sustainable Land
Management (SLM) investment activities related to Acacia Senegal under Component 2. The CBA showed a
financial Internal Rate Return (IRR) of 15 percent with the Net Present Value (NPV) of US$655,000 and an
economic IRR of 14 percent with an NPV of US$342,000, over a period of 30 years with a discount rate of 12
percent (PAD, Annex 6, page 42). The CBA assumed a density of 200 trees per ha, 100 percent survival rate,
and 50 percent increase in gum productivity of new plantations.

At project closing, the ex-post CBA was not comparable with the ex-ante CBA because the yields of new Acacia
Senegal (gum Arabic) plantations were not observed due to implementation delays. While the interventions
started in 2018, the time necessary for the trees to bear fruit was approximately 5-6 years after planting. The ex-
post CBA indicated that these plantations would be able to bring profits for the farmer and for the society in the
long run, assuming that future management would ensure the survival of all the remaining trees and would
provide minimum yields of 0.2 kg of gum Arabic per tree per year during maturity, over a period of 23 years with
a discount rate of 6 percent, covering approximately 20 percent of the total project cost (TTL/ICR team
response). The most conservative scenario with the yield of 0.2 kg of Arabic gum per tree per year had a
financial IRR of 3 percent with a negative NPV of minus US$38 per ha, while the most ambitious scenario with
the yield of 0.5 kg of Arabic gum per tree had a financial IRR of 22 percent with an NPV of US$522 per ha (ICR,
page 46). The net returns from gum Arabic plantations were expected to be even higher if the estimated
economic values of fodder, fuelwood, soil protection, and biodiversity conservation (proven complementary
benefits of gum Arabic trees) were included in the CBA.

Cost-effectiveness analysis: At project closing, the project’s unit cost of US$1,600 per ha for all the project
activities was compared with some of other SAWAP countries. This unit cost was approximately 229 percent of
that disbursed in Sudan, but 29 percent of that in Mali (ICR, Table 2, page 19). The project’s unit cost of
approximately US$700 per ha for SLM practices under Component 2 was in the same range of costs found for
other SAWAP countries (ICR, para 50). Although cost data for many SLM practices were not available, the
analysis showed that some cultural practices were cost-effective, such as planting gum Arabic and digging half-
moons for soil and water conservation.

Factors that affected efficiencies during implementation: Implementation of SLM investment activities was
delayed due to the pro-longed process to establish and register Community Development Associations. It
caused delays in planting gum Arabic seedlings, resulting in the lack of data on yield at project closing to
conduct the ex-post CBA with the same approach as the ex-ante CBA. Nevertheless, the project implemented
planned activities and disbursed almost all the approved amount without any extension of project duration. The
financial IRR of the SLM investment activities at project closing was in a range from 3 percent to 22 percent,
depending on the yield of gum Arabic during maturity from 0.2 kg to 0.5 kg per tree. The project was at the same
level of cost effectiveness with some of other SAWAP countries. The implementation was efficient in general
despite of some delays in community activities.

Overall, the efficiency with which the project was implemented is rated substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     20.00
ICR Estimate                                               22.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives was substantial because the project aligned with the strategies of the Government
and the Bank assistance. The extent to which the project strengthened SLM in the gum Arabic belt and
contributed to the SLM approach was substantial. The efficiency of project implementation was estimated to
be substantial, as the Cost Benefit Analysis and Cost Effectiveness Analysis showed robust results. The
project’s relevance, efficacy and efficiency all had only minor shortcomings and the project’s overall outcome is
therefore rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There were following risks to the sustainability of the achieved results presented in the ICR:

Financial risk: There might be a risk that the Community Development Associations (CDAs) would not have
sufficient funds to maintain the SLM investments, such as fences, stone bunds, and water supply systems,
especially during a few years after project closing until the revenue from the gum Arabic would be generated
sustainably. With proper maintenance, those investments were expected to last for a few decades. The
financial risk was mitigated for some associations, which saved a portion of the fodder sales revenue to
ensure the maintenance of the equipment or further investments. However, for the majority of CDAs which
were newly established under the project, their capacities to levy maintenance fees were unknown or still
under development. Considering that some income-generating activities were not started under the project
as designed at appraisal due to delays in establishing the CDAs, it was likely that the financial capacities of
the majority of CDAs were not fully developed. External funding for maintenance activities and continuation
of capacity building activities might be needed to sustain the CDAs.

Technical risk: There might be a technical risk that the SLM approach tested under this project would not be
scaled up in order to bring solid results on reforestation and desertification control and gum Arabic sector
development. Though the SLM approach was successfully tested in the project, the scope of the project (30
km² of land under SLM) was far smaller than the scale needed in the Mauritanian Sahel (estimated 127,392

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



km² of potential and favorable zones for gum Arabic development). The technical risk that the innovative pilot
would not be continued after the project closed was mitigated by the Government's commitment to a gum
Arabic reforestation policy and the development partners’ interests in the Great Green Wall Initiative. Some
of the specialists in the PMU, including a technical advisor and a GIS specialist, remained and continued to
support the existing government institutions through their capacities, under the active engagement of a
project coordinator, who was the Director of the Directorate of Nature Protection during project
implementation and currently appointed as the Director of Directorate for Species and Ecosystems
Protection and Restoration.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Strategic relevance and approach were adequate as described in Section 3 of this review. Technical,
  environmental, and social aspects were adequately incorporated into the project design based on studies
  such as the IUCN pre-feasibility study conducted through the SAWAP information and knowledge support
  project (i.e., Building Resilience through Innovation, Communication and Knowledge Services or BRICKS
  project) and with support from the TerrAfrica Program, which guided selection of the suitable Acacia
  species to adapt to the project in terms of its regeneration characteristics, as well as the MEDD’s socio-
  economic study in 2014 on the Acacia Senegal and Acacia Seyal belt for the production of gum Arabic.
  Lessons from other SLM projects in the Sub-Saharan Africa and from the Mauritania Community Based
  Watershed Management Project (PACV, P087670, FY06-13) were reflected in the design of project.
  Specifically, the local SLM investment activities under Component 2 were informed by the PACV’s lesson
  that local associations established under a project would require extension advice on increasing yields
  through SLM practices. The project adequately engaged a range of stakeholders from local
  administrations to regional partners, in order to closely monitor the project from activity implementation at
  sites and improvements in the ecosystem.

  On the other hand, the institutional and implementation arrangements at appraisal to establish a PMU
  with a majority of MEDD staff did not work out as expected, due to a lack of commitment and limited
  human resources in the Government, which resulted in a cancellation of financial incentives to the MEDD
  staff seconded to the project in 2018 (ICR, para 67). The risk assessment at appraisal (PAD, page 13)
  focused on analyzing and mitigating institutional capacity risks at the local level and did not thoroughly
  elaborate on the risk at the central level. As approximately 75 percent of the budget allocated to
  Component 3: “Project Management” was expected to be financed by counterpart funds (PAD, Table 11,
  page 38), the project might have benefitted from a closer attention to risks associated with mobilization of
  civil servants for project management at the design stage. Regarding gender aspects (ICR, para 57), the
  project appeared to have positive effects on women through income-generating activities, which
  could have been better monitored with gender-disaggregated indicators of beneficiary satisfaction by sub-
  projects and employment generation. Including a gender action plan in the project design, even though it
  was not required at the time, might have benefitted the project to quantify and present gender-related
  results, considering that the prime beneficiaries of the project were the women who took care of the
  household and agricultural activities instead of the migrant male workers (PAD, para 18). Finally, the
  Results Framework did not include indicators to measure changes in biodiversity and carbon stocks, as
  described in Section 9.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



  To summarize, the project design reflected studies and lessons from the Bank’s previous sector
  experience in the region and in Mauritania and made adequate arrangements in technical, environmental,
  and social aspects. On the other hand, the project’s design was not fully adequate in terms of either risk
  assessment, implementation arrangements, or the focus on gender and environmental impacts. Overall,
  the quality at entry is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision inputs and processes were not consistent throughout project implementation and thus not fully
 adequate. At inception, the project received technical support from a wide range of experts in the Bank, but
 this support gradually decreased during implementation to match the limited supervision budget. The
 project was supervised by four TTLs during its five years of implementation with some interruptions
 between their transitions in terms of knowledge sharing. From 2017 to 2018, there was limited information
 from supervision as the TTL in 2017 the Bank without properly storing project documents (e.g., Aide-
 Memoires for two missions in 2018 were missing), implying a lower level of supervision over that
 period. Overall supervision missions occurred on an irregular basis. For example, only two missions were
 conducted per year in 2016, 2018, and 2019. Field inspections were conducted when investments at the
 local level started, to address environmental issues linked to plastic waste and pest management.

 As a factor outside the control of the Bank or the implementing agency, the COVID-19 pandemic affected
 supervision by shifting the implementation support from in-person to online. From 2020, no physical
 missions were organized due to the World Bank travel ban associated with the pandemic. Instead, half-day
 online meetings were organized at least every three months to track project’s progress and identify actions,
 that were reported in the ISRs with candor. At project closing, a virtual mission was organized in January
 2021. The fiduciary management was not fully adequate. Though the Bank team made a number of
 requests to record procurement contracts in the Bank’s procurement system (i.e., STEP), many
 procurement requests were cleared outside the system due to the country-wide issue of poor internet
 connection and not all contracts were recorded in the system until project closing, as described in Section
 10.

 To summarize, the level and quality of supervision was not consistent among the four TTLs, resulting in
 discontinuity in the accumulation and use of information from the project on various issues in this pilot
 project. The Bank team successfully addressed many supervision challenges; however, these were not
 sufficient to address the capacity gaps on fiduciary management in the Implementing Agency. Overall, the
 quality of supervision is rated moderately unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was explicit for the definition of the SLM in the PAD (para 17). The Theory of Change was sound
 and reflected in most of the indicators in the Results Framework to monitor a progress towards an
 achievement of the PDO. Monitoring system of Gum Arabic ecosystem was designed and institutionalized
 in the existing government system under the project, which became operational at the end of project to
 inform reporting of achieved results in line with the Results Framework. On the other hand, the PDO
 outcome indicators on the land area adopted the SLM practice and the direct project beneficiaries provided
 targeted output-level achievements rather than outcome-level achievements. No specific verification
 methodology was presented in the project design to ensure measurement of changes in tree canopy
 coverage, despite the project's design principle that expanding the coverage of Acacia Senegal trees for
 gum Arabic production was an important element of the Theory of Change. No indicators were designed to
 specifically measure the project’s effects on enabling the development of a sustainable gum Arabic value
 chain, nor the behavioral changes of stakeholders that were necessary to adopt SLM practices.

 During implementation, the M&E implementation arrangements were modified as follows. At the central
 government level, the project-hired an M&E consultant who served in the PMU until the project ended and
 received support for technical capacity building from the Bank team as well as for the regional capacity
 building activities organized by the BRICKS project. No evidence was presented regarding the extent to
 which the M&E functions and processes were likely to be sustained at MEDD after project closing.



b. M&E Implementation
  At local levels, the Regional Coordinating Units' (RCUs) capacities to monitor field activities were
  strengthened by hiring financial and administrative staff and providing trainings, computer equipment, and
  vehicles. The RCUs regularly monitored the execution of project investments and collected primary data
  from the community development associations to inform the M&E system. Joint supervision missions
  with PMU and RCU staff were conducted on intervention sites. At the ecosystem level, the Sahara and
  Sahel Observatory (OSS) was contracted to develop the ecological monitoring system; however, the
  contract was terminated in 2019 before operationalization of the ecological monitoring system due to its
  over-complexity and high costs (ICR, para 82). The PMU developed and implemented a new monitoring
  method by combining satellite imageries to capture grass and herbaceous coverage and drones’
  imageries to capture tree canopy coverage. On the other hand, delays in operationalization of the new
  ecosystem monitoring system only enabled the project to measure tree canopy coverage in 2020.
  Moreover, contrary to what was envisioned at appraisal (PAD, Annex 1), the new ecosystem monitoring
  system was not able to analyze changes in the gum Arabic ecosystem productivity and service functions
  linked to various SLM practices because of the lack of a baseline (ICR, para 83).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were communicated to the various stakeholders to track implementation of activities
  and make necessary changes to the project. The results and indicators were monitored regularly

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



  providing information to implementation support missions and for Aides-Mémoires and ISRs. The
  project’s contribution to the GEF focal areas were measured by the GEF Tracking Tools (ICR, para 52).

  To summarize, the M&E design was aimed at rigorous data collection, but was not thoroughly aligned
  with the existing national M&E system for the gum Arabic ecosystem. The M&E execution arrangements
  were modified to address the challenges encountered by the project during implementation, but the
  modification process caused delays in collecting M&E baseline data, narrowing the scope for M&E
  utilization. The weaknesses in the Results Framework made it somewhat difficult to assess the
  achievement of the stated objective and test the links in the results chain. Considering that pilot projects
  are expected to have high M&E standards, overall M&E quality is rated modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as Category B and triggered the following safeguards: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP
   4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework, a Resettlement Policy Framework, and a Pest
   Management Plan were prepared prior to appraisal based on pre-identified interventions and the mitigation
   activities were implemented. The project provided training on environmental and social impact assessment
   to the Implementing Agency, to enable environmental and social safeguards to be considered during design
   and implementation of the sub-projects. During implementation, the project prepared simplified
   environmental and social impact assessments for 189 subprojects, which were reviewed and approved by
   the Government.

   During implementation, environmental concerns were raised regarding plastic waste generated by the tree
   nurseries and pesticides management in market gardening. Mitigation measures, such as burying the used
   bags in a safe place and providing training on the pesticide use, and protective equipment to the users,
   were implemented, respectively. The anticipated social risk related to land restriction (i.e., restriction of
   access to natural resources within the fences) were managed within the CDA and through traditional
   grievance and conflict management bodies. Social complaints that the PMU received were regarding the
   layout of the fences disturbing the passage of pastoral livestock, as well as the expansion of the area of
   market gardens to cover more beneficiaries. In the first case, the local authorities worked as mediators to
   reach a consensus on new fence lines. In the second case, resources generated by ongoing activities in the
   CDA allowed for the expansion of the fenced area for market gardening. During the ICR mission’s field
   visits, community representatives denied any negative impact related to land use restrictions.

   There was no mention in the ICR of the project's compliance to any of the safeguard policies.




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: At appraisal, the Implementing Agency had no previous experience in
  implementing World Bank projects and had limited capacity in fiduciary management. To mitigate fiduciary
  risks, the project developed a manual of financial, accounting, and administrative procedures, recruited a
  qualified accountant and an internal auditor, and acquired accounting software. These actions were
  delayed and not sufficient, raising a number of financial management issues by 2018, such as: (a) bank
  reconciliations performed irregularly; (b) Financial Monitoring Reports not prepared or unsatisfactory; (c)
  the Annual Work Programs and Budgets not submitted on time; (d) external auditor not hired; (e) ineligible
  expenses incurred by the project (compensation payments); (f) some expenses not sufficiently justified; (g)
  and lack of availability of counterpart funds. The 2018 local and legislative elections caused a change in
  institutional arrangements on project coordination. The project’s financial management was improved in
  line with the Bank's recommendations. Still, the issues on regularization of ineligible expenses incurred and
  delayed mobilization of counterpart funds for human resources persisted. The project external audit was
  delayed one year for FY2016 but were completed on time for FY2017-2020 (response to IEG by the Bank's
  TTL/ICR team). The external audit was unqualified for FY2016-2017, and the qualifications in for FY2018-
  2020 were resolved by the PIU (response to IEG by the Bank's TTL/ICR team).



  Procurement: At appraisal, none of the relevant ministerial directorates or agency had adequate
  procurement capacity nor previous experience in management of the Bank projects. In order to strengthen
  procurement capacity of the Implementing Agency, the project prepared a procurement manual, provided
  procurement training to the staff, and hired a procurement consultant to manage the procurement
  processes in accordance with World Bank procurement guidelines. These mitigation measures were not
  sufficient to prevent issues such as procurement delays and slow updating of procurement documents in
  the Bank’s procurement system (STEP). Despite the numerous requests from the WB Team to submit the
  documents in STEP as early as possible, many clearances for procurement requests were provided
  outside of STEP. This flexibility was given by the World Bank because of limited access to the system due
  to poor internet connections, which was a frequent issue in Mauritania, where project procurement teams
  needed to go to the Bank's office to access STEP. Based on the remaining procurement risks identified in
  the ex-post expenditure reviews in 2018 and 2019, an assistant was recruited to store all contracts to the
  STEP by the end of the project. During last year of implementation, improvements on procurement
  management were observed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Beyond the project scope, some of the most successful CDAs further expanded their activities by finding
  alternative technical support and financing. For example, CDAs of Séyène, Patoukone and Agrije in the
  Gorgol region were supported by an Oxfam-financed local NGO, receiving training on techniques to
  transform fresh milk into curdled milk and a solar fridge for the conservation of processed dairy products.

  The development of herbaceous cover through building fences and soil and water conservation allowed
  communities to make important fodder stocks for livestock, which benefitted farmers dealing with the
  severe drought in 2019 and reduced potential conflicts in land use during dry seasons between crop
  farmers and pastoralists.



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                  The M&E Quality is rated
                                                                                  modest due to the weaknesses
                                                                                  in the M&E Design and
                                                                                  Implementation which limited
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Modest
                                                                                  M&E Utilization, as well as an
                                                                                  expectation that pilot projects
                                                                                  would need higher M&E
                                                                                  standards.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided six lessons. Some of them are summarized below because they may be of
interest for other SLM projects.

The implementation period of a project needs to be aligned with the time it expected to take
to achieve the project's objective. Although gum Arabic trees needed at least five years before
starting gum production, the SLM investment activities including plantations of gum Arabic tress
were implemented for only three years under the project. It was not feasible to observe the results of
the newly introduced SLM investment activities in the gum Arabic belt.

Established water supply systems are important in reforestation including for acacia trees in
arid regions. Under the project, abundant watering was needed because the survival of the acacia
seedlings depends heavily on regular watering. To provide water to the tree nurseries and seedlings
in the ground for the first year after plantation, the project used various types of water tanks drawing
water from wells constructed primarily for market gardens.

This ICR Review adds the following lesson.

In remote arid regions such as rural Mauritania, where men earn incomes from off-
farm activities leaving women to take care of agricultural/pastoral activities (PAD, para 18), a
more gender-focused approach to support women as participants in pastoral development is
needed. In this project capacity building operations were less likely to reach women if specific
actions to benefit women were not designed. While the project experience implied that the income-

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sustainable Landscape Management Project (P144183)



generating activities had positive effects for women, the effects were not measured by gender-
disaggregated indicators. A gender action plan is therefore essential to finance and support
the involvement of women in all aspects of projects aimed at pastoral development in remote areas
such as the Sahel.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The narrative supports the ratings and available evidence.
It is candid and generally aligned to the project development objective. The report is concise, follows the
majority of the guidelines, makes an attempt to triangulate data to reach conclusions, and is focused on results.
The quality of evidence and analysis is aligned to the messages outlined in the ICR. There is a reference to the
project’s theory of change that helps the reader to understand how the ratings have been reached. The lessons
are specific and based on evidence of what actually occurred in the project. On the other hand, the ICR did not
mention of the project's compliance to the safeguard policies. Overall, the quality of ICR is rated substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
