     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0022634

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P151972                                      Citizen-centered public services

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Albania                                      Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85210                                  31-Dec-2020                                           32,191,739.90

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Aug-2015                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              32,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               32,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           32,191,739.90                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Jorge Garcia-Garcia          Paul Holden                  Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project appraisal document (PAD) states that “The objective of the project is to improve the efficiency of
   delivery and access to selected administrative services in Albania” (PAD, p. 6). The Loan Agreement of the
   project states that “The objective of the Project is to improve the efficiency of delivery and access to Selected
   Administrative Services in the Borrower's territory” (Loan Agreement, p. 5).




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



   For the purpose of this evaluation the objectives of the project are to increase efficiency in delivering
   administrative services and increase access of the poor and vulnerable to selected administrative services.

   PDO 1: Increased efficiency in delivering administrative services

   PDO 2: Increased access of the poor and vulnerable to selected administrative services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Enhancing the back-end systems. The component supported enhancing the backend
   systems (original, not defined; actual, not reported in ICR). The component supported the enhancement of
   the information technology (IT) systems and the reengineering of business processes (PAD, p. 31).

   Component 2: Enhancing citizen interface with service delivery. The component supported enhancing
   the interface with citizens in the delivery of services (original cost not defined in PAD; actual, not reported in
   ICR).The component supported (a) the physical interface with citizens (e.g., reforming front offices in
   existing agencies, developing and managing sector specific One Stop Shops); (b) improving online delivery
   of services (e.g., business licensing and registration); (c) providing information on key services (e.g.,
   providing information and actively promoting its availability); (d) implementing beneficiary feedback (e.g.,
   feedback on hospital services property registration, improving capacity to analyze incoming data); and (e)
   providing assisted access to internet services (e.g., setting up points of contact such as internet cafés and
   community centers).

   Component 3: Building capacity to deliver. The component supported building capacity to deliver
   services (original cost not defined in PAD; actual cost, not reported in ICR). The component supports (a)
   improving strategic planning (e.g., detail costing, sequencing, design choices of reform plan); (b) improving
   performance management (e.g., quality of data reported and performance indicators) (c) improving capacity
   of key reform drivers (e.g., Minister of State for Innovation, Agency for Delivery of Integrated Services in
   Albania [ADISA], Delivery Unit in Prime Minister’s Office to monitor progress); and (d) communicating with
   stakeholders (e.g., advertising benefits of citizens facilitation centers).

   Each component was supported by three parts of the loan: a project preparation facility (PPF, US$2 million);
   a technical assistance part (TA, US$5 million); and a results–based financing part (RBF, US$25 million).
   Disbursing the results-based financing part was contingent on achieving agreed targets of five disbursed-
   linked indicators (DLI) associated with the three components. This structure of the project explains why
   there are no costs reported for each component. The indicators were:

   Component 1 – Back-end systems.

         DLI#1 - Development of online services with level 3 automation.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



         DLI#2 – Re-engineering of administrative processes to reduce the time to citizens of obtaining
          approval.

   Component 2 – Front office interface

         DLI#3 - Improved citizen interface for service provision.
         DLI#4 - improved provision of information on government services on multiple platforms (DLI#4).

   Component 3 – Capacity to deliver

         DLI#5 - Policy Reform Document outlining strategic plan for the reform and PDO baseline survey.

   DLI#5 had to be met before the World Bank to disburse any of the US$25 million of results-based funds.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on August 25, 2015, became effective on March 22, 2016, and closed on
   December 31, 2020, as planned.

   The original project cost was US$32 million equivalent (EUR 29.3 million). Actual project cost was
   US$32.19 million because of changes in the EUR-$US exchange rate. The project consisted of a PPF worth
   US$2 million, a results-based financing part worth US$25 million, and a TA part worth US$5 million. The
   PPF and TA parts were executed following the World Bank procurement guidelines and were disbursed
   against eligible expenditures upon submission of Interim Financial Reports (IFRs). The RBF part was
   disbursed against Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) upon achieving the disbursed-linked indicators.

   The project was restructured in September 28 of 2018 to reallocate funds for EUR 1.894 million from the
   PPF portion to the TA part




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2015) identified the delivery of basic public
services as a constraint to growth, inclusion and asset accumulation. Corruption and fragmented
institutional arrangements contributed substantially to the low quality of service delivery, its inefficiency and
the poor access of the poor, Roma people, rural residents and women to these services. Better quality and
quantity of services would help raise productivity overall and in the public sector in particular.

Although Albania had advanced in addressing these issues, corruption was particularly pronounced,
especially in health, police, customs, and property registration services. While about 20 percent of citizens
paid a bribe for getting a public service, these levels were reported to be high in health care (over 70


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



               percent to doctors and 45 percent to nurses); bribes to police were14 percent and to property registration
               officers, 7 percent. Many people solved problems of service delivery using private intermediaries, but bribes
               and “facilitation” payments eased access to their providers and to getting the service. This practice was
               more common when users had to deal face-to-face with providers. There was evidence that reforms in
               business processes and e-governance had improved business services, but little effort had been made to
               improve administrative services. The country also had other reasons to improve the quality of its institutions
               and combat corruption; they related to the country’s desire of becoming a full member of the European
               Union for which it had to carry out several reforms, and to show its desire and commitment to fight
               corruption. Fighting corruption was the country’s most important challenge to gain accession to the Union.
               To this end, the European Union was assisting Albania to strengthen its democratic institutions and improve
               its public administration through its Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA II) for the period 2014-2020. The
               World Bank Group (WBG) coordinated its support with the European Union and other development
               partners.

               After an initial assessment of constraints and opportunities, the Government of Albania codified its priorities
               in the draft National Strategy for Development and Integration for 2014-2020. The government set as an
               overarching national goal progress towards EU integration. The Strategy outlined its vision for a European
               Albania through sustained economic growth and moving from greater wealth to enhanced well-being. To
               attain these goals the Strategy defined four pillars: (a) Growth Through Fiscal Stability and Increased
               Competitiveness; (b) Sustainable Growth through Effective use of Resources; (c) Investing in People and
               Social Cohesion; and (d) Good Governance, Democracy and Rule of Law. The Good Governance pillar had
               six sub-pillars of which the project supported that on effective governance, in particular public administration
               and the transparency and fight against corruption. The project was aligned with and supported the
               government's priorities.

               The WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 2015-2018 had three focus areas that
               addressed the issues that the SCD identified and the priorities of the Government’s National Strategy for
               Development and Integration. The CPF’s Focus Area 3 (Strengthening public sector management and
               service delivery) addressed aspects of governance, transparency and accountability which had been
               identified by the SCD. The project contributed most to the CPF objective of increased efficiency of public
               service delivery. The project also contributed to the government’s program of Innovation against Corruption
               which started in June 2014, and which responded to its electoral mandate of reducing corruption and
               improving the delivery of public services to its constituents. The government sought to innovate in providing
               these services to reduce their cost and delivery time.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



PDO 1. Increased efficiency in delivering administrative services.

Rationale
Outcome indicators

Three results were associated with PDO1. All of them referred to reducing the number of days –from
submission to delivery– that it takes to get each of the three administrative services. The baseline and target
values in the Project Appraisal Document were revised after completing the baseline survey in May 2016 and
after revising some parts of the results framework in March 2017. The indicators reported below refer to the
time it takes to deliver services in 9 focal institutions; the baseline and target values correspond to those
reported in Table 3 of the ICR.

      Obtain motor vehicle registration. Baseline: 5.3 days in 2016, target: 4 days in FY2019-20. The time to
       obtain the service fell to 30 minutes in 2020; exceeding its target value. Achieved.
      Process old age pension application. Baseline: 53 days in 2016; target: 40 days in FY2019-20. The
       time to obtain this service fell to 29 days in 2020; exceeding its target value. Achieved.
      Obtain health insurance card. Baseline: 5.5 hours; target: 4 hours. The time to obtain the insurance
       card fell to less than 10 minutes in 2020, as the process is now automated and fully on-line. Achieved.

Time to deliver services also fell in 70 of the services the project supported, with an average reduction of 37
percent (ICR, par. 22). The reasons behind these improvements were regulatory reforms that reduced the
number of documents demanded by the authorities, the lower number of steps in the back-office workflow to
process the service, the online application and the electronic exchange of information between different
government databases.

Intermediate results indicators

Achieving the above outcomes was possible because the intermediate results that supported achieving them
were delivered. The intermediate results were:

      Development of online services (DLI#1). This corresponded to the disbursement-linked indicator #1,
       which consisted of increasing the number of new services with level 3 automation fully achieved.
       Baseline: 0; target, 75. The actual result was 75 services with automation fully achieved; 11 of them
       achieved level 4 automation, higher than level 3. Achieved.
      Priority services with business processes reengineered (DL#2). This corresponded to the
       disbursement-linked indicator #2, which consisted of increasing the number of priority services whose
       business processes were reengineered. Baseline: 0 services; target: 100. The actual result was 100
       services. Achieved.
      Number of agencies with new or enhanced backend IT systems to improve service delivery. This
       indicator was not part of the DLI group. Baseline: 0; target, 8. The actual number was 7, and the target
       was almost achieved. Achieved.

The project fully achieved this objective and its outcome indicators exceeded their targets by a substantial
margin. The project also met or exceeded the targets for two of its intermediate results indicators and mostly
achieved its target for the third one. Efficacy is High.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Citizen-centered public services (P151972)




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. Increased access of the poor and vulnerable

Rationale
Outcome indicator

One result was associated with PDO2. The result is broken in three categories:

        Percentage of the poor who stated that receiving services from institutions contacted was “easy” or
         “very easy”. Baseline: 50 percent; target: 70 percent. The actual value was 69 percent. Achieved.
        Percentage of Roma who stated that receiving services from institutions contacted was “easy” or “very
         easy”. Baseline: 52 percent; target: 72 percent. The actual value was 65 percent.
         Substantially Achieved.
        Percentage of females who stated that receiving services from institutions contacted was “easy” or
         “very easy”. Baseline: 50 percent; target: 71 percent. The actual value was 71 percent. Achieved.

The PAD defines as poor the persons living below the poverty line, and as vulnerable the persons at the
bottom 40 percent, women, older citizens, and ethnic minorities such as the Roma (PAD, par. 22 and Annex
2, Box A2-1).

Intermediate results indicators

The above results were supported by several activities that sought to improve citizens’ interaction with public
institutions and make services more citizen centric. The results associated with these activities were achieved
in most instances, as shown below. The intermediate results were:

        Citizen Service Centers (CSC) Established with Improved Customer Service (DLI#3). The indicator
         was the number of services with improved front office interface. Baseline: 0; target 130. The actual
         number was 140, exceeding the target. In total, 20 citizen service centers were established (instead of
         one), and they provided about 750 services for about 20 central institutions and 70 local government
         services. Achieved.
        Information on Services Provided (DLI#4). The indicator was the number of services with information
         available on multiple platforms. Baseline: 0; target 130 services. The actual result was 132 services.
         Achieved.
        Online Service Delivery Improved. Two results were expected:
              o Number of registered users accessing e-government services (as percentage of adult
                population). Baseline: 2.25 percent; target: 3.6 percent. The actual value was 13.7 percent,
                exceeding the target. Achieved.
              o The amount of data prefilled in public services' online forms (Percentage). Baseline: 58.4
                percent; target: 71 percent. The actual result was 63 percent. Partially Achieved.


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Citizen-centered public services (P151972)




                                   Number of institutions with proactive citizen feedback mechanism implemented. Baseline: 1; target 8.
                                    The actual number was 4. Partially Achieved.
                                   Improved capacity to deliver both PDO1 and PDO2. Two results were expected:
                                        o Institutional prerequisites of Citizen Centric Service Delivery Program –Yes/No– (DLI#5).
                                           Baseline: No; target: Yes. The prerequisites were present by 2020. Achieved.
                                        o Number of institutions with key performance indicators reported and quarterly performance
                                           reports circulated. Baseline: 0; target: 8. The actual number was 7 by 2020; the result was
                                           substantially achieved. Substantially Achieved.

                            The project achieved this objective and its outcome indicators were achieved or mostly achieved, in some
                            cases . exceeding their targets. The targets were achieved for five intermediate results indicators and partially
                            achieved for two. Efficacy is Substantial.

                            The project achieved Objective 2 and efficacy is Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Since efficacy is high for objective 1 and substantial for objective 2 overall efficacy is substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The Project Appraisal Document pointed out potential financial and economic benefits and costs of the project.
   Among the financial benefits, it noted the savings from lower administrative costs of providing the service, an
   increase in government revenue as the demand for the services increases caused by a fall in the cost of getting
   the service. Among the financial costs, the PAD notes those associated with the creation, maintenance and
   periodical upgrade of the Citizen Service Centers. The economic analysis of the project centers on the direct
   benefits and costs associated with the changes in citizens’ economic welfare. The main benefits identified by the
   PAD are the reduction in compliance costs for citizens (e.g., getting documents to register property) and the
   reduction in time and travel costs for citizens, a third of which visited government agencies only to get
   information; the cost of getting that information can fall sharply if citizens have electronic access to it on
   government websites. The PAD notes that the cost savings could be significant for registering property, one of



                                                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



the most affected by bribery. Citizens also benefit from paying fewer fees to intermediaries and other agents for
supporting documentation. The government saves staff time that can be allocated to other government activities.

Limitations on data availability at the time of project closing prevented replicating the above calculations. Instead
of calculating the benefits from citizens’ time savings, the ICR estimates the benefits accruing to the government
from improvements in business processes associated with 46 services where delivery time fell by 90 percent.
The net present value of these estimated benefits was US$52 million and US$246 million for 5 and 10 years of
project life.

The net benefits estimated in the ICR are likely to underestimate the benefits of the project. First, the results
presented in the section on efficacy suggest that the gains are likely to be larger than the ones estimated in the
PAD because the actual time saved exceeded by far the target values on which the ex-ante net present value of
the project was estimated. Second, over the project’s life real per capita income rose by about 15 percent (it
includes 2020), meaning that the benefits of time saved are underestimated. Third, people who now have
access to health services are likely to have better health than they would have otherwise, which is likely to be
reflected in better performance at work, fewer working days lost to sickness, and a longer life expectancy.
Fourth, the ICR assumes that the benefits accrue to the government only in 2020, the fifth year of project
implementation.

The above reasons suggest that the efficiency of the project was substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The program shows positive results in reducing the time it takes to get government services and in increasing
the access of the poor and vulnerable to these services.

On time to get government services, there was a generalized average reduction of 37 percent in 70 of the
services the project supported. Noteworthy reductions happened in getting a motor vehicle registration (95



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



percent) and a health insurance card (99 percent); also notable is the 45 percent reduction in the number of
days it takes to process an old age pension application.

On access to services, about 70 percent of the poor, 65 percent of Roma people and 71 percent of females
consider that it was easy or very easy receiving services from the agencies they contacted.

Over the five years of project life, the government reduced its operating costs through improvements in business
processes in 46 services where delivery time fell by 90 percent. The cost reductions are estimated at US$52
million in terms of net present value.

The project had some minor shortcomings, mainly in the intermediate indicators for access of the poor and
vulnerable to government services. The targets were not achieved in the number of institutions with proactive
citizen feedback mechanism implemented and the amount of data prefilled in online forms


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is modest, in part because citizens are benefiting from and therefore can
be expected to be supportive of the reforms carried out. The gains from the reforms are substantial and
citizens are likely to expect politicians and government administrators to, at least, maintain what they have
now. Keeping a service of better quality requires maintaining a balance between the government’s desire to
use online methods to deliver services and using the Citizen Service Centers to deliver the services
physically. While the online delivery may become more important over time, there are groups that will still
need physical contact with government agencies, making it unlikely that the government will eliminate
physical delivery; therefore, it is unlikely that they will disappear in the short and medium term.

In summary, the risk to development outcome is modest.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank did good preparatory work to understand the constraints on and circumstances in which the
  reform was going to take place. It also helped that the Bank had gained knowledge of Albania with two
  earlier projects that used the Disbursed Link Indicator approach to structure the operation and the actions
  that would have to be carried out. This approach permitted the Bank to make a strong case for using a
  results-based instrument, focusing on a few but high-quality results indicators, and on the need for
  technical assistance to support the project.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



  The project had a clear results framework and a good monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system to ensure
  that the actions agreed to were carried out.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The quality of supervision was good. The inputs and processes were adequate to supervise the project.
 The country manager and staff supported the project throughout its life. Four task-co-team leaders
 managed the project with one staying for its duration, providing continuity. The team supervised the project
 twice a year, except in 2017 when the Bank authorized missions after the government elected that year
 took over. During COVID 19 the missions were carried out virtually. The supervision of fiduciary and
 environmental and social aspects was also satisfactory.

 The Bank team also paid attention to the project’s development impact. In most instances it resolved the
 threats to the project’s results, but it faced problems when the new administration 1) weakened the
 institutional arrangements put in place for implementing the project and 2) decided to accelerate the
 transition towards “online only” service applications from the dual approach of on-stop shops and e-
 services the project supported. Overall, these changes affected the inter-institutional collaboration during
 project implementation, but they did not prevent the Bank from supervising the project; the Bank acted
 wisely by prioritizing implementation aspects and project results rather than triggering legal remedies to the
 new implementation practices as the expected impact of litigation on results was uncertain.

 The results achieved validated the Bank’s decision of avoiding the legal route to solving problems. The
 route taken did not threaten the project’s achievements.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project had a good M&E design. Its theory of change and the objectives were clear and well specified.
 The indicators covered all outcomes of the PDO statement and measured well the results expected. The
 intermediate results indicators captured adequately the contribution of the operation’s activities and the
 outputs that could deliver the expected outcomes. The indicators were specific, measurable, achievable,

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



 relevant, and time bound. The PAD defined baseline and target values and noted that the results
 framework should be revised and all baselines established once a baseline survey was completed as part
 of the global disbursed-linked-indicators, a necessary condition for disbursing the US$25 million funds
 corresponding to the results-based-financing of the project. Linking the disbursement of the US$25 to
 having baseline and target values for the results indicator ensured that the information would be available
 and on time. Last, the PAD presented a detailed map of the institutional structure that would be in charge
 of project administration.



b. M&E Implementation
  The input, output, outcome, and impact evidence anticipated in the design of the project was collected
  and analyzed in a sound manner. The baseline data were collected and the indicators of the results
  framework were reported on the ICR and the Implementation Status Reports. Some results indicators
  were revised during implementation in response to the information gathered in the baseline surveys and
  to change in the definition of one indicator, to make it precise. The data collected are reliable and of good
  quality. It is unclear if the authorities are committed to continuing to gather the information after project
  closing.

  No information was collected to replicate the economic analysis of the PAD on the expected benefit of
  the project. The ICR notes that this calculation could not be made because of limitations on data
  availability.



c. M&E Utilization
  The data collected during implementation provided information about achievement of outcomes besides
  outputs and intermediate indicators. They were not used to inform important policy decisions by the
  Borrower and it is unclear if they were used to implement decisions and reforms and sustain the results
  achieved beyond the project’s closing date. Albania has strong institutional capacity to carry out reforms;
  missing this opportunity to enhance the project’s benefits was unfortunate.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger OP4.01 when the Board approved it, but the World Bank helped the authorities to
   prepare a Checklist Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to mitigate some problems of dust, noise and
   waste management in Tirana arising from the renovation of existing buildings where the Citizen Service
   Centers would operate. The environmental and social risks were rated low from project appraisal to project
   completion.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Citizen-centered public services (P151972)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. Financial management, flow of funds and disbursement arrangements for the
   project were adequate and complied with Bank requirements, for both the TA part, the PPF and the
   results-based-financing part. RBF part, throughout the project term. Experienced and qualified experts
   supported the financial management function which complied with financial reporting principles and
   disbursement requirements. The ratings for financial management were affected by delays in the audits
   and their quality but these issues were resolved at project closing.

   Procurement. Procurement risk was substantial because of the weak capacity of the project
   implementation unit and delays in launching some procurements.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR does not report on them.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                 IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory       Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial        Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offers the following lessons with which IEG agrees:

      The experience with the project demonstrates that a clear vision and purpose must underpin
       the digitalization efforts of a government which seeks to deliver better services to the
       country’s citizens.
      For reforms to succeed, selecting the correct delivery model is fundamental. For Albania, the
       creation of high-quality physical access points, alongside efforts for the service to be more
       citizen-centric (via feedback and service standards), created a new culture, which raised
       citizens’ expectations and increased the demand for more complex institutional service
       delivery reforms. Building CSCs produced quick gains and visible changes, creating the

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Citizen-centered public services (P151972)



        space for more ambitious institutional reforms. The customer-orientation of the CSCs and
        their professionalism changed the service delivery culture in the country.
       Selecting appropriate results indicators must constitute a central point of project design,
        since the information and communications technology inputs (ICT) alone are insufficient to
        ensure that the project delivers services and benefits citizens.
       Sustained and informative dialogue with the client regarding the instrument is critical to
        ensure that there is strong alignment between the incentives it provides and the incentives of
        the relevant implementing agencies.

The results of the project illustrate the continued relevance and importance of physical channels of
service delivery, especially for the vulnerable groups. In other instances, further financing and
investment should be encouraged to support scaling up e-service ambitions to ensure more resilient,
citizen centric and transparent service delivery. To strike the “right” balance, it is important to take
into account the local context, the characteristics of service users and the characteristics of the
services provided.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The project was extremely successful and can provide good examples of what is required to help improve the
  quality of government service to its citizens.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides good information to assess the achievements of the project and its shortcomings, mostly
minor ones. Its rating of results is fair. The information is relevant, credible and verifiable. The quality of its
analysis is good, The report summarizes the salient points well and links evidence to findings. Its structure and
organization is consistent with the guidelines for ICR preparation. The ICR, at 60 pages, could have been a bit
shorter avoiding some repetition, such as that on section II which already embedded in the discussion on the
outcome (Section II).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Citizen-centered public services (P151972)




                                                                          Page 14 of 14
