     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0022582

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P121455                                  NG-State Employment and Expenditure

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                  Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-50220                                30-Jun-2017                                         246,937,698.37

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Mar-2012                              30-Sep-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                        200,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                         200,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                     174,509,962.28                                                0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan               Clay Wescott                 Jennifer L. Keller              IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Krishnamani




 P133071_TBL
 Project ID                               Project Name
 P133071                                  NG-State Employment and Expenditure ( P133071 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                 72678470.78

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



 31-Jul-2014

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                    0.00                                   83,209,300.00

 Revised Commitment                                     0.00                                   70,491,144.89

 Actual                                                 0.00                                   72,678,470.78




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement dated April 16, 2013
   (page 5) and in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page vii):

   "To enhance opportunities for employment and access to socio-economic services, whilst improving
   public expenditure management systems in the participating states."

   This review is based on the two PDOs stated below:

   1. Enhancing opportunities for employment and access to socio-economic services in the participating states.

   2. Improving the public expenditure management systems in the participating states.

   The PDOs were unchanged, although the Bank expanded the project scope with the Additional Financing
   (AF) for the project approved in March 2016.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components (PAD, pages 7 - 10).

   1. Youth employment and access to socio-economic services. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$126.84 million. However, the actual cost was US$187.83 million. This component financed activities for
   promoting employment and access to socio-economic services in the participating states. There were three
   subcomponents:



                                                                                                 Page 2 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



a. promoting employment for youth in urban areas through small public works (road and drainage
maintenance, maintenance of public space, and disposal and sorting of refuse), and conducting study tours
to the staff of selected ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) and committee members to observe
similar youth employment schemes;

b. providing grants to existing technical, vocational and agricultural schools for: (i) acquiring instructional
materials; (ii) rehabilitating selected technical and vocational training (TVT) institutions; (iii) national
accreditation of courses taught at the TVTs: (iv) conducting technical education fairs; (v) developing
strategies for skill development programs, and information and communication technology for teaching;
(vi) expanding the remedial courses for teachers; (vii) partnering with the private sector for job placements
and industrial attachments for providing jobs to people with vocational skills; (viii) expand the
entrepreneurship development programs through starter packs for TVT post graduates (a way to assist the
TVTs post graduates commence their chosen trades; (ix) capacity building of the state ministries
of education and agriculture;

The outputs described above would improve the quality of skills acquired by graduates of TVTs,
and increase the supply of people with improved vocational skills.

c. providing grants for the Fadama (a Hausa word for low-land agricultural projects) community
associations and community and social development agencies for developing community
infrastructure projects (such as, rehabilitating feeder roads, primary schools, health centers, water
points, rural markets, and small scale irrigation and drainage systems).

The outputs of activities described above would increase the number of people with access to essential
services, and increase the demand for youth with improved vocational skills trained under the project in the
participating states.

The Bank expanded the scope of this component with the AF for the project, to explore further mechanisms
for ensuring continuity of employment for youths currently employed
under this scheme.

2. Public Financial Management (PFM) Reforms. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$49.61 million.
However, the actual cost was US$57.68 million. This component financed technical assistance (TA)
activities for PFM reforms to be implemented by the states based on their PFM reform action plans.

Activities in this component included: (i) review of existing financial management
legislation/regulations, drafting new legislation/regulations, and organizing public finance
seminars; (ii) strengthening budget execution and instituting multi-year budget frameworks; (iii) modernizing
the financial reporting system; (iv) restructuring the office of the state auditor-general and capacity building
of members of the public accounts committee of the state legislature; (v) implementing State Integrated
Financial Management Information Systems (SIFMIS); (vi) strengthening the public procurement
processes; and (vii) strengthening the tax administration of states.

The outputs of activities were expected to reduce the deviation between annual expenditure and budgeted
spending. Adopting new procurement laws and establishing a specialized procurement cadre would enable
the adoption of standard bidding procedures and an increased percentage of public contracts above a
threshold awarded through a competitive process.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



  The Bank expanded the scope of this component to include TA activities in the area of PFM reforms in
  states such as: (i) migrating to the newly adopted Federal Account Allocation Committee budget
  classification that complied with the 2001 Government Finance Statistics (GFS); (ii) improving cash
  management and introducing a Treasury Single Account; (iii) transitioning to the International Public Sector
  Accounting Standards; and (iv) strengthening the budgeting framework.

  3. Project Coordination and Implementation Support. The estimated cost at appraisal was
  US$16.00 million. However, the actual cost was US$19.54 million. This component financed technical and
  logistical support for project coordination. Activities in this component included:

  (i) supporting coordination at the federal level including training the staff of the National Project Coordinating
  Unit in the Ministry of Budget and National Planning; (ii) supporting state-level coordination and training
  staff of the state coordinating units on fiduciary management, Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), and
  environmental and social safeguards; (iii) supporting the Ministry of Niger Delta Affairs (MNDA) in two
  areas: (i) developing a public investment strategy for Niger Delta Region; and (ii) strengthening their M&E
  system.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$200.00 million. The actual cost was US$265.05
  million.

  Project financing. An IDA Credit of US$200.00 million financed the project. By the time the project closed,
  it had disbursed US$174.26 million of this credit. The European Union approved a grant of US$86.84 million
  in March 2016, that became additional financing administered by the Bank. With this, the total funding for
  the project was US$286.84 million. The total amount disbursed was US$246.94 million. US$4.99 million
  was undisbursed. The difference between the IDA loan and the amount spent was mainly was due to
  exchange rate changes during implementation. These amounts were provided to IEG by the project team.

  Recipient contribution. The government had not planned at appraisal to contribute. However, according to
  the information provided by the team, most states provided accommodation for housing the project
  implementation units in government premises, and Bayelsa State provided about the equivalent of US$2.00
  million over the lifetime of the project. The team also clarified to IEG that the communities in the four states
  provided 10% of the project cost.

  Dates. The Bank approved the project on March 6, 2012, and the project became effective on July 30,
  2013, with a planned closing date of June 30, 2017. However, the project closed fifteen months behind
  schedule on September 30, 2020.

  Other changes. The AF supported the following changes for the project in March 2016.

        expansion of the project scope (discussed in Section 2d), and
        coverage of the cost overruns of component two activities.

  The project was restructured twice (Level 2 restructurings) during implementation.




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



   The first restructuring on March 29, 2017 supported the following changes.

         modifying the results framework, and increasing outcome targets to reflect the scaled-up project
          activities.
         reallocating funds between disbursement categories.
         changing the project closing date from June 30, 2017, to September 30, 2019.

   The second restructuring on September 20, 2019 supported the following changes.

         reallocating funds between categories.
         reallocating savings realized due to exchange rate changes to scale up components one and two.

         extending the closing date from September 30, 2019 to September 30, 2020.



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country sector context. Nigeria is a federation of 36 states and a federal capital territory. Under
the constitution, the states have significant autonomy, and are responsible for delivering critical public
services. Despite high and sustained growth in the years before the appraisal, over half of
Nigeria's population was poor, and unemployment was a serious problem across all age groups. The
overall unemployment rate was around 21% (with youth unemployment around 25%). Nigeria's poor
economic situation stemmed from poor governance and poor public resource management. The Bank
designed this project following the Niger Delta Amnesty Program for militants in 2007 and the return of
relative peace to the region.

This project addressed two distinct development challenges facing the Nigerian economy: youth
employment and the need to improve public services in war-torn communities visibly. Small public
works could deliver short term-results in employing youth and improving essential services to support the
amnesty program.

The project design addressed the supply and demand issues for youth employment that were important in
the country context. One, the project activities aimed at increasing the supply of qualified youth who could
work in community infrastructure projects. and two, the project activities aimed to strengthen the capacity of
civil society organizations to design community infrastructure projects, which in turn would increase
the demand for workers trained under the project. The team clarified this project focused on youth
unemployment, as this was the primary cause of unrest in the Niger Delta region. The team also pointed out
many other government initiatives on skills development and support to small and medium-size enterprises
addressed the structural issues contributing to unemployment across all age groups. Furthermore,
addressing PFM issues would provide the foundation for better allocation of public resources in the medium
to long run.

Government strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned at appraisal with the government strategies articulated
in: (i) the Niger Delta Development Plan of 2009, which provided a development blueprint for states in the

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



               Niger Delta; (ii) Nigeria's vision 20:2020; (ii) the seven-point agenda which focused on issues in the Niger
               Delta Region; and (iii) the transformation agenda launched in for 2011 - 2015, which prioritized job creation
               and infrastructure development. In addition, the PDO's were in line with the new government's agenda -
                "Our Vision for a New Nigeria". This agenda identified the following as priorities: threat to national security
               caused by militancy of youth, good governance and better public financial management, human capital
               development and economic development.

               Bank strategy. At appraisal, the PDO's were well-aligned with the three pillars of the Bank's Country
               Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2010 - 2013: governance, maintaining non-oil growth and promoting human
               development. In addition, the PDOs continue to be relevant to the three pillars of the current Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) (2021-2025) for Nigeria: Strengthening the foundations of the public sector,
               investing in human capital through improving service delivery of critical services and promoting jobs and
               economic diversification (CPF, page 30).

               Prior Bank experience. The Bank has financed several multi-state and multi-sector projects in Nigeria
               (e.g. the FADAMA project and the Community and Social Development Project). Four of the nine states of
               the Niger Delta region (Bayelsa, River, Delta and Edo) implemented the project. These were some of the
               oil-producing states in the region with the highest environmental degradation, persistent unemployment and
               severe law and order issues. This project was built based on the experiences from the previous Bank-
               financed projects described above. An important lesson incorporated in the design of this project was
               strengthening demand-side governance at the sub-national level in general, and working with civil society
               organizations in particular, for designing community infrastructure projects, that would in turn increase the
               demand for workers trained under this project (PAD, paragraph 36). The analytical underpinnings for the
               PFM reforms came from the Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Reviews
               undertaken in the four participating states. Given that demonstrating short-term results was significant in the
               wake of the amnesty, and reforms aimed at addressing PFM management issues were essential
               for improving service delivery in the medium to long run, the project activities were appropriate.

               The relevance of PDO is however assessed as substantial, as the employment objective is a short-run
               objective, and the problem of unemployment across all age groups (including youth) is a longer-term
               development issue.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective

                             Enhancing opportunities for employment and access to socio-economic services in the participating states.


                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)




Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs such as, acquiring training materials, rehabilitating selected TVT schools,
national level accreditation of courses taught at the TVTs, conducting training sessions, and developing
strategies for skill development programs, and starter packs for graduates for TVTs, were expected to
improve the vocational skills of people in general, and youth in particular. These outputs would increase the
supply of skilled workers with vocational skills. The outputs such as, strengthening the capacity of the civil
society organizations at the subnational level to design community infrastructure projects, would increase the
demand for the skilled workers trained under the project. In addition, the results of activities associated with
building community infrastructure, were expected to lead to improved access to socio-economic services. The
causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were clear. The intended results were
monitorable.

Outputs.

      A total of 29, 366 youths were trained with vocational and training skills in the four states, far
         exceeding the target of 14,629. This total included: 3,460 in Bayelsa State (target 3,314); 14,959 in
         Delta (target 2,159); 18,680 in Edo (target 7,466); and 21,770 (target 10,845). The ICR (page 24)
         notes that the significant achievements in Delta state were due to the Youth Agricultural
         Entrepreneurs Program and Skills Entrepreneurship Program of the Delta State Creation Office
         program. This project was a part of this broader program.
        The National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) accredited 117 courses taught at the TVT centers
         in the states by December 31, 2019, far exceeding the target of 67. In addition, the NBTE granted
         accreditation to: (i) 35 and 32 courses to TVTs in the Delta and Edo States; (ii) 29 trades in TVT
         schools; (iii) courses run by the craft training institutions in Bayelsa State; and (iv) five technical
         courses at the Government Technical and Science Colleges.
        64,015 people were trained in Life Planning and Entrepreneurship skills, far exceeding the target of
         29,254.
        The project team told IEG that Edo and Bayelsa States had completed all their Community
         Development Plans: the status of plans in Rivers and Delta States is not known.
        Bayelsa and Rivers States provided starter packs to graduates of TVTs. The content of the packs was
         determined independently by each school, but common to all - was providing cash for either
         covering rental for one to three years, or working capital. According to the team, Bayelsa State
         continues to give starter packs to graduates.

The grants were provided for two major categories of CDD operations:

      1. Economic - using the FADAMA approach. This approach provided productive grants in rural areas
       for designing community infrastructure projects. In terms of interventions under this approach,
       authorities developed 238 local development plans and completed 77%. In addition 15% are ongoing
       and the remaining 8% did not take off.
      2. Social - using the community and social development approach. This approach addressed the
       provision of social services and natural resource management in rural and peri-urban communities.
       The project supported 359 community-driven projects. Of these, communities completed 91% and had
       nearly completed the remaining 10% when the project closed. According to the information provided



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



         by the team, Edo and Bayelsa States have completed all their community-driven projects and the
         team awaits feedback from the Rivers and Delta States.

Outcomes.

The outputs of activities should have led to increasing youth employment and the number of people with
access to socio-economic services in the four states.

      A total of 67,650 youths were employed in the four states during the project execution period, far
       exceeding the target 33,674. This total included: 17,685 in Bayelsa State (target 6,626); 9,515 in
       Delta (target 8,736); 18,680 in Edo (target 7,466); and 21,770 in Rivers (target 10,845).
      2,617,617 people in principle had access to socioeconomic services in the four states exceeding the
       target of 453,863. This total included: 521,846 in Bayelsa (target 121,500); 1,457,210 in Delta (target
       129,646); 186,142 in Edo (target 150, 347); and 469,918 in Rivers (target 52,370).

1,870,827 people benefitted from project activities in the four states, far exceeding the target of 340,000. The
project beneficiaries included youth who were unemployed, people seeking to be trained in vocational and
training schools and technical and vocational training institutions, the teachers who were recruited or trained,
students benefitting from direct interventions to enhance learning, and people who were provided with access
to social services (such as water and sanitation services). This total included:

        525,512 in Bayelsa State (target 85,000). 57% of the beneficiaries were females (target 30%);
        1,466,725 in Delta State (target 79,000). 56% of the beneficiaries were females (target 30%);
        163,880 in Edo State (target 81,000). 57% of the beneficiaries were females (target 30%).
        484, 237 in Rivers State (target 95,000). 52% of the beneficiaries were females (target 30%).

 While it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which the outcomes were attributable to the project, given that
the participating states had similar government schemes for increasing employment, it is reasonable to
conclude that the project contributed to realizing the PDO.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improving the public expenditure management systems in the participating states.

Rationale
Theory of change. The causal links between the project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The
participating states had undertaken Public Expenditure Management (PEM) and Financial Accountability
Reviews and prepared reform action plans. This project intended to assist the states in achieving some of the
recommended PEM and financial management plans. The outputs of activities such as submitting the public
finance legislation to the State House of Assembly, developing a medium-term expenditure plan and
publishing the annual budget, were expected to reduce the deviation between annual expenditure and

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



budgeted spending. Adopting new procurement laws and establishing a specialized procurement cadre would
enable the adoption of standard bidding procedures and an increased percentage of public contracts above a
threshold awarded through a competitive process. The outputs of activities associated with establishing a tax
payer database would increase internally generated revenue. These outcomes would contribute to the
medium and long-term result of improving the PFM of the four states.

Outputs.

      The states started publishing the annual budget estimates on their websites as expected.
      77 Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) developed medium expenditure plans from the
         State Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) in the four states. This total showed variations
         between states: 28 MDAs in Bayelsa (target 8); Five in Delta (target 8); 43 in Edo (target 8); and one
         in Rivers (target 8).
        The states adopted new and modern budget classification.
        The number of months to submit annual audited financials of the state to the State House of the
         Assembly declined from 12 at the baseline in February 2012 to six months in Rivers, and five months
         in Delta and Edo States as targeted. In Bayelsa it decreased to six months, short of the target of five
         months.
        Bayelsa and Edo states launched Public Finance Management Reform Action plans based on their
         completed Public Financial Management and Financial Accountability Review.
        The states enacted new Public Procurement Laws. As a result, two states (Edo and Rivers) started
         using standard bidding documents (SBDs) for 100% of contracts over the threshold limits. The other
         states (Delta and Bayelsa) are still in the process of developing SBDs.
        Only one state (Rivers) had automated its tax system (PIVTAMIS) when the project closed. However,
         according to information provided by the Bank team, the automated tax system is now also fully
         operational in Edo State.
        The State Integrated Financial Management Information System (SIFMIS) was operational in all
         the states when the project closed.

Outcomes.

The PFM reforms were expected to lead to two outcomes: reducing the deviation between actual and
budgeted expenditure and increasing the percentage of public contracts above a threshold awarded through
competitive bidding.

The performance of the states is as follows;

      Bayelsa State reduced the deviation between actual and budgeted expenditure from 16% at the
         baseline in February 2012 to 15%, short of the target of 10%.
      The deviation decreased from 24% at the baseline to 23% (target 10%) in Delta State.
      The deviation decreased from 36% at the baseline to 15% (target 10%) in Edo State.
      The deviation decreased from 32% at the baseline to 16% (target 10%) in Rivers State.

The percentage of public contracts awarded through a competitive process in the states is as follows:




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)




                                  In Delta State, the percentage of public contracts awarded through a competitive process, increased
                                   from 20% at the baseline to 100%, surpassing the target of 60%.
                                  In Bayelsa State, it increased from 20% at the baseline in February to 54% (slightly short of the target
                                   of 60%).
                                  In Edo State, it increased from 20% at the baseline to 55% (short of the target of 85%).
                                  In Rivers State, it increased from 25% at the baseline to 40% (short of the target of 60%).

                            There was progress towards improving public financial management, although there was variation in the level
                            of progress across the participating states.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy was substantial, with some shortcomings. The project almost entirely achieved its
                            development objectives in youth employment and access to socio-economic services. Progress was made in
                            improving public financial management, although with variations across the four participating states.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   There was no formal economic analysis of project activities either at appraisal or at closure. When the project
   closed, the team clarified that they did not calculate the Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) (such as in the
   water and health micro projects). There was also no EIRR of the Public Financial Management plans.

   The project completed all activities without any cost overruns. In addition, savings realized due to exchange rate
   changes were utilized for scaling up project activities.

   Value for money. The project demonstrated good value for money supporting the employment of trained
   youth in community infrastructure projects that were created by the civil society organizations under this project.
   67,650 youth were employed in the four states in community infrastructure projects when the project
   closed, more than double the target of 33,674. In addition, 117 TVETs were accredited, almost double the target
   of 63. A total of 1,870,827 people benefitted from project activities, far exceeding the target of 340,000
   (discussed in section four).



                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



Cost-effectiveness considerations. The unit cost of several CDD projects was lower than the cost of similar
micro-projects executed by government agencies. For instance, the ICR (page 91) notes that the average cost
of micro-projects of the water and health sectors in this project, were 24% and 38% lower than the costs of
similar projects executed by government agencies. Likewise, the State Integrated Financial Management
System's (SIFMS) implementation cost was favorable when compared with the global experience that reviewed
134 projects (Lessons from Reforming Financial Management Information Systems, World Bank Policy Paper
2018).

Operational and administrative issues during implementation. The project became effective 16 months after
approval, due to the suspension of project activities by the World Bank because of non-compliance with
environmental and social safeguards. This caused the project to close 16 months behind schedule.

In sum, efficiency was substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of PDO is assessed as substantial, because as the employment objective is a short-run
objective, and the problem of unemployment across all age groups (including youth) is a longer-term
development issue. Efficiency is assessed as substantial. Overall efficacy was assessed as substantial. The
project almost achieved its development objectives in youth employment and access to socio-economic
services. Progress was made in improving public financial management, although the project did not achieve
some of the PFM targets. Taking these shortcomings into account, overall outcome is assessed as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)




The ICR (paragraph 87) notes that the state governments had started mainstreaming project activities into
their annual budgets. The state budgets of 2021 allocated funds for state project coordinating units for youth
employment schemes and each state allocated funds for aspects of the organizational/support structure for
SIFMIS. The ICR does not provide details whether the allocated budget is adequate for maintaining the
youth employment scheme and maintaining the SIFMIS.

However there are some risks to development outcomes.

Social risk. There is a substantial social risk, given that the project only created temporary jobs and the
project did not specifically address the structural reasons for unemployment across all groups.

Technical risk. There is the technical risk that there may not be adequate capacity in the country to operate
the equipment and addressing technical issues including in the SIFMIS equipment.

Financial risk. There is the risk that the deterioration of the fiscal situation such as due to the COVID-19
crisis and shortfall in oil revenues could undermine funding for the employment program in the participating
states.

Political risk. Given that commitment at the sub-national level is required for sustaining the CDD
subprojects, there is the risk that inadequate sub-national commitment could compromise the development
outcomes.

Security risk. Security concerns remain an issue in the Niger Delta.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed projects in
  Nigeria (e.g., the FADAMA and Community and Social Development Project). Lessons incorporated at
  design included: (i) Since the project included federal and state aspects, setting robust institutional
  arrangements for coordination and implementation (discussed below); (ii) The project responded to both
  the short term needs (jobs for youth) and the medium-term needs of the states in financial management
  (The project did not however specifically address the issues associated with employment for all working
  age citizens); (iii) strengthening demand-side governance through working with communities at the sub-
  national level, that would aid in designing community infrastructure projects, that would in turn increase
  the demand for workers trained under this project; and (iv) given the erosion of the training
  capacity within the participating state's civil services over the period , developing training policies for skills
  development in areas such as procurement, public sector budgeting and public expenditure
  management. The analytical underpinnings for the PFM came from the Public Expenditure Management
  and Financial Accountability Reviews undertaken in the four participating states (PAD, paragraph 21).




                                                                                                         Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. The National Project Coordinating Unit in the
  Ministry of Finance, Budget and National Planning was responsible for federal-level coordination. The
  State Project Coordinating Units were responsible for implementing project activities at the state level.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal, including high risks associated with the weak
  implementation capacities of the participating states, governance risk, and security concerns in the Niger
  Delta region. Mitigation measures incorporated at design, included capacity building to the states in
  critical areas, regular engagement with government counterparts, and alternative implementation
  arrangements (such as inviting project teams to more secure locations outside the affected zones) if the
  security situation in the Niger Delta deteriorated. However, even with the mitigation measures, project risk
  was rated high at appraisal because of the multi-sector and multi-state nature of the project (PAD,
  paragraph 17). The arrangements made at appraisal for M&E, safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in sections nine and ten).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (paragraph 85) notes four multi-disciplinary supervision missions during 2013 - 2014 and six
 during 2017 - 2020, complemented by technical missions to address specific issues. The Bank carried out
 the final supervision mission virtually due to the disruptions caused by COVID-19. The specialists had
 worked in environments similar to Nigeria, though not necessarily in Nigeria. In addition, the team
 proactively responded to the challenges during implementation. For instance, given the wide range of
 activities supported by the project, the kobo toolbox - an application used by the Bank for project
 monitoring, especially in Fragile, Conflict and Violence locations, and a third party monitoring system was
 introduced by the team (discussed in section 10b) to monitor progress and validate the outcomes.
 According to the information provided by the team, there were six Task Team Leaders during the project
 lifetime.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The outcome indicators were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The number of people
 employed under the employment program and the number of people with access to socio-
 economic services, were suitable for monitoring component one activities. The percentage deviation of

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



 actual aggregate expenditure from budgeted expenditure, and the percentage of public contracts awarded
 through the competitive process, were appropriate for monitoring activities associated with PDO Two. The
 team clarified that a critical focus of training related interventions was to get the state-level training
 institutions accredited by national bodies responsible for accrediting the state level training institutions
 (discussed in section four). The team also clarified that the national bodies continue monitoring the quality
 of state level training institutions, ensuring that these institutions continue delivering programs that met the
 accreditation standards.

 The M&E framework at design was appropriate. The framework included the following: (i) developing an
 M&E development plan, based on a rapid readiness assessment conducted before effectiveness; (ii)
 allocating resources for an M&E system and training the state staff on data collection; (iii) identifying the
 data sources. Quarterly progress reports of the implementing agencies were to monitor youth employment,
 TVT, and CDD activities. In addition, the annual financial and audited accounts of the state accountant
 general, the budget statement and the budget performance reports were to be used to monitor the
 project's PFM component. The baseline data for the PFM component came from a Public Expenditure
 Management and Financial Accountability Review conducted in the four states.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank conducted the Mid-Term Review on February 11. 2016. Following this, the team appropriately
  revised the indicators, to reflect the increased project scope with respect to the number of youth
  employed under the project. Youth employment programs, TVT and CDD activities were monitored
  through quarterly progress reports during implementation.

  The ICR (page 44) notes that the project supported the implementation of around 1300 rural road and
  waste management and over 3,000 community projects in the four states. Given the wide range of project
  activities, the project used two innovative features for monitoring. The Bank used standard paper-based
  tools for tracking progress before this project. For this project, the Bank opted to use the Kobo toolbox -
  the Bank's standard application for project monitoring, especially in Fragile, Conflict and
  Violence locations. Between July to December 2019, the Bank digitized all project locations in a
  Geographic Information System database, with photographs, key beneficiary names and primary project
  data. The team had to return to the project locations if the data quality was not of the required standard,
  for ensuring quality control of the collected data. The data collected was in the public domain and
  available at www.kobotoolbox.com, and in addition the Bank established a mechanism for third-party
  monitoring to validate outcomes, through the Data Science Nigeria - a leading Non-Governmental
  Organization that specializes in the use of Artificial Intelligence for practical solutions.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data provided information for decision making, resource mobilization, accountability and
  planning to federal and state governments and other stakeholders of project performance during
  implementation. For example, the M&E information helped the project team and the implementing
  agencies to make design adjustments and improve technical support during implementation. This
  information was used at closure for monitoring project outcomes.




                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



  M&E is assessed as substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies, triggering five safeguard policies at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Pest
   Management (OP 4.09); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.01); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD page viii).

   Environmental assessment. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared and
   publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address the potential environmental effects. (PAD, paragraph 71).

   Pest management. The design did not envision the procurement of pesticides or herbicides. However,
   given the possibility that the agricultural activities of the project could lead to increased use of
   pesticides, herbicides and inorganic fertilizers, an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) was prepared
   as part of the ESMP (PAD, paragraph 72).

   Natural habitats and Forest safeguards. Given the project activities on reforestation and that project
   activities may be in the vicinity of natural habitats, these safeguards were triggered. Mitigation measures
   used in the prior Bank-financed FADAMA 111 project and the Community and Social Development project
   were to be used to address issues relating to these safeguards (PAD, paragraph 75).

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed
   at appraisal to address involuntary resettlement issues (PAD, paragraph 66).

   The ICR (paragraph 76) reports that the project complied with all the environmental and social policies, with
   no adverse effects. However, the ICR notes that in 2014, civil works implementation took place without
   cleared ESMPs, which caused the temporary suspension of the project. The project also had a Grievance
   Redress Mechanism (GRM) in the four states to ensure that communities could give feedback concerning
   project activities. The ICR does not provide information on whether the GRM was used in the participating
   states.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The State Project Financial Management Units (SPFMUs) and the Federal
   Project Financial Management Division (FPFMD) were in charge of financial management. The SPFMUs
   and FPFMD had executed Bank-financed projects. The Bank conducted an assessment of the
   financial arrangements at appraisal. Although the Bank found these to be adequate, the Bank rated the
   financial risk as high, due to the inherent risks associated with CDD activities. Mitigation measures,

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



   included preparation of a Financial Procedures Manal with a risk management strategy. With mitigation
   measures, the Bank rated the financial risk as substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 53).

   The ICR (paragraph 79) notes progressive improvement in financial management over the project life. The
   Bank adequately resolved the flagged financial management issues except in one participating state
   (Delta). The ICR notes that the Bank received annual audit reports in a timely fashion.

   Procurement. The National Project Coordinating Unit at the National Planning Commission, and the State
   Project Coordinating Units were responsible for managing procurement. The Bank conducted a
   procurement assessment at appraisal (PAD, page 62). In states with no experience in Bank's procurement
   procedures, the Unit hired procurement consultants with expertise in the Bank's policies in the first year of
   implementation to train procurement officers.

   The ICR (paragraph 81) notes that while the overall performance concerning internal controls, record-
   keeping and implementation was adequate, there were significant issues in one participating state (Delta),
   that triggered an Integrity Vice Presidency review, that declared around US$1.8 million of IDA funds as
   ineligible.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None identified



d. Other
   None identified



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG supports the following main lessons that the ICR draws from the experience of implementing
this project, with some adaptation.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       NG-State Employment and Expenditure (P121455)



1. A youth employment strategy using small public works as a tool can be an appropriate
strategy for quick results in disturbed areas like the Niger Delta. However, such a strategy does
not address the broader challenge of providing remunerative, safe and dignified work for all working-
age groups.

2. Innovative digital technology can be helpful for tracking project performance. For example
a geographic-information system-based digital database and third- party can successfully track
performance, even if the project activities cover a wide area.

3. Successfully implementing an Integrated Financial Information Management System
requires competent human resource and good infrastructure. Capacity building of the relevant
agencies needs to be assured in jurisdictions implementing the system, as is the case in, for
example, Edo State, which is stably operating its system.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear. The ICR provided a clear description of the country context when the Bank prepared
this project. The theory of change provided in the ICR shows the causal links between the project activities,
their outputs and the intended outcomes. The theory of change makes a clear distinction of between the
outcomes realized in the short term, and outcomes requiring a longer horizon for a clear demonstration of
results. The ICR adheres to the guidelines. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
