     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0022684

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P154803                                     Malawi Floods ERL

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Malawi                                      Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56360,IDA-D0580                         31-Dec-2019                                          81,134,011.98

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-May-2015                                 31-Jan-2021

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            80,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             80,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         79,402,708.90                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Kavita Mathur                 Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 30), the
   Project Development Objective (PDO) was "to “sustainably restore agricultural livelihoods, reconstruct critical
   public infrastructure to improved standards in the flood-affected districts, and improve the Government of
   Malawi’s disaster response and recovery capacities.”

   This review will assess project performance against the following objectives:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



         To sustainably restore agricultural livelihoods.
         To reconstruct critical public infrastructure to improved standards in the flood-affected districts.
         To improve the Government of Malawi’s disaster response and recovery capacities.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Livelihoods Restoration and Food Security: (US$29 million at appraisal and actual). This component
   would finance two sub-components to restore the livelihood supporting and income generating activities.
   This would enable beneficiaries to meet the food and basic household needs of the mostly agricultural
   flood-affected households. The first sub-component “Labor-Intensive Community Infrastructure Repair”
   would finance cash transfers or in-kind assistance in exchange for restoring community infrastructure
   destroyed by the floods using beneficiary labor. The second sub-component “Restocking of the Strategic
   Grain Reserve (SGR)” would replenish the country's SGR after releasing the reserves to feed households
   affected by the flood.

   2. Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Reconstruction: (US$43 million at appraisal and actual). This
   component would finance the reconstruction and restoration of infrastructure in four sectors, using Build
   Back Better standards and the Flood Risk Management Action Plan funded under the Shire River Basin
   Management Plan (SRBMP). These four sectors included (i) roads and bridges, (ii) irrigation and rural water
   supply and sanitation infrastructure, (iii) water resources management, and (iv) education and health
   facilities. Funds would also replace school learning materials, furniture, medical equipment, and medical
   supplies.

   3. Promoting Disaster Resilience: (US$4 million at appraisal and actual). This component would finance
   technical assistance for post disaster response and recovery in two sub-components. The first would
   finance efforts to strengthen the capacity of the Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DODMA) in (i)
   data preparedness and use of the Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) methodology; (ii) recovery
   planning and implementation; (iii) community mapping and land use; and (iv) disaster response. The second
   would finance efforts for safer housing by (i) reviewing and strengthening guidelines; (ii) developing a
   strategy to raise awareness in the use of these guidelines; (iii) developing a national building code and
   standards for private housing; and (iv) a study to assess the viability of railways rehabilitation.

   4. Program Management: (US$4 million at appraisal and actual). This component would finance the
   operating costs for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU); the technical designs for the reconstruction and
   rehabilitation of infrastructure investments; contract management; and required audits and assessments.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The original and the actual total project cost was US$80 million equivalent.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



   Financing. The original financing was US$80.0 million. The International Development Association (IDA)'s
   Crisis Response Window (PAD, paragraph 14) fully financed this project with an equal combination of grant
   (US$40.0 million) and credit (US$40.0 million). The actual credit disbursed was US$79.4 million. Foreign
   exchange adjustments accounted for the balance. During implementation, the Malawian kwacha (MWK)
   depreciated against traded currencies while the US$ appreciated against the SDR (ICR, paragraph 67).

   Borrower/Recipient Contribution. There were no planned or actual contribution .

   Dates. The project was approved on May 7, 2015 and made effective on August 20, 2015. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was completed on September 4, 2017. The original closing date was December 31,
   2019. Two level 2 restructurings extended the closing date by 13 months to January 31, 2021 (ICR,
   paragraph 17):

         on December 20, 2019, to extend the closing date by 9 months to September 30, 2020 to allow for
          the completion of critical road works that were delayed following a contract cancellation of a
          noncompliant contractor and need for continued strengthening of the safeguards system;

         on September 23, 2020 to extend the closing date by another 4 months to January 31, 2021 to allow
          for completion of road works that had suffered delays due to the COVID-19 lockdown measures,
          gaps in overseas expert staff, supply chain delays, and material shortages.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Malawi is a landlocked country, with its population anticipated to reach about 23 million
by 2025 from just over 16 million in 2015 (PAD, paragraph 1). Agriculture contributed around a third of the
country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP), employing over 80 percent of its labor force. Around 85 percent
of its population lived in rural areas, engaged in smallholder, rain-fed subsistence agriculture. These rural
areas were marked by poor, unreliable infrastructure. Roads connecting farmers to markets were poorly
maintained, with limited resilience against natural hazards. The government established a Strategic Grain
Reserve (SGR) in 1981 to address its vulnerability to climate-induced disasters and to economic shocks.

In January 2015, the highest seasonal rainfall caused significant flooding in the poorest southern area of
the country. The floods affected 1.15 million people, displaced 336,000 residents, and lost 104 lives (PAD,
paragraph 6). Floods washed away livestock, destroyed buildings, houses, assets, damaged roads,
bridges, irrigation structures, schools, and health facilities. The government declared a state of disaster for
the affected 15 districts. The government, the World Bank, the United Nations Development Program
(UNDP), and the European Union (EU), conducted a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). The PDNA
informed this emergency project.

Country Plans: The PDOs were relevant to the country's Malawi Growth and Development Strategy III for
the period 2017-2022. A key priority area of the strategy aimed at inclusive agricultural transformation,
adaptive to climate change (MGSD, p. xvii). An intermediate outcome was "enhanced community resilience
to the impact of climate change" addressed by the PDOs (MGSD, Figure on p. 3). The PDOs also adhered


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



               to the vision of Malawi 2063 (launched in January 2021), the basis of all country development plans by
               contributing to agricultural productivity, one of its three main priorities.

               World Bank Partnership Framework: The PDOs were also relevant to the Country Partnership
               Framework (CPF) for Malawi for FY21-FY25. The CPF had three focus areas. The PDOs contributed to the
               second focus area: Promoting Private Sector-Led Jobs and Livelihoods. The project would contribute to
               achieving Objective 2.2. Increasing Resilience in Urban and Rural Hotspots by strengthening early warning
               disaster preparedness to mitigate the impact of worsening climate shocks. The project was aligned with the
               CPF by supporting agriculture businesses and expanding access to services and markets. In addition, the
               PDOs , through its focus on reconstructing disaster resilient infrastructure and increased resilience in rural
               and urban hotspots, would contribute to regional integration by facilitating trade and access to corridor
               value chains such as the strategic Nacala corridor linking Malawi to the coast (CPF, paragraph 79).

               Prior World Bank Operations in the Country and in the Sector: The Bank's experience in the country
               and in the sector included: (i) the agricultural livelihood, productivity and transport sector access under the
               Second Agriculture Sector Wide Approach Support Project (ASWAp-SP) and the Irrigation Rural
               Livelihoods and Agricultural Development Project (IRLADP); (ii) social protection interventions under the
               Malawi Social Action Fund (MASAF); (iii) the flood risk management work under the Shire River Basin
               Management Program (SRBMP); and (iv) improved infrastructure and pedagogical materials, as well as
               Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) services provisions under the Education Program and the National
               Water Development Plan 2 (NWDPII). The Disaster Risk Management (DRM) and Climate Change
               Technical Assistance (TA) program for Malawi focused on strengthening early warning systems and the
               institutional capacity of the government to effectively coordinate DRM activities across the country (PAD,
               paragraph 25). The World Bank also completed the Disaster Risk Management Development Policy
               Financing with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CAT DDO, P165056) to address fiscal constraints
               (CPF, paragraph 58). This project would contribute to the Bank's integrated programmatic framework for
               post-flood recovery in Malawi, achieve balance across public sector reconstruction, and sustainable
               recovery of lives and livelihoods disrupted by disasters (PAD, paragraph 23).

               Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated High. The PDOs were aligned with the government's strategy,
               which addressed the recovery from the floods. Two of the three PDOs were outcome oriented, focused on
               sustainability of restored agricultural livelihoods and institutional capacity. The second objective was
               formulated more as an output rather than an outcome expressed as reconstructed infrastructure
               investments with improved standards, however this formulation responded to the emergency nature of the
               project. The project was appropriately pitched according to the government's capacity with its experience in
               previously implemented Input for Asset (IFA) program to support disrupted livelihoods.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To sustainably restore agricultural livelihoods.

Rationale
Theory of Change: There were two sets of inputs. The first called for support in income generating activities
by participating in labor intensive community infrastructure repair (Input for Asset Program or IFA). This would
create jobs and restore community infrastructure. Participating beneficiaries would receive income in the form
of IFA vouchers. These vouchers would be used for food, basic household needs, and farm inputs for the
following season. The second would replenish the Strategic Grain Reserve (SGR) after food assistance to
flood-affected people was released. SGR would use available purchasing channels such as the National
Food Reserve Agency (NFRA), Agricultural Commodity Exchange for Africa (ACE), and Auction Holdings Ltd
Commodity Exchange (AHCX) as well as small and large traders and farmer organizations. The Malawi
Vulnerability Assessment Committee (MVAC) would prioritize the release of the food assistance. Sound
market analysis would stabilize prices (PAD, paragraph 82). The key expected outcomes were restored
agricultural production and livelihoods for the flood affected population. Food security would be
enhanced. The number of beneficiaries served as an outcome indicator although the expected results were
closer to the output level in the results chain. Outcome was defined to be "sustainable restoration of
agricultural production and livelihoods as well as enhanced food security for the flood-affected people (PAD,
paragraph 31);" The outcome orientation was not supported by adequate indicators, such as how the restored
livelihoods would be sustained over time, or the impact of the SGR replenishment to the food price-based
inflation. The target outcome did not sufficiently reflect the development impact of the project. The key
assumption was that local productivity (soil, weather) conditions would not change.

OUTPUTS: The following targets were exceeded:

      208,753 households (original target 180,000) received Input for Asset (IFA) Program vouchers, 54%
         of the IFA vouchers recipients were female;
      52,538 metric tons (original target 50,000) of maize were released to flood affected beneficiaries;
      52,600 metric tons (original target 50,000) of maize were purchased to replenish SGR food
         assistance for the next emergency use;

The following outputs were achieved at closing with no targets set at appraisal:

        7,946 metric tons of urea and Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium (NPK) fertilizer was purchased;
        50,062 hectares of land planted with maze;
        1,334 metric tons of hybrid maize seeds purchased;
        130,184 metric tons of maize produced;
        IFA vouchers worth MWK 1.44 billion (equivalent to US$1.824 million) of cash were disbursed to
         208,753 beneficiaries. The Task Team clarified in its October 13, 2021 email to IEG that in some
         areas where markets were working well, beneficiaries were given cash to buy inputs because this
         reduced transaction costs.

OUTCOMES: The following targets were exceeded:

      2,297,846 (original target 500,000) direct project beneficiaries restored their agricultural
         livelihoods, 52.4 (original target 50) percent of these direct beneficiaries were female. Both the PAD

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



       (paragraph 32) and the ICR (paragraph 34) noted variances in target setting given the post-disaster
       context and rapid preparation timeframe. The 2015 Post Disaster Needs Assessment noted 1,150,000
       flood affected people (ICR, Annex 4). According to the Task Team, the project was not designed
       to cover all the flood affected areas. The final number of beneficiaries increased because the IFA
       component/seed distribution, and food distribution for the estimated recovery period was redesigned
       to reach more people during the first few months of distribution. Due to the challenges of rectifying
       district level information, the team was unclear about the number beneficiaries at the time of the MTR.
       With the 2019 and 2020 restructuring focused on gender-based violence (GBV) issues and
       safeguards compliance, the team did not revise the original target then.
      563,562 (original target 500,000) flood affected people benefited from the SGR, of which, 51 (original
       target 50) percent were female

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings The interventions added a sustainable aspect to the traditional output orientation to the
emergency response- maize distribution for emergency livelihood support – by adding the IFA. This IFA work
generated farm inputs “to help farmers target the next cropping season", but the evidence is still insufficient to
support that sustainable livelihoods were generated. The Bank team added that as an emergency response,
this intervention was not intended to test over time the sustainability of livelihoods supported by the IFA. The
target indicators with regard to beneficiaries were exceeded.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reconstruct critical public infrastructure to improved standards in the flood-affected districts.

Rationale
Theory of Change: Inputs would include the restoration of roads and bridges; irrigation schemes, such as
headworks, flood protection bunds or embankments, canal sections, drains, and in-field infrastructure; water
supply and sanitation schemes such as water intake structures, treatment plants, conveyance systems,
distribution networks, pumping stations, wells, and bore holes. Inputs would also include the repair and
rehabilitation of affected schools and health facilities and flood mitigation works as part of water resources
management in line with the Flood Risk Management Action Plan. Design for the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of the target infrastructure investments would be guided by flood resistant designs under
the Build-Back Better standards (right size, right site), and the Flood Risk Management Action Plan funded
under the prior Shire River Basin Management Project.

Outputs would include the restored infrastructure in roads, bridges, schools, health facilities, irrigation, water
supply and sanitation. The water resources management outputs included river training works, river banks
protected, restored storm water drains, riparian forests, and flood protection bunds or embankments.
Outcomes were expressed as number of disaster resilient restored schools and health facilities, roads,
irrigation, and water supply and sanitation schemes. The expected results could be attributable to the
project's interventions. A beneficiary survey was conducted but only for the Inputs for Assets component,
which the Bank team validated against the results framework through a desk review (ICR, paragraph 23).

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



However, the expected results (reconstructed infrastructure) were closer to output level in the results chain
rather than outcome level, such as increased volume or value of product access to markets, reduced travel
time, or reduced incidence of accidents that the restored roads afforded the beneficiaries, an increase in their
incomes, improved productivity or improved health. Some of these outcomes were noted but not necessarily
monitored nor reported with data. These outcomes may be longer-term but tracking these with appropriate
indicators would reinforce the project's contributions to long term development. The key assumption was that
resources and structures to maintain investments were in place.

OUTPUTS:

      For the roads sector:
            o 97 (original target 90) km of roads reconstructed to improved standards and with services fully
               restored.
            o 946 (original target) m of bridges/roads (including drainage structures) reconstructed/
              rehabilitated to improved standards.
      For the schools and health sector:
            o 42 (original target 82) schools with services fully restored. At the 2017 Mid Term Review, the
              target of 82 referred to classrooms in 40 schools, but the target value was not changed.
            o 152 (original target 82) additional classrooms built or rehabilitated at the primary level
              benefiting 46,037 pupils
            o 120,000 pupils benefitting from the teaching and learning materials (TLM).
            o 7 (original target 2) health facilities reconstructed with services fully restored. 5 health centers
              were rehabilitated and 2 new health centers were constructed in Osiyana and Thuchira).
      For the irrigation, rural water supply, water resources management, and flood protection:
            o 13 irrigation schemes were rehabilitated and 4,460 treadle pumps were distributed benefiting
              3,635 ha of irrigable lands and benefitting 21,338 households.
            o 10 gravity-fed water supply schemes were rehabilitated, benefitting 260,520 residents
            o 101 boreholes and pumps were rehabilitated, benefitting 25,250 residents
            o 10 water harvesting structures were constructed, benefitting 87,386 households
            o 15 hydrological monitoring stations were installed and functional

OUTCOMES:

      For the roads sector: The roads rehabilitation provided direct employment in civil works and improved
       access to socio economic services. Travel time was reduced (from four to one hour - no targets were
       set). The ICR reports that transport costs were reduced (no data provided, ICR paragraph 30), access
       to markets improved, and the incidence of floods was minimized because river channels were
       dredged and drainage structures were widened. No data or evidence was provided. The Task Team
       clarified that the transport costs were reduced because of shortened travel time on rehabilitated roads
       (without supporting data), and previously impassable areas (due to unreliable bridges or where the
       road was cut off) were now accessible. The works followed the Build Back Better strategy, which
       presumably included improved, disaster resilient standards for the rebuilt roads. Durability and
       resilience of the bridges and drainage structures were achieved.
      For the schools and health sectors, other factors that may have contributed to these outcomes were
       not specified:




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



              o Total enrollment increased from 37,157 (18,564 boys and 18,592 girls) in 2016 to 40,868
                  (20,438 boys and 20,430 girls) by 2019, representing a 9.1 percent increase over a three year
                  period.
              o School dropouts were reduced by 61.7 percent between 2017/18 to 2019/20 academic years
                  due to increased learning spaces and availability of water and sanitation (WASH) facilities.
              o The Ministry of Education Science and Technology (MOEST) increased the teacher
                  allocation for the project-supported schools from 447 teachers in academic year 2016/17 to
                  634 teachers for academic year 2019/20. The Task Team clarified that the additional teacher
                  allocation was not project financed but due to the increase in the number of classrooms,
                  increase in enrollment, and teacher's houses. The MOEST complimented the project results by
                  allocating more teachers.
              o The addition of specific rooms for health services that were fully equipped, with quality
                  antenatal and postnatal services, as well as enhanced patient privacy, led to an increase in the
                  number of women delivering babies in these facilities (no number reported).
        The irrigation schemes increased the frequency of household agricultural production per year (no
         data, ICR, Annex 5) but did not include other factors that may have contributed to this outcome.
        In the flood-affected districts, access to potable water reduced the burden on women who used to
         travel long distances to fetch water. Based on the beneficiary surveys used for the IFA, and verified by
         the Task Team (ICR, paragraph 23), women reported that time for productive work replaced the time
         spent fetching water and remaining at water points. Improved health was reported by way of reduced
         incidence in waterborne and water related diseases (no data provided).
        As a result of the flood protection structures, 13 river banks were protected, and 87,386 households
         reduced their flood risk and benefited in the use of water for irrigation.
        The use of the hydrological monitoring stations transmitted data to the hydro-data center at the
         Department of Water Resources to inform the flood early warning system.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings because targets were achieved in the flood-affected districts to reconstruct critical public
infrastructure using improved standards but the plausible linkages to the claimed outcomes were generally
stated, without sufficient explanation of other contributing factors and not supported by specific data. The
target value of the indicator associated with the school buildings/classrooms was clarified during the Mid
Term Review (MTR) although the value remained unchanged until closing (see Section 8, Assessment of
Bank Performance, (b) Quality of Supervision below).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the Government of Malawi’s disaster response and recovery capacities.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The inputs included technical assistance to improve data preparedness, capacity to
undertake post disaster needs assessment (PDNA), recovery planning and implementation, community

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



mapping, land use planning, and enhancing disaster response systems. Additional technical assistance would
be directed at agencies to develop and institutionalize disaster and climate resilient standards for
infrastructure investments. The outputs included guidelines for safer housing construction, awareness raising
strategy for use of these guidelines, national building code and standards for private housing, and a study to
assess the viability of railways rehabilitation. This last study was in response to the damage caused by the
floods to the railway system. According to the PAD, the key expected outcome was defined as the
"institutionalization and adoption of strengthened and improved disaster recovery and response systems
(PAD, paragraph 31)." The ICR reported this outcome as the adoption of PDNA to inform disaster recovery
and response. The key assumption was that knowledge gained through capacity building was sustained.

OUTPUTS:

      The staff of the Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DODMA) and Civil Protection
         Committees in the target 15 districts were trained in Emergency Response as targeted.
      Disaster resilient designs for education, health, and roads sectors were developed.
      Construction guidelines for safer schools and safer houses were reviewed and
       strengthened. An awareness raising strategy in the use of these guidelines was developed
      The national building codes, regulations, and standards for housing were developed.
      Feasibility study of the railways rehabilitation, including topographic, sedimentation, climate change,
       and hydrological studies was completed.

OUTCOMES:

      The DODMA adopted the PDNA methodology - including guidelines, templates, standard operating
         procedures for damage assessment as part of disaster management. A Disaster Recovery
         Framework.(DRF) was installed, highlighting the legal framework and the existing and potential
         financing instruments for disaster recovery through a risk layering approach to disaster. This
         framework served as a foundation for disaster risk financing in the country.
        The Malawi Spatial Data Platform (MASDAP), an open source platform to facilitate the sharing of risk
         and hazard information, is functional.
        Disaster resilient designs were adopted for education, health, and roads sectors. The Minister of
         Education and the education sector technical working group adopted the safer school construction
         guidelines and incorporated these into the National Education Sector Plan to guide all stakeholders in
         the construction of schools. Since its adoption, 83 schools both government and donor financed, were
         constructed.
         A national building code is planned to be enacted. According to the Task Team, the revised Building
         Regulations (or the Building Code) has not yet been enacted since the government was still finalizing
         the Buildings Act and the Buildings Policy. Together, these would form the legal basis for the
         regulations. The safer housing construction guidelines would be added to guide all construction of
         public and private buildings, including health facilities. The institutionalization of the national building
         code was covered by the Malawi Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Financing with
         Catastrophe Draw Down Option (CAT DDO, P154056).
        The government would finance railway rehabilitation.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Disaster resilient designs of
investments in roads, education, and health were adopted and now part of the institutional landscape.


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve its objectives is rated Substantial. This was an emergency
                            project, and some outcome indicators were at the output level of the results chain rather than
                            outcome. Inputs and outputs showed valid causal linkages and were properly sequenced. All outputs, except
                            one, were achieved. There were some minor shortcomings, i.e., under PDO1, the evidence was not fully
                            sufficient to claim that agricultural livelihoods were sustainably restored beyond the next cropping season.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Analysis: At appraisal, an economic and financial analysis was based only on the
   benefit and cost streams of the transport and irrigation components. Cost benefit analysis for the irrigation sub-
   component established a financial rate of return (FRR) of 31 percent and an economic rate of return (ERR) of 24
   percent. The analysis replicated the methodology used in the Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods, and Agricultural
   Development Project (IRLADP) (PAD, Annex 4, footnote 11). At appraisal, several methodologies were used to
   analyze the efficiency of the roads sub-component, including the use of a 12 percent discount rate. However,
   the economic and financial analysis was postponed due to limited preparation. Instead, efficiency analysis would
   be prepared after final design but before procurement (PAD, paragraph 73, footnote 7).

   At closing, the economic analysis expanded the benefits to include those from (i) restored and reconstructed
   irrigation infrastructure; (ii) rehabilitated water supply schemes; (iii) restored and improved road transportation
   networks; and (iv) reconstructed education facilities. Using only the cost associated with the measured benefits
   resulted in an ERR of 32 percent for roads, 17 percent for irrigation, 20 percent for water supply and sanitation,
   and 39 percent for education investments, achieving an overall ERR of 31 percent with an NPV of USD 148
   million. The analysis assumed a standard discount rate of 12 percent for roads, bridges, and irrigation
   infrastructure, 6 percent for education and water supply services, and a 20-year longevity of assets (ICR,
   paragraph 45). The economic analysis used at appraisal and at closing was not comparable.

   Administrative and Operational Efficiency: The project was partially suspended due to the gravity of the
   safeguards noncompliance (see Section 10 (a) Other Issues and (b) Fiduciary Compliance below). The sector
   specialists changed for some of the longer-term recovery interventions in health, water supply, and transport.
   This led to additional delays and expenditures to reconfirm priorities and approaches and contributed
   to additional field time and costs at the sector level (ICR, paragraph 63). The project experienced weaknesses in

                                                                                                                           Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



contract management that led to contract extensions, cost overruns, and suspension of contracts (see Section
10, Other Issues below), contributing to implementation delays and affecting overall efficiency. The project
closing date was extended by 13 months to implement corrective measures and the impact from COVID 19. The
additional time allowed for additional outcomes to be achieved and improved the cost-efficiency of the livelihood
and food security restoration component by 13 percent. The unit cost reduced from US$22.14 to US$19.30 per
capita to benefit a total 0.8 million persons (ICR, paragraph 46).

Overall, the project efficiency is rated Substantial. The project team justified that the project's economic
efficiency at closing was substantial at 31 percent even after the acknowledged operational and
administrative inefficiencies. The significant qualitative gains such as strengthening the country's GBV and
safeguard management systems overcame the inefficiencies reflected in the additional time needed to complete
the project due to the unforeseen impact of the pandemic, weather related, and early procurement delays.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     47.00
 ICR Estimate                                              31.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High. The efficacy of the project to achieve Objective 1 is rated Substantial,
with moderate shortcomings because of lack of evidence to support sustainably restored agricultural livelihoods
beyond the next cropping season, even as the target output indicators were exceeded. The efficacy of the
project to achieve Objective 2 is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings; the target indicators were
achieved or exceeded. The team did an effort to show the project's contribution to a range of development
outcomes, however the plausible linkages were not sufficiently explained and supported by the data. The
efficacy of the project to achieve Objective 3 is rated Substantial because of the adoption of disaster resilient
designs and strengthened capacities. On balance, the overall efficacy of this emergency project to achieve its
objectives is rated Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to the satisfactory economic efficiency at
closing and the strengthening of the GBV and safeguards management systems to overcome early
administrative and operational inefficiencies. The overall outcome is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcome:

      Economic: The COVID 19 pandemic poses a risk to the country's economic recovery. Competing
       priorities will remain for the immediate term. Requirements of the project to move beyond livelihood
       support under the Input for Asset (IFA) program, and operations and maintenance (O&M) needs of
       completed infrastructure investments were not specified (although noted in the Theory of Change as
       an assumption). The following projects in the current World Bank CPF for Malawi may mitigate
       the economic risks: (i) the US$95 million Malawi Agricultural Commercialization Project (AGCOM,
       P158434); and (ii) the US$160 million Shire Valley Transformation Program – Phase 1 (SVTP-1,
       P158805). A series of projects from 2017, beginning with SVTP-1 would scale up commercial
       agriculture. SVTP-1 would establish core irrigation infrastructure through a PPP
       structure, integrate smallholder farmers into newly established commercial value chains, and
       strengthen land tenure. At the national level, the AGCOM Project would support commercialization
       by establishing 200 “productive alliances” of smallholder groups that diversify into high-value
       commercial crops and off-takers production (CPF, paragraph 73).

      Environmental and Exposure to Natural Disasters: Climate shocks continue to threaten the
       region. The project’s technical assistance activities were designed to feed into institutionalized
       operating procedures and structures for recovery needs assessment, policy making, standard setting,
       implementation management, and financing in the future. Despite the project’s success in capacity
       building to manage climate shocks and strengthen preparedness at the national (Department of
       Disaster Management Affairs or DODMA) and district levels, further support is needed for continued
       advancement of a holistic DRM program in Malawi that designs, plans, and delivers effective activities
       to safeguard livelihoods and appropriately respond and recover, post disaster. On the policy side, the
       Malawi Disaster Risk Management Policy Financing with Catastrophic Draw Down Option (MDRMPF
       CAT DDO or P165056), included building regulations, construction guidelines and policies as well as
       DRM financing strategies and legislation.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objective was broadly stated. The country's plans, the Word Bank's strategy, and the Post
  Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) carried out after the devastating 2015 floods informed the recovery
  needs of the target districts. Lessons from prior Bank operations (Malawi Social Action Fund (MASAF)
  Irrigation Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development Project (IRLADP), the Integrated Flood Risk
  Management Plan (IFRMP) of the Shire River Basin Management Program (SRBMP), and the Rapid
  Response Program in 2012 were incorporated into project design. These included the use of the Input for

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



  Assets (IFA) program and aspects of the cash-for-work schemes to restore livelihood sources using labor
  intensive public works program. Critical infrastructure, in turn, would be quickly restored. These design
  aspects would enhance food security, mitigate floods, and rapidly disburse funds. Design also adopted a
  build back better strategy in disaster resilient design of infrastructure (PAD, paragraphs 22, 24, and
  footnote 5). The design balanced early recovery and longer-term resilience intervention.

  As an emergency loan, preparation time was shortened to just over 3 months (ICR, paragraph 53). The
  following risks were assessed as substantial: institutional capacity, fiduciary, implementation, and
  safeguards. As an emergency project, fraud and corruption risks due to simplified
  procurement were noted. Gender Based Violence (GBV) was not identified as a risk. Technical
  assistance, targeted training, regular monitoring, as well as support during supervision were designed
  to mitigate these risks. Implementation arrangements rested on a well-established Project
  Implementation Unit (PIU) familiar with Bank operations. However, size and composition of the
  established PIU was not adjusted to match project needs.

  There were shortcomings in M&E (see Section 9 M&E below). Some indicators under the second
  objective were not designed to capture all infrastructure rehabilitation interventions at the outcome level
  (e.g., irrigation, water and sanitation). The outcome indicators for the third objective were more output
  than outcome focused. At implementation, an error in the unit of an intermediate indicator was not
  corrected (from schools to classrooms, ICR, paragraph 68).

  Overall, the performance of the Bank at entry is rated Satisfactory. Design addressed the country's
  emergency needs and complemented the Bank's strategy. Design responded to the emergency nature of
  the operation using the PDNA and existing arrangements. Substantial risks were adequately identified
  although there were overlooked risks due to the limited preparation. The team relied on mitigating these
  risks during implementation (See below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 12 supervision mission over the 5-year implementation period. Targeted
 missions that included the locally based task team leader and specialists supplemented these. The Bank
 team on the ground allowed for continuous dialogue with country counterparts. The PIU consisted of 3
 offices - a primary one in Lilongwe, with field offices in Zombia and Blantyre, to facilitate the implementation
 of the first component. Project management expenditures were initially high, reaching 90 percent by the
 time of the Mid Term Review. Vehicles were purchased, project offices constructed and rehabilitated,
 livelihood support component required intensive management costs, and the high salaries and benefits of a
 large, inherited PIU all contributed to the rapid use of project management funds. When the livelihood
 component was completed, the size of the PIU was adjusted and made leaner and the 2016 Malawi
 Drought Recovery and Resilience Project (P161392) supplemented project management costs when this
 project was added to the PIU for implementation. The composition of the team was
 strengthened. Efficiency in project management improved. At MTR, the team overlooked a target value of



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



 an indicator (schools vs. classrooms). Outcome indicators were not adjusted to better reflect outcomes
 (see Section 9 M&E Design below). This was a shortcoming in the quality of supervision.

 According to the ICR, Bank supervision matched the capacity needs of the districts implementing the
 project activities. Districts with more complex interventions and specific fiduciary or technical gaps were
 prioritized. Presence on the ground and open lines of communication with national and local
 authorities allowed the team to raise issues with government counterparts for timely resolution. The Bank
 team uncovered Gender Based Violence issues in the implementation of the Thabwa Road site. More
 grave incidents led to suspending disbursements for a period of 6 months until after corrective measures
 were implemented. Intensive safeguards and technical support followed. The Bank
 team established monthly supervision. These efforts completed the road, although the COVID-19
 challenges added delays. Safeguards compliance improved. At closing, compliance was satisfactory as
 reported (ICR, paragraph 81, see also Section 10 Other Issues below). Following the MTR, Bank
 supervision did not take advantage of the formal restructuring process to adjust target outcome indicator
 (ICR, paragraph 79). There was no evidence to address the issues surrounding the weak implementation
 of the M&E system (see Section 9 below). Challenges surrounding procurement and weak contract
 management, which reduced project efficiency were later addressed by introducing the use of the World
 Bank Systematic Tracking for Exchanges in Procurement.

 The World Bank team's quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory. The Bank team clarified that
 earlier procurement and contracting challenges were adequately addressed that led to intensified capacity
 building and enhanced supervision support for the last third of project implementation. This allowed for
 exceeding outputs and achieving outcomes.

 Overall, the World Bank performance is rated Satisfactory. The quality at entry was responsive to the
 emergency needs of the project. There were minor shortcomings but these were attributable to the rapid
 preparation needs. The satisfactory performance in the last two years of Bank supervision resulted in
 achieving the objectives after the Bank team provided adequate response to the earlier procurement and
 contracting challenges.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly stated but broadly defined. M&E design was reflected in the Results
 Framework, which showed a valid causal link between inputs and outputs to achieve the project objectives.
 Baselines were provided through the PDNA. The target values of the indicators were appropriate for 2
 outcome and 7 intermediate outcome indicators. Outcome indicators reflected expected outcomes of the
 project and the contributions of the components to achieve these. However, not all outcome

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



 indicators sufficiently provided a picture of achieving improved lives and livelihoods, with regard to the
 extent of livelihoods restored and infrastructures improved. For example, some intermediate results
 indicators tracked infrastructure rehabilitation but not at the outcome level (irrigation, water and sanitation).
 The restored livelihoods were only expressed as the number of beneficiaries, without reference to the
 nature or extent of restored, sustainable livelihood. The outcome indicators for the third objective —
 improvement of disaster response and recovery capacity—were reflected in the reported measures
 adopting the PDNA methodology. Assessment of efficiency (ICR, Annex 4) provided some evidence of the
 impact of the outcomes. One intermediate outcome target indicator —82 schools rather than classrooms —
  was found to be incorrect at the Mid Term Review. This error was overlooked in the second level 2
 restructurings that extended the project. The output indicators were specific measurable, and achievable.
 The indicators were relevant and time bound, although some indicators were missed, such as the number
 of jobs created, the levels of restored incomes through livelihood support and income generating activities,
 or the contribution to stabilizing food price based inflation as part of SGR replenishment.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project M&E was implemented, as designed, by the Project Implementation Unit in the Ministry of
  Finance and Economic Development. The M&E tracked Implementation progress across the 15
  districts on a quarterly basis. Data collection and analysis of results was done manually during the first
  year. An automated database system was deployed in the second year. 195 district M&E officers (13 per
  district) were trained in M&E and 80 officers were fully equipped to enter quarterly data. However, the
  PIU had inadequate systems to verify and validate submitted information. These challenges led to issues
  of timeliness, consistency, and quality of reports. M&E implementation had to be adjusted and resolved
  through site visits, district council visits, and active engagement with sectors. At project completion, the
  team had to verify and validate some results information within individual ministries and sectors (ICR,
  paragraphs 23 and 69). No changes were introduced to clarify outcome indicators of the project
  interventions. A beneficiary assessment, only of the Input for Assets program was carried out and verified
  at closing by the Task Team (ICR, paragraph 23).



c. M&E Utilization
  Data from the M&E system informed project progress, the Mid Term Review and project outcomes.
  Although the database system was established, the M&E system did not have tools to analyze the
  information. The PIU prepared reports manually using the M&E data. At the project management level,
  the quality and periodicity of information flows compromised the ability of the project to fully use the M&E
  data to make day-to-day project level decisions during implementation. The government continued to
  use the limited information for decision-making. M&E generated information on the post-disaster
  recovery and informed coordination across sectors.

  Overall, the quality of the M&E is rated Modest (ICR, paragraph 70). The system, as designed, and its
  implementation were weak and were not sufficient to assess the achievement of the objectives and test
  the links in the result chain to substantiate the project outcomes. However, shortcomings during
  implementation were reported in the periodic updating and verification of results. This affected the ability
  of the M&E system to inform project-level decision-making. There were also moderate shortcomings in
  the choices and definitions of certain indicators (ICR, paragraph 71).


                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: This Emergency Recovery Loan (ERL) project was classified as Category "B"
   and followed the condensed procedures in "Preparation of Investment Project Financing - Situations of
   Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints." The Bank's Regional Vice President approved Project
   Safeguards Requirements under OP 10.00 paragraph 12 on April 6, 2015. The Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF) and Integrated Pest Management Plan were completed and disclosed in-
   country and on the World Bank’s external website on September 2015 after project approval but before
   activity implementation (ICR, paragraph 72).

   The following four environmental safeguard policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Forests (OP/BP 4.36). Malawi,
   Tanzania, and Mozambique were co-riparian countries of the Shire River. Namibia, Angola, Zimbabwe,
   Botswana, and Zambia were co-riparian countries above the confluence of the Shire and Zambezi Rivers in
   the greater Zambezi Basin. However, the project would only rehabilitate existing infrastructure. The
   Regional Vice President issued an exception under paragraph 7(a) for Projects on International Waterways
   (OP/BP 7.50) on April 6, 2015 (PAD, paragraph 96).

   By the time of the Mid Term Review (MTR), the project was in full compliance, of environmental safeguards
   (ICR, paragraph 73). However, there were instances that sub-projects were started without the necessary
   World Bank approvals; confusion during implementation on the application, timing, and roles of
   various actors (sectors, PIU, Environmental Affairs Department, the World Bank) in safeguard compliance
   procedures (ICR, paragraph 73). The government adopted measures provided in World Bank supervision
   missions to address issues of noncompliance during implementation. In September 2019, compliance was
   downgraded to Unsatisfactory due to serious safeguards noncompliance in the Thabwa-Chitseko-Seven
   Road. Noncompliance was reflected in the following incidents. A fatality in 2018 due to inadequate safety
   measures at the work site led to a partial suspension of the work for a month. In July 2019, lack of
   occupational health and safety measures, unfair labor practices, nonfunctioning Grievance Redress
   Mechanism (GRM), and Gender Based Violence (GBV) incidents led to suspending disbursements for six
   months. In July 2020, the Roads Authority investigated and resolved GBV reports implementing the
   improved processes and GRM that were adopted in response to the earlier incidents (ICR, Annex 6).

   Intensive World Bank support, such as frequent review of the progress in implementing the Safeguards
   Action Plan, confirming its veracity through frequent site visits, and undertaking numerous intensive support
   missions, returned the project to full compliance by closing (ICR, paragraph 73, and Annex 6, paragraph 9).
   The Task Team added that they worked closely with the government in defining and implementing the 27
   point Safeguards Action Plan; conducted monthly in-country site missions and supervision of progress on
   the action plan; improved the flow of information from the GBV service provider, third party monitor, and
   other entities; and was granted exception to conduct 2 in-country missions during the COVID 19. The Task


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



  Team also worked to ensure that contractors had personnel for safeguards management, signed Codes of
  Conduct were up-to-date, complied with requirements, in local languages and visible on sites.

  Social Safeguards: The project also triggered following social safeguard policies: Physical Cultural
  Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework
  was prepared and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s external website in May 2015 before
  project implementation (ICR, paragraph 74). A project Grievance Redress Mechanism was in place (ICR,
  paragraph 75). Training was directed to improve PIU capacity in managing safeguards and enforcing
  contractual compliance on site because of (i) several instances of irregular reporting to the World Bank on
  the status of safeguard instruments and associated challenges; (ii) construction was started on one health
  center before the safeguard instruments were fully approved, (iii) site clearance at the Thabwa-Chitseko-
  Seven Road began before the necessary instruments were fully approved; (iv) a road fatality at the Thabwa
  construction site; and (v) the more serious noncompliance issues at the Thabwa construction site noted
  above that led to suspending disbursements.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: According to the ICR, the project complied with the World Bank’s financial
  reporting requirements (ICR, paragraph 76). However, staffing recruitment delays at the district level were
  noted. Project audits reported control and accountability issues in most districts The World Bank reviews
  and an internal audit in August 2018 - determined US$106,000 in questionable expenses from the district
  councils at Thyolo, Mulanje, Chiradzulu, Blantyre, Karonga, Zomba, Rumphi, and Mangochi. The councils,
  with support of the Ministry of Finance, refunded these to the PIU.

  Procurement: According to the ICR, the project followed the procurement procedures (ICR, paragraph
  77). No mis-procurement was declared. The Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Development
  (MoFEPD) Internal Procurement and Disposal Committee assisted in fast-tracking procurement
  processes. A procurement specialist and two assistants staffed a dedicated procurement team. During
  implementation, weaknesses in contract management were identified and addressed by installing and
  closely monitoring compliance using an online platform, Systematic Tracking for Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP). Among the weaknesses included (i) weak enforcement of environmental, social,
  health, and safety risks (sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment or SES/SH, rape, and assault);
  (ii) poor documentation, record keeping, and monitoring, (iii) lack of due diligence in the terms of reference
  for some of the consultancies; (iv) inadequate communication of contract progress between the PIU and
  implementing departments; (v) awarding of some contract works packages prior to the completion of
  safeguards instruments; and (vi) scheduling equipment delivery prior to completing construction. These led
  to extending contracts, contracts lapsing, payments delayed, cost overruns, and contracts suspended.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)




11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paragraphs 85-99) provides a number of lessons learned from the project's experience.
The following lessons are emphasized with some adaptation of language:

      Design of emergency operations may benefit from being informed by a Post Disaster
       Needs Assessment (PDNA). In this project, the PDNA provided a sound technical basis for
       priorities that focused on livelihood support and the medium- and longer-term recovery
       needs. In addition, project design incorporated time-bound aspects in implementing the
       livelihood support activities (Input for Asset (IFA) program), and other immediate/short term
       interventions to facilitate the management of supervision resources, better structure delivery
       mechanisms, and minimize the risk that resources may not reach its intended beneficiaries
       on time.
      An inherited Project Implementation Unit (PIU) may benefit from a reassessment of
       needs of an emergency project. While an established PIU is beneficial during early
       implementation, it is critical to conduct capacity assessment of the PIU to ensure efficiency in
       implementation. This includes:(i) assessing needs against available staff and resources
       to identify gaps or excess capacity; (ii) developing staff performance evaluation protocols;
       and (iii) establishing a system of competitive rehiring after a year of implementation similar to
       establishing a new PIU.
      Establishing a safeguards steering committee may be useful to oversee large sector
       or high risk projects to strengthen safeguards compliance. A safeguards steering
       committee could provide oversight, establish accountability and mechanisms for redress,
       bolster ownership, and facilitate adequate resourcing of corrective measures, when needed.
      Specific lessons to address Gender Based Violence (GBV) in labor-intensive construction
       works:
             o In designing livelihood programs (such as Input for Assets (IFA) used in this
                project) using economic and entrepreneurial interventions that
                empower women and communities may be useful. Targeting female
                participation may reduce exploitative relationships that tend to develop when there is
                an influx of both men and women in labor intensive construction works. In this project,
                GBV service providers engaged and trained mothers in the community on GBV
                issues to build trust. Empowered communities may better understand rights and
                opportunities for services and redress.

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)



              o Use of technology may support confidentiality and reduce the stigma of
                reporting GBV incidents. In this project, survivors showed more confidence and
                appreciated the convenience of reporting incidents using cell phones publicized by
                GBV providers or virtual meetings. Technology may reduce the risk from "double-
                punishment" faced by women who report incidents. Women who reported GBV
                incidents were ostracized for causing work stoppages, loss of income for workers
                (both men and women). The Grievance Redress Mechanism was not trusted. Greater
                vulnerability and risk for GBV incidents prevailed. Other measures may need to
                address GBV reporting and safeguards compliance to avoid an incentive to remain
                silent, individually and as a community.
              o Fostering community engagement and GBV awareness early and often. In this
                project, reported GBV incidents were corrected through measures directed at
                contractors (e.g., translated and disseminated improved codes of conduct). Engaging
                the community at project preparation may provide a good understanding of the rights
                of individuals and the community in preventing GBV in the work place by identifying
                tools and services available to victims and the community, and effective use of the
                grievance redress mechanism. Periodic reminding of rights, services, and options to
                communities may foster trust in these tools and services such as assigning female
                volunteers and leaders to signal that women have a role in the community not only in
                participating in livelihood interventions, but also in monitoring, and resolving
                incidents.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good overview of the project implementation and experience, and the assessment is in line
with the guidelines. The measures associated with ensuring that safeguards compliance were adequately
addressed (Annex 6). The salient points of the operation were summarized and clearly linked with the evidence
(particularly with regard to the extensive discussion on the safeguards issues). Annex 4 was sufficiently detailed
on efficiency. Lessons were based on the project experience, with specific recommendations for teams to
consider in designing safeguards compliance and mitigating risk of Gender Based Violence in the workplace.
The report highlighted how activities informed outcomes although the results framework did not have
appropriate indicators to strengthen outcome reporting. The discussions under the section on Efficacy provided
additional information indicating outcomes although the M&E system did not track these (see Sections 4 for
Efficacy and 9 M&E above).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Malawi Floods ERL (P154803)




                                                                  Page 20 of 20
