     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0022713

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P129401                                     Guiyang Rural Roads Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83370                                  30-Jun-2019                                        142,369,820.42

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Mar-2014                                 31-Dec-2020

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            142,369,820.42                                               0.00

 Actual                                        142,369,820.42                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Elisabeth Goller               Victoria Alexeeva              IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3) was:

   "To provide improved transport accessibility in selected areas of Guiyang in a sustainable manner ".




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 4 -5).

   1. Upgrading/Improving County and Township Roads. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$92.6
   million. The Bank task team clarified that this did not include the costs for project preparation and
   management, land acquisition, resettlement costs, and contingencies. 50% of the cost of this component
   was to be Bank-funded and the balance by the recipient. The actual cost was US$68.4 million, also
   excluding the costs for project preparation and management, land acquisition and resettlement costs. This
   component aimed to provide all-season roads in the selected rural areas of the Guiyang municipality.
   Activities in this component included: (i) upgrading a county road from Class IV to Class II road; and (ii)
   improving unclassified county and township roads to class IV roads.

   At appraisal, it was planned that about 570 kilometer (km) of rural roads would be upgraded/improved under
   the project (ICR, page confirmed by the project team), which would be selected and implemented by five
   batches on a rolling basis. At appraisal, the design identified a first batch of about 250 km of roads. With the
   Level 2 restructuring (discussed in section 2e), (i) two road sections under this Batch (15.1 km out of about
   250 km) were removed from the project, due to implementation delays and contract disputes; (ii) some
   originally planned roads were no longer within the jurisdiction of Guiyang municipality after a new Gui'an
   district was established as a new development zone in Guizhou Province (two roads of n25.9 km); and (iii)
   while the project originally planned to rehabilitate five batches, the scope was reduced to three batches, due
   to implementation delays. With these changes, the total km of roads that were to be rehabilitated under the
   project was 520 km (as compared to the original target of 570).

   2. Rehabilitation of County and Township Roads. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$56.5 million.
   The Bank task team clarified that this did not include the costs for project preparation and management,
   land acquisition, resettlement and contingency costs. 65% of the cost of this component was to be financed
   through Bank funding and the balance by the recipient. The actual cost was US$85.9 million (also excluding
   the costs for project preparation and management, land acquisition and resettlement costs. This component
   aimed to rehabilitate 67.5 km of the deteriorated county and township roads with improved safety and
   drainage features.

   At appraisal, the project envisioned rehabilitating 67.5 km of the county and township roads, as compared
   to the costlier option of reconstructing roads. The ICR (paragraph 14) notes that during implementation,
   some project roads were used to transport equipment and materials for the nearby highway and railway
   constructions. This caused substantial damages to the project roads. These roads needed to be
   reconstructed with works on the sub-base structure. This necessitated additional design work and increased
   costs.

   3. Rural Road Maintenance Pilot. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$12.0 million. This component
   was to be financed entirely through Bank financing. The actual cost was US$0.7 million. This component
   aimed at enabling the Guiyang Municipal Bureau to improve its Rural Roads Maintenance Program. This
   program had three parts: (i) developing the road maintenance pilot aimed at providing Technical Assistance

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



  (TA) for analyzing options addressing five specific issues (maintenance practices, overloading control,
  monitoring and surveying, funding for road maintenance, and options for pavement maintenance); (ii)
  implementing the pilot; and (iii) improving the Guiyang Rural Roads Management Information System
  (GRRMIS) (a computer-based rural road information and maintenance decision support system for data on
  road conditions).

  The GRRMIS activity was replaced with the Rural Roads Monitoring and Management System (RRMMS), a
  computer based rural road information and maintenance decision support system. The RRMMS was
  integrated with the Guiyang Digital Municipal Management Information System (GDMMIS) - a digitalized
  public asset and public services database - developed by the Guiyang Municipal Government, with its own
  budget and outside the project. According to the clarifications provided by the team, this system, integrated
  with the GDMMIS, has the same functionality as the GRRMIS, but it is more efficient and sustainable
  because it can be maintained without external consultants. Because of this, Bank financing for this activity
  was reduced rather substantially (from US$12.0 million at appraisal to US$0.9 million), and the funds were
  reallocated for reconstructing additional roads.

  Technical Assistance (TA). The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.0 million. This component was
  entirely through Bank financing. The actual cost was US$0.5 million. This component planned to finance
  two TA programs for the longer-term sustainability of the rural roads program. Activities in this component
  included: (i) developing a rural road network plan; (ii) financing training and study tours.

  The rural road network plan activity was dropped as an important element of the plan - the sharing of the
  rural road network Geographic Information Map (GIM) with third parties - was restricted by local regulations.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$250.0 million (inclusive of physical and price
  contingencies). The actual cost was US$222.9 million.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD loan of US$150.0 million. US$142.4 million was
  disbursed.

  Borrower contribution. The borrower contribution was estimated at US$100.0 million at appraisal. Their
  actual contribution was US$80.5 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 6, 2014, became effective on August 19, 2014, and was
  scheduled to close on June 30, 2019. The project closed a year and half behind schedule on December 31,
  2020.

  Other changes. The following changes were made through the Level 2 restructuring on June 14, 2019.

        The closing date was extended to December 31, 2020, due to the initial delays for factors such
         as, disruptions caused by the construction activities of an expressway and a high-speed rail adjacent
         to project roads, design changes, and counterpart funding issues in some counties and districts.
        Loan proceeds were reallocated among project components and disbursement categories.
        The Bank financing was increased to 100 percent for components one and two (civil works)
         activities.

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



         The results framework was modified and some activities (including the road maintenance pilot
          activity and technical assistance for analyzing options for addressing road sector issues (discussed
          in section 2d) were dropped.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Although the Chinese economy grew at an average rate of over eight
percent before appraisal in 2014, the growth was uneven with wide disparities between urban and rural
areas. Guizhou, a mountainous and landlocked province in Southwestern China, is the poorest province in
China. A third of the population in the province (4.32 million) lived in Guiyang municipality, and a third
of the municipality's population (4.32 million) lived in rural areas. The rural road network in Guizhou had
deteriorated due to usage beyond the expected service life, overloading, inadequate road maintenance,
and overall weak capacity for maintaining the roads. This hampered the rural population's access to final
destinations.

This project addressed two interrelated challenges facing Guizhou. First, it aimed to improve the transport
accessibility of Guizhou's rural population (with accessibility defined for the purpose of this review, as ease
of access to final destinations such as markets, educational and health centers, and work opportunities).
Second, it aimed at sustained access of the rural population to final destinations.

Government and Province strategy. China's 12th Five Year Plan (FYP) for 2011 to 2015 articulated the
need for improving transport accessibility in the lagging regions. At the provincial level, Guiyang
municipality's Rural Roads component of the 12th FYP aimed to provide all the counties, township and
administrative levels, with asphalt or cement concrete roads, improve the capacity for disaster mitigation
and road safety, and improve service delivery through upgrading/ rehabilitating county and township roads.
The ICR provides no information on the current Government and Provincial strategies.

Bank strategy. The PDO was consistent with the strategic theme two of the Country Partnership Strategy
(CPS) for 2013-2016. This theme highlighted the need for "promoting inclusive growth". The PDO was well-
aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020-2025. The third area of
engagement of this framework underscored the need for sharing the benefits of growth, by increasing
access to quality and social services in rural areas.

Prior Bank experience. This was the second Bank-financed project in Guiyang municipality. The first
Guiyang Transport Project was completed in December 2013. Unlike the prior project, which included both
urban and rural roads, this project focused on rural roads, to overcome the challenges associated with a
project having urban and rural components. The design of this project included a pilot for rural roads
maintenance planning, which could be replicated across the whole province. Even if part of the PDO is not
challenging for a country like China, the project does not simply repeat the previous project.

The PDO is in line with the current Bank strategy for China and it addressed a development challenge
facing Guizhou, of improving transport accessibility in selected areas of Guiyang in a sustainable manner.
Although the project did not simply repeat the previous project, part of the PDO of improving access in rural


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



               areas did not focus on development outcomes and the key outcome indicators were closer to the output
               than the outcome level. Therefore, this review assesses the relevance of the PDO as substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide improved transport accessibility in selected areas of Guiyang in a sustainable manner.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. The causal links between project activities, outputs and outcomes were logical and
                             the intended outcomes were monitorable. Upgrading county roads from Class IV to Class II roads, improving
                             unclassified county roads to Class IV roads, and rehabilitating/reconstructing county and township roads with
                             improved safety and drainage features, were aimed at increasing the percentage of rural population with
                             access to all-weather roads, and thereby their access to final destinations. Developing and implementing
                             the maintenance pilot and Guiyang Municipality's Rural Road Management Information System, and technical
                             assistance activities on the rural network plan, were aimed at contributing to the longer-term sustainability of
                             the rural road network. The key outcome indicators - the number of beneficiaries benefitting from all weather-
                             access roads, and the travel time savings on the rehabilitated roads were measurable, time-bound and
                             attributable to the project activities, but they were closer to the output than outcome level. The theory of
                             change explicitly assumes that the government would provide timely and sufficient counterpart funding.

                             Outputs. (ICR, pages 5 - 6 and 18 - 19).

                                        520 km of rural roads were either upgraded/improved/rehabilitated or reconstructed under the project,
                                         as per the revised target (short of the original target of 570 km). This included: (i) 121.8 km of
                                         roads that were either upgraded to class IV standards with adjusted alignment, asphalt concrete
                                         pavements, and safety and drainage facilities: and (ii) 398.2 km of roads were either rehabilitated/
                                         reconstructed with new pavement and strengthened road furniture. The ICR (paragraph 23) notes that
                                         these roads before the project were frequently impassable during rainy seasons.
                                        In addition to the roads mentioned above, about 30 km of the branch/feeder roads were improved
                                         upon requests from the local government and people, to extend the benefits to communities.
                                         These roads connected the project roads to nearby business/social centers and villages.
                                        A RRMMS was developed as envisaged at project restructuring. It was integrated with the GDMMIS.
                                         This system uses independent monitors to gather data on road conditions, and enables the authorities
                                         to determine the need for road maintenance on selected road segments.
                                        A study on the rural road maintenance pilot design was carried out. However, the pilot program to test
                                         and verify methods of rural road maintenance that could improve cost efficiency and efficacy of the

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



       rural road maintenance program, was not implemented as targeted because after its design, there
       was only one year left until the original closing date.
      Two overseas study tours were conducted (one to Vietnam in 2017 on quality contract and
       community-based maintenance schemes, and one to the United Kingdom in 2019 on road
       construction and maintenance).
      157 people of the relevant rural road agencies were trained, exceeding the target of 125.
      The other road maintenance activities such as providing Technical Assistance for analyzing options
       addressing five specific issues (such as overloading controls, monitoring and surveying, funding for
       road maintenance. and options for road maintenance) were not completed as targeted.

Outcomes (ICR, pages 5 - 6 and 17 - 18).

The project activities were expected to decrease travel time on the project roads and increase the number of
people with improved accessibility to final destinations.

      The roads rehabilitated or reconstructed under the project provided all-weather access to populations
       and enabled vehicles to travel at 30 - 50 km/hour, compared to 10 - 30 km/hour on the original
       roads. The travel time on the project roads was reduced by at least 35%, exceeding the target of 30%.
      According to the annual surveys by the Guiyang Project Management Office (GPMO), 817,027 people
       (including transporters and residents nearby the project roads) benefitted from improved accessibility
       to final destinations. This exceeded the target of 778,027 people. The ICR however provides no
       details on the methodology followed in administering the surveys and how the intended beneficiaries
       for the surveys were identified.
      Under the pilot operation of the RRMMS, the condition of the road networks was monitored using
       independent monitors on 259 km of rural roads in Xifeng county. 90% of feedback from independent
       monitors of the RRMMS was addressed by the municipality through road maintenance activities,
       exceeding the target of 80% (this indicator was defined as the percentage of responses to requests for
       routine road maintenance from independent monitors, that were addressed within ten business days).
       According to the information provided subsequently by the Bank team, the monitors collected and
       uploaded road condition in the system, such as through pictures and location of damages, by using
       mobile phone services. Based on the evaluation of the damages, the rural road management unit has
       been carrying out the necessary maintenance. (The Bank team also mentioned to IEG that Guiyang is
       being allocated road maintenance allowances on a regular basis to maintain the damaged roads
       (RMB 15,000 per km for county roads, and RMB 5,000 for rural roads). The team clarified that
       these allowances are the minimum subsidies provided by the Provincial Government, and that these
       allowances are in addition to the municipal budget for routine road maintenance and other relevant
       activities in funding road maintenance. For example, if the data collected by the RRMMIS revealed
       that road damages were caused by a natural disaster, the road maintenance works could be funded
       by a separate budget system for disaster recovery, and that if the damage requires capital intensive
       work beyond routine maintenance, appropriate budget can be used. The team also clarified that the
       Transport Commission is now able to recognize patterns of road damages due to heavier traffic that
       what they were designed for. Such information accumulated over time, will help in identifying road
       sections that need to be designed to higher standards.

With the exception of the original target regarding the km of roads to be intervened, all defined targets were
met. The ICR provides reasonable evidence that the project improved transport accessibility in selected areas
of Guiyang. The information subsequently provided by the Bank team indicates that appropriate measures

                                                                                                Page 6 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



                            are being used for the sustainability of the roads rehabilitated under this project (through the capacity to
                            timely assess road conditions, decide on appropriate treatments, and provisions for maintenance of rural
                            roads rehabilitated under this project). Therefore, IEG considers the achievement of the PDO as substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR provides reasonable evidence that the project improved transport accessibility in selected areas of
                            Guiyang. The clarifications provided by the Bank team provides reasonable evidence that the accessibility
                            gains obtained under the project will be sustained.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for activities associated with
   upgrading/reconstructing/rehabilitating county and township roads. These activities accounted for 60% of the
   appraisal estimate, and 69% of the actual project cost. The project benefits were assumed to come from:
   (1) lower Vehicle Operating Costs (VOCs) due to better road conditions; and (2) savings in passenger travel
   time due to faster travelling speed on the rehabilitated roads. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return
   (EIRR) was 17.3%, as compared to the ex ante EIRR of 22.6%. Although the ex post EIRR was higher than the
   discount rate of 12%, it was lower than the ex ante EIRR, due to the higher road works cost. The ex post EIRR
   was subjected to sensitivity analysis to test different scenarios of costs and benefits. The results of the analysis
   indicated the project to be economically viable under the tested scenarios.

   Administrative and operational issues. Implementation was subject to delays in the initial years due to a
   combination of factors, including disruptions caused by the construction activities of an expressway and a high-
   speed rail adjacent to project roads, design changes and counterpart funding issues in some counties and
   districts. The cost estimates for Batch 1 roads had to be adjusted upward during the early stage of
   implementation, due to insufficient survey work during preparation, and price escalations in materials and labor
   costs. The delays in the latter years were beyond the control of the project such as, unfavorable weather
   conditions and restrictions on movement of people due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These delays contributed to
   reducing the project scope. (Only 520 km of roads as compared to the original target of 570 km were carried
   improved and rehabilitated). Some institutional strengthening and technical assistance activities were dropped.



                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



The actual total project cost was lower than the appraisal estimate (10.8 percent less), which reflects the
reduced project scope together with cost savings for certain activities, such as construction supervision.

Given the lower EIRR than expected at appraisal and the administrative and operational shortcomings during
implementation, efficiency is assessed as modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       60.00
 Appraisal                                                  22.60
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       69.00
 ICR Estimate                                               17.30
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Bank and the Government strategies is assessed as substantial. Efficacy of
the single objective - To provide improved transport accessibility in selected areas of Guiyang in a sustainable
manner - is assessed overall as substantial. Efficiency is assessed as modest, given that the ex post EIRR was
lower than the ex ante EIRR, the project had implementation delays and it financed a reduced scope of
activities. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is assessed as moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment to funding road maintenance activities. The ICR (paragraph 68) notes that
local governments in Guiyang municipality routinely experience shortage of funds. Most funds for rural road
development are used for construction and rehabilitation, leaving road maintenance activities largely
underfunded. The ICR (paragraph 68) notes that while this project was implemented, counterpart funding
from some countries and districts was not readily available for funding of road maintenance. The Bank team
clarified to IEG that this happened during project implementation and provided reasonable evidence that the
roads rehabilitated under the project are likely to be sustained (see efficacy section) There is also a risk that


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



a long lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic could delay regular road maintenance activities and hence
cause road damage, but this risk is not very likely to happen.

Institutional risk. Although the Rural Roads Monitoring and Management System (RRMMS) system was
designed to assist the Guiyang Municipal Transport Bureau (GMTB) to monitor road conditions and support
decision-making on road maintenance practices, the pilot for testing road maintenance was not implemented.
The other institutional risks include risks due to lack of prioritization, unclear responsibilities for maintenance,
and inadequate capacity to plan and use advanced road asset management system. There is substantial risk
that the long-term sustainability of the project could be undermined without significant institutional
strengthening of the GMTB.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was prepared based on the experience of the prior Bank-financed project (Guiyang Transport
  Project). Lessons from the project incorporated at design included: (i) having a single implementing
  agency as opposed to two agencies; (ii) focusing on rural roads to overcome the challenges when a
  project has urban and rural components; (iii) tools for rural road maintenance planning; and (v) limiting
  the geographical scope of the project to one municipality (PAD, paragraphs 30 -36).

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate, with the dedicated office that was managing the
  ongoing transport project - the Guiyang Project Management Office (GPMO) - responsible for day-to-day
  project management (PAD, paragraphs 37 and 38).

  Several risks were identified at appraisal, including substantial risks associated with the weak capacity of
  the implementation agency and risks associated with counterpart funding. Mitigation measures
  incorporated at design included technical assistance and training for the staff of the GPMO, Guiyang
  Rural Road Construction Office (GRRCO) and the participating counties, and a guarantee commitment
  letter from the Guiyang Municipal Government to reduce delays associated with counterpart funding. With
  mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated moderate at appraisal (PAD, paragraph 9). The
  mitigation measures adopted at design for addressing the risks associated with counterpart funding
  proved to be initially inadequate, as insufficient counterpart funding was an issue in some counties and
  districts. However, this issue was overcome through strict enforcement of the mitigation mechanism (see
  section 12 below). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 9 and 10).

  There were shortcomings in M&E design (discussed on section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                         Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)




b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision missions were held twice a year. These missions included inspection of the road work sites. In
 the wake of the local travel restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank's task team carried out a
 virtual implementation support mission in April 2020 using available video and audio communication tools.
 The ICR (paragraph 44) notes that Guizhou Province remained a low risk throughout the pandemic, and
 civil works and other activities resumed during summer of 2020. This enabled the last Bank supervision
 mission in November 2020 to assess the completion of the remaining activities. During implementation, the
 supervision team provided advice on the design and implementation of the institutional strengthening
 programs. The supervision team appropriately handled the change in the scope of the road maintenance
 information database and decision support activities. This aided in integrating the RRMMS developed
 under the project with the municipal information system GDMMIS that covered the broad scope of public
 assets and services, and helping in ensuring sustainability of outcomes. The support provided by the team
 aided in safeguards and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10). The ICR provides no details on the
 continuity of Bank task team leadership during the project lifetime. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held
 as scheduled on April 17, 2017. The review noted the delays in the early years of the project and made
 recommendations for course correction.

 The Bank supervision team did, however, not correct the shortcomings in the M&E design through
 indicators for assessing the sustainability of the accessibility gains.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Guiyang Municipal Transport Bureau (GMTB) was responsible for providing the results data. GMTB
 had in place the resources and procedures for providing the data with the systems developed under the
 prior Bank-financed project (PAD, paragraph 45).

 The results framework was logical and the M&E framework was clear. The key outcome indicators - the
 number of beneficiaries benefitting from all- weather access roads, and the travel time savings on
 the rehabilitated roads were measurable, time bound and attributable to the project activities.

 However, there were shortcomings in the M&E design: the project lacked adequate indicators to measure
 the sustainability aspect of the PDO. The PDO indicator measuring the length of roads served by the
 maintenance pilot activity was an output indicator. It does not provide robust evidence on the impact of this
 pilot on the sustainability of the project roads. The indicator that measured addressing the feedback from
 independent monitors in terms of maintenance was also weak because it does not show if it actually
 contributed to maintaining the project roads and how sustainable it is (that is, whether it is meant to last

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



 beyond the lifetime of the project). A more appropriate indicator would have been to monitor the
 maintenance pilot activities that were expanded at a larger scale or the budget allocated in the municipality
 for road maintenance activities during the lifetime of the project.

 The project could have provided more details in terms of measurement methodologies. For instance, it is
 not clear if travel time savings were measured based on the actual time savings of the beneficiaries, or the
 theoretical savings based on the difference between the ex ante and ex-post travel design speed of the
 road multiplied by its length. The methodology for measurement was also not clear for the indicator
 associated with the road length impacted by the maintenance pilot activity. Further, the ICR does not
 provide details on the methodology followed in administering the beneficiary surveys. It only states that the
 people living near the roads rehabilitated under the project benefitted from project activities (implicitly
 assuming that everybody who lived near the road benefitted from project activities). A more appropriate
 way to capture the beneficiaries would have been to identify who actually were able to use the rehabilitated
 or improved road. This could have been done on a sample basis, or the project could have indicated an
 indicator to compare the time taken for the beneficiaries final destination in the intervened areas vis-a-vis
 the time taken on a representative sample of the non project-intervened areas.

 There is another area for improvement in future projects. All baselines had a value of zero. This does not
 provide any indication about the "without the project" situation of the counterfactual. For instance, knowing
 the number of people with access to an all-weather road at appraisal and using the information as baseline
 would have provided a better understanding of the overall contribution of the project to enhance access in
 the province. Similarly, the currently actual travel time as baselines would have helped to better appreciate
 the extent of the time savings obtained by the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  When the project was restructured, the results indicators were not appropriately revised to reflect the
  actual needs. For example, no appropriate indicators were added to monitor the sustainability aspect of
  the PDO.

  The ICR (paragraph 51) notes that the project implementation data collected every quarter were
  processed and incorporated in the semi-annual project progress reports. The ICR (paragraph 52) notes
  that external monitoring was conducted by an independent consulting entity



c. M&E Utilization
  The monitoring reports were used to monitor progress and to take actions to guide implementation (such
  as adjusting loan allocation and extend the project closing date).

  In sum, monitoring and evaluation is assessed as modest, given the lack of adequate indicators in the
  original design to measure that the accessibility gains will be sustainable, which were not rectified during
  implementation.




                                                                                                    Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the World Bank safeguard
   policies. Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01):
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). No other safeguard policies
   were triggered during implementation.

   Environmental Assessment. The PAD (paragraph 74) notes that the main environmental impacts of the
   project could include soil erosion, dust and noise, and social disturbance during construction. Due to the
   rolling selection process employed in the project, an Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) was
   prepared for the overall project at appraisal.

   The ICR (paragraph 58) notes that the overall environmental performance of the project was
   satisfactory. Minor issues identified on some individual sub-projects, relating to improper waste
   management on-site and inadequate safety signage. These were rectified. The ICR notes that monitoring
   of environmental performance during implementation was through an external environmental monitoring
   consultant.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed
   to address resettlement issues (PAD, paragraph 68). The PAD (paragraph 69) notes that a Grievance
   Redress Mechanism was established at appraisal to address three types of grievances: (i) complaints about
   the compensation standards and payment process: (ii) requests for support on livelihood restoration: and
   (iii) inconvenience of road transportation during the construction period.

   There was compliance with safeguards on involuntary resettlement. 1, 757.71 mu of land were acquired
   and 37,313.33 m2 of houses were demolished. This affected 3,323 households economically and 148
   households physically. The actual resettlement cost was Renminbi (RMB) 161.23, 25%, more than the
   estimates of RMB 129.31 million. For the land acquired, cash compensation and livelihood restoration
   measures were implemented as set out in the RAP. Where house demolition was involved, the households
   were provided with options of cash compensation, property swap and replacement of houses. All affected
   households selected the option of cash compensation. A third party was involved to appraise the market
   value of the houses. The households affected by house demolition were also provided with relocation
   subsidies.

   Indigenous Peoples. The PAD (paragraph 65) noted that several ethnic minority groups resided in the
   project area (including Miao and Buyi communities). A Social Assessment was carried out during project
   preparation, with a focus on ethnic minority groups. An Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was
   developed and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address issues related to minority groups.

   The ICR does not report of issues with indigenous peoples. The ICR (page 30) notes that dedicated
   measures were taken to ensure that ethnic minorities benefitted from the project, such as identifying roads



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



   in areas where they lived, extensive consultation during design with ethnic minority groups, and providing
   jobs to ethnic people.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. A financial management assessment of the GPMO was conducted at appraisal.
   The financial risk included the risk that counterpart funding may not be available in a timely fashion. The
   mitigation measures included an arrangement whereby the participating governments were required to
   place the share of counterpart funding in a designated account to be managed by the implementing
   agency. With mitigation measures, financial management risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD,
   paragraph 31). The mitigation measure pertaining to the counterpart funding was not adequate, as there
   were issues of inadequate counterpart funding in some counties and districts during implementation.

   The ICR (paragraph 61) notes that the project accounting and financial report preparation and submission
   were in line with the regulations issued by the Ministry of Finance, which were consistent with the
   requirements in the Loan and Project Agreements. The audits were unqualified.

   Procurement. A procurement assessment GRRCO was conducted at appraisal. The GRRCO staff
   had executed the prior Bank-financed project. The major procurement risk identified at appraisal, was the
   risk associated with GRRCO's unfamiliarity with specific Bank procedures. The mitigation measures
   incorporated at design, included employing a qualified procurement agent with experience in Bank
   procurement policies, and training and capacity building of the GRRCO staff (PAD, paragraphs 62 and 63).

   The ICR (paragraph 62) notes that the procurement of the project was carried out in accordance with Bank
   Guidelines. The ICR (paragraph 63) notes that while most of the contracts were implemented according to
   the agreed schedules, a few contracts were seriously delayed and experienced disputes around contract
   variations. GPMO took actions to terminate the non-performing contracts and rebid four contracts for the
   remaining works. The rebidding processes were satisfactorily implemented. The ICR does not report any
   case of mis procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                                There were shortcomings in
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Modest                    M&E design and in M&E
                                                                                implementation
Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following two lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. An adaptive design and implementation scheme can be helpful in preparing rural roads
projects. The adaptive approach used in this project consisted of identifying and preparing for only
one of the five batches of roads at appraisal. The subsequent batches were to be identified during
project implementation based on a set of pre-defined criteria. This approach aided in speeding up
project preparation time and improved the readiness for implementation.

2. A counterpart funding assurance mechanism can be an effective tool to avoid a funding
shortage and resultant implementation delays, but it needs to be enforced. The mechanism
employed in this project required the participating local governments to submit a fund guarantee
letter together with their annual project proposals and deposit their funding upfront in a designated
project account. After weak enforcement of this mechanism in the initial years, which led to delays in
some civil works, the mechanism was effective, and the availability of counterpart funding functioned
as a criteria for identifying subsequent batches.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written. The theory of change presented in the ICR clearly expounds the logical causal links
between the project activities, their outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR presents a candid description
of the issues surrounding inadequate counterpart funding in some counties and districts despite measures
taken at appraisal to get a guarantee from the municipalities, and how these were eventually resolved due to
the counterpart funding mechanism used in this project. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the
specific experience of implementing this project, and the lessons drawn are linked to the narrative. The ICR is
concise and tightly presented, with the main body of the text adhering to the usually recommended length of
about 15 pages.

There were some shortcomings. The quality of analysis particularly with respect to the indicators for monitoring
project performance is rather weak, and the ICR would have benefitted for better interrogation of the evidence.
The ICR provides very little information on sustainability of outcomes and the arrangements that were made for

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)



providing maintenance of the rural roads rehabilitated under this project. This information was however
provided subsequently by the Bank team. The ICR could have provided more information on supervision, such
as continuity of leadership, the efforts made by the team to encourage the timely implementation of the road
maintenance-related activities, and whether the supervision team was based in the field or at headquarters.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 15
